
   Parshat  Bamidbar
   
   1,1. וידבר ה' אל משה במדבר סיני באהל מועד, ”<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting.” Nachmanides writes that now that the laws pertaining to sacrificial offerings had been concluded, the Torah moves on to discuss laws governing the Tent of Meeting. G’d had already warned concerning the sin of entering the Tent of Meeting in a state of ritual uncleanness as well as against offering sacrifices which were in a state of ritual unfitness.
   Now the Torah wishes to restrict the presence of non priests in the Tabernacle and its immediate surroundings in the desert, similar to the restrictions imposed on the Temple and its immediate surroundings on Mount Moriah in the future. Non priests who violate these rules are subject to the death penalty by stoning. The Torah also forbids looking at sacred furnishings normally inside the Tabernacle, but exposed to potential view seeing that the Israelites were so often on the move, and the whole Tabernacle had to be dismantled each time, and the holy objects had to be carefully wrapped before being transported on the shoulders of the Kehatites. All of these precautions were designed to prevent the people from entering sacred grounds <i>en masse</i> and falling victim to the warnings issued.
   The Torah issues detailed instructions about the wrapping of these furnishings, by whom and where the parts of the Tabernacle were to be guarded. Seeing that the Torah in the Book of Leviticus had interrupted some of these subjects by writing about the <i>sh’mittah</i> and Jubilee years, of which we had been told that these instructions had been issued to Moses while he was on Mount Sinai, the Torah now mentions that the instructions reported here were communicated to him in the Tent of Meeting. There had been no direct communication from G’d to Moses since the time the Tabernacle had been assembled and inaugurated in the first month of the second year. The desert of Sinai is mentioned here again, as the people had not moved from there, since arriving at Mount Sinai on the first day of <i>Sivan</i> in the first year of the Exodus until the 2oth of <i>Iyar</i> of the second year. [Almost an entire lunar year. Ed.]
   
   1,2. שאו את ראש, “take a census of the whole community.” <i>Rashi</i> on Numbers 31,26, explains the use of the expression שאו ראש, as “take a count of the heads,” [in the sense of according value to the head of each person so counted. Ed]
   Nachmanides [who apparently had a different version of <i>Rashi</i> in which the words שאו ראש are compared to the command to an executioner to behead his victim Ed.] who understood these words in a derogatory sense, raises the question why it should be interpreted derogatively. He points out that in <i>Midrash Rabbah</i> on this verse the interpretation is one that is complimentary to the Jewish people, quoting G’d as telling the people that He had given them the highest rank, ראש, among the nations in a number of areas. One example for the admissibility of such an interpretation is when Joseph interprets to the head of the cupbearers of Pharaoh that he will be reinstated to his former position, saying ישא פרעה את ראשך, “Pharaoh will raise your head, etc.” (Genesis 40,13) On the other hand, should the Israelites fail to qualify for G’d’s benevolence, the same words may signal their impending destruction, as in the case of the chief of the bakers who was also told of his impending fate by Joseph employing the same introductory words.
   
   1,3. כל יוצא צבא בישראל, “every one who goes to join the army among the Israelites.” <i>Rashi</i> comments that we learn from this verse that no one under the age of twenty is to join the army, something that corresponds to what we learned in <i>Avot,</i> בן עשרים לרדוף, “at the age of twenty one has matured enough to give chase.” (<i>Avot,</i> 5,25) It is possible to interpret the words כל יוצא צבא, as referring to all the men old enough to participate in general assemblies of the people. We know that every such general assembly is described as צבא, as for instance in לצבא צבא לעבודה באהל מועד, “to take part in the assembly around the Tent of Meeting in order to perform service” (Numbers 4,23). Another example of such a meaning of the word צבא would be the well-known term צבא השמים, “heavenly assemblies.” (Deut 4,19 and 15 other examples throughout the Bible) This is the reason why men participating in wars are not just described as חיילים, or אנשים לבושים בדים, “soldiers, or men wearing uniforms, but as יוצאי צבא, similar to יוצאי שער עירו, (Genesis 24,34) “all those assembled in the public square of his town.”
   
   תפקדו אותם, “you are to count them.” Nachmanides writes that the use of the term פקידה instead of ספירה for counting is meant to show that each individual so counted was elevated to a higher status than he had possessed prior to being counted. He was brought to the special attention of G’d’s benevolent supervision of his individual fate. We find an example of the use of the word פקד in this sense when it did not involve counting at all, in Genesis 21,1 וה' פקד את שרה, “<i>Hashem</i> had remembered Sarah specifically, etc.” In our context the term implies that all the men so counted would henceforth enjoy G’d’s special individual protection. This became evident when we do not read about the armies of the Jewish people suffering any casualties with the single exception of the attack by the Canaanites after the death of Aaron, and even then the sole casualty, i.e. a captive, appears to have been a civilian. (Numbers 21,1) Instead of being counted head by head, each soldier tendered a silver coin of the value of half a <i>shekel,</i> as atonement for any sin he might have been guilty of at the time he was counted. When Yoav reluctantly counted part of the Jewish people at the insistence of King David, (Samuel II chapter 24) we find that the prophet describes the result of the census as מספר מפקד, this appears to mean that the total was arrived at after counting the number of silver coins tendered. We believe that the reason why G’d was so angry at the counting was not at the manner in which the census was taken, but was on account of the entire census having been unnecessary as no military threat existed at the time against the Kingdom of David. He wanted to glory in the vast number of subjects he ruled over. It is also possible that the word מספר there is justified as David commanded Yoav also to count men under 20 years of age, i.e. from 13 years and up. Doing this may have been the reason why he was punished, as he had never been permitted to count the people below the age of 20. One of the reasons G’d does not want the entire Jewish population to be counted may be because then the promise that they are as numerous as the stars, i.e. beyond man’s ability to count them, would not be true. When, in the above mentioned chapter when Yoav counted the people, there appears a line saying “the entire Jewish nation numbered one million three hundred thousand (including the men from the tribe of Yehudah) that could handle a sword;” this does not mean that all of these people were fighting in the front line, it merely means that all these people were physically fit and healthy, and in case of need could be mobilized for war. The sick, the elderly, and the handicapped were not included in that count, as no one can boast about being the ruler of such people.
   
   לצבאותם, “according to their legions.” There were numerous legions, the army of each tribe representing one legion.
   
   1,5. לראובן, Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the members of the tribe of Reuven were counted first was because chronologically speaking, he was the first born of Yaakov’s children. Once all the children of Leah had been counted, the Torah switches to Joseph who was Rachel’s first born. Ephrayim was counted first, in accordance with the rank accorded him when Yaakov blessed him on his deathbed, switching hands in order to place his right hand on him. This was followed by counting the tribe of Dan, who was the senior son of the maidservants of Leah and Rachel. Then followed Asher, who was the leading tribe in the camp of Dan. He in turn was by followed by Naftali, who represented the senior son of Leah’s servant maid.
   
   1,16. קרואי העדה, “the above named were so described as their importance was such that no decisions were taken unless these men were present.”
   
   1,18. ואת כל העדה הקהילו באחד לחודש השנית, “They called together the whole assembly on the first of the second month, etc.” Nachmanides points out with what alacrity Moses went about his task, in taking the princes on the very day he had received the instructions from <i>Hashem;</i> he assembled the whole community and began the task of taking the census. Clearly, the taking of the census was a task that could not be completed on that day, but took considerably longer.
   
   ויתילדו על משפחותם לבית אבותם, “they established their genealogy according to their families, according to their father’s household.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that each of the people concerned submitted a booklet containing the respective family tree. They also supplied witnesses that testified to their true ages, i.e. when each one of them had been born, (as explained by Onkelos)
   Nachmanides writes that it appears quite unreasonable to suggest that each person had to document his claim to which family he belonged and when he had been born. He claims that the meaning of the words ויתילדו וגו', simply mean that they identified themselves as belonging to certain families in certain tribes, the family being defined in terms of the respective fathers. The entire procedure had been commanded to Moses, more or less to the last detail, i.e. these people all came to the entrance of the Tabernacle to present themselves for the count; the census takers did not make house calls. The only ones who did not present themselves at that time were the members of the ערב רב, the mixed multitude who accompanied the Israelites when they left Egypt, all people who were not natural born Jews. Each person made a verbal declaration in front of Moses and the respective leader of his tribe that he was so-and-so and was of age. Moses deposited the coins according to the respective tribe of the person who tendered it, so that he knew at the end how many men of military age each tribe had contributed to the grand total. Proof that this was the procedure may be seen when at the second count no mention is made in the Torah of the line ויתילדו על משפחותם, neither is the expression במספר שמות לגולגלותם, “according to their headcount” repeated there. (Compare Numbers chapter 26). The reason why there was no need for this at the time of the second census was simply that the division into tribal units had already been made on the occasion of the first census and those records were readily available. When these people were counted as members of individual families, it appears that there was no objection to the “headcount.” They did not then have to present a coin or shard. There also was no need at that time for the respective princes of each tribe to be present during the count.
   Ibn Ezra says that the word ויתילדו means that each one had to inform Moses and his tribal prince of the date and year of his birth.
   Some commentators say that the reason why we find here the words במספר שמות, “according to the number of names,” added, was to teach us that none of them had changed the name by which they had been known in Egypt.
   
   1,32. לבני יוסף לבני אפרים, Nachmanides writes that Ephrayim, the younger son of Joseph was given precedence over his older brother Menashe and Joseph’s genealogy is linked to him both here and when it came to the “flags,” the groupings of three tribes each around their flags, seeing that he was the one in his group that was the flag bearer, and also because he was numerically a much larger tribe (41.500) than his brother tribe Menashe. (32.500) However, on the occasion of the census in the 40th year in the wilderness of Moav, you will note that the tribe of Menashe (52.700) had in the meantime become more numerous than Ephrayim. (32.500) They also received their ancestral land before Ephrayim, seeing that half the tribe remained on the East bank of the Jordan with the tribes Reuven and Gad. He also took precedence when the Torah reports the names of the tribal heads in charge at the time of the entry of he people into their ancestral land. (Numbers 34, 23-24) On the other hand, although Ephrayim’s representative of the 12 tribes during the mission of the spies is listed first, Joseph himself, in that connection, is linked directly to Menashe. (Numbers 13,8)
   In trying to understand the various occasions when the respective brothers Ephrayim and Menashe appear in different sequences, perhaps the fact that just as Joseph, who, in his youth was guilty of slandering his brothers, Menashe, i.e. the spy representing the Tribe of Joseph-Menashe, Gad, did join the majority in slandering the land of Israel, as opposed to the representative of his younger brother Ephrayim, i.e. Joshua, who did not. Moses may have listed Ephrayim first, without mentioning that he was part of the tribe of Joseph. (Numbers 13,8) This may serve as a reminder that sometimes the son commits the same type of error as had his father. (Compare <i>daat z’keynim baaley tossaphot</i> Numbers 13,11)
   Ibn Ezra explains that the army was made up of 12 tribes excluding the tribe of Levi, so that the tribe of Joseph was represented by his two sons Ephrayim and Menashe. There were four army groups of three tribes each placed in the four directions of the surface of the earth. Leah had 6 sons, Seeing that the tribe of Levi, descended from one of Leah’s sons was not included in the men serving in the army, the first camp, (flag) comprised of the tribes Reuven and Shimon, both from the sons of Leah, co-opted a third, Gad, the senior son of Leah’s maid Zilpah. The second camp (flag) was comprised of the tribes of Yehudah, who was joined by tribes descended from his younger brothers Issachar and Zevulun. The third camp contained only tribes descended from Rachel, i.e. Ephrayim, Menashe and Binyamin. The fourth camp was comprised of Dan, Asher and Naftali. Naftali was the younger one of the three tribes comprising that camp. He was listed first in order that the flag of that camp be guarded by the senior son of Rachel’s maidservant Bilhah. The reason why Yehudah’s group was placed at the head and Dan’s at the rear, was that these two tribes excelled in valour and in the art of warfare.
   1,46. ויהיו כל הפקודים, “the grand total of all the men thus mustered, etc.” Nachmanides, in searching for a reason why the Torah had to tell us the total again, seeing it had already told us the number of men that were counted in each tribe, claims that this is the manner in which kings conduct themselves when they take a census of their subjects. However, he admits that he does not know why G’d commanded Moses to do so. He speculates that possibly the Torah wanted the people to reflect on the fact that a family who had numbered only 70 souls and children included, had grown within the relatively short period of 211 years to comprise at least two and a half million souls when allowing for the people under 20 and all the women. 
   It is also possible that the Torah did proceed here in the manner human kings proceed before going into battle, counting totals in addition to the number and composition of each army group. After all, when the Jewish people left Mount Sinai they were poised to begin the conquest of the land of their forefathers, and if they had not insisted on spying out the land (something that consumed 40 days) they would most likely have found themselves at war within a few days of their departure, Moses himself described the distance to the boundary of that land as only 11 days’ march (Deuteronomy 1,2) Moses, when inviting his father-in-law to join the people had told him that they were about to depart for their ultimate destination. (Numbers 10,29) It was necessary for both Moses and the princes to know the numbers of each tribe and army group in order to be able to account for each soldier after the campaign, and to determine if there had been any casualties and how many there had been. Although, in the event there were none, Judaism, i.e. the Torah, does not base its calculations on supernatural miracles occurring.
   
   1,47. והלוים...לא התפקדו בתוכם, “But the Levites’ census was not included in that of the other twelve tribes.” Nachmanides writes, that notwithstanding the fact that up until then no directive had been given to count the Levites separately and according to different criteria, Moses realized on his own that he was not meant to include them as an integral part of that census. One of the reasons was that whereas a leader had been named for each of the other tribes, no one had been appointed as the leader of the tribe of Levi. At any rate, while Moses was in doubt how to proceed, he would not arrogate the decision to himself, and as soon as he had concluded the counting of the other twelve tribes, G’d told him how to proceed with the Levites. He called Aaron, in order to give him the honour, seeing that he was the de facto leader of the tribe. Perhaps this is the reason why we find dots on the word ואהרן (verse 39) i.e. a hint that Aaron was in Moses‘ company when G’d told him how to count the Levites. Subsequently, in 4,46 as well as in 4,36 and 4,45 we are also told about the respective leaders’ presence during these counts, as everything had to be done with the approval of all the notables concerned. The same applied to the division of the tasks to be performed by the various groups of Levites, each group headed by descendants of one of the three sons of Levi, son of Yaakov.
   
   1,53. , והלוים יחנו סביב למשכן העדות, “and the Levites shall encamp around the Tabernacle of Testimony.” Nachmanides writes that what the Torah records here as applicable to the Tabernacle, henceforth would become applicable to the Temple, and the division of the Levites into משמרות, guard duty whose components were the same, and who alternated with one another regularly, formed the pattern for the many hundreds of years that the Temple stood in Jerusalem. The words ושמרו את משמרת וגו' refer to night duty performed by the Levites in guarding the Tabernacle. They would walk around the Tabernacle at night ensuring no unauthorised person would attempt to enter it. The priests guarded the inside of the Tabernacle, whereas the Levites guarded it from the outside.
   
   2,1. וידבר ה' אל משה ואל אהרן, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses and Aaron. Ibn Ezra explains that the reason why Aaron was addressed also was that his sons had to place the various furnishings of the Tabernacle on the shoulders of the priests.
   
   2,2. איש על דגלו באותות, “each man by his flag, according to its insignia.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that each flag had coloured insignia woven or embroidered on it reflecting the appearance of the respective gemstone of the tribe on the breastplate of the High Priest. Ibn Ezra writes that each flag had a pattern that easily identified the tribe it belonged to; (possibly reflecting the definitions used by Yaakov when he had blessed his sons before his death.) They could also have reflected the images seen by the prophet Ezekiel in his famous vision of the <i>merkavah.</i>
    Ancient sources have recorded that the Tabernacle was located in the center of the four army groups. In the space between the Tabernacle and the army groups (presumably in peace time accompanied by the various families of the soldiers), the Levites arranged their huts around the Tabernacle. The details have been described in the ספר יצירה. The respective sides of the camp which was square in shape, began with the east side, the army group headed by the tribe of Yehudah, as per G’d’s command in response to the question who should lead the army. [Compare <i>Bamidbar Rabbah 2,10</i> on Judges 1,1-2 Ed.]
   The army group headed by the tribe of Reuven was situated on the south side in order to accord some honour to the biologically oldest son of Yaakov. The third army group under one flag comprised the tribes of Rachel’s descendants who were situated in the west, with the group comprised of sons of Zilpah and Bilhah in the north. 
   I have seen further in the <i>Midrash</i> that just as <i>Hashem</i> created 4 directions on earth, (north, south, west and east) so He surrounded His throne in the heavens with four such directions, the throne of His glory being the loftiest of them all. When telling Moses how to arrange the army groups around the Tabernacle, He told him that what He was directing Moses to do corresponded to the pattern in which the hierarchies in the heavenly regions were arranged. East, the source of the original light, would be represented on earth by Yehudah, who represented the concept of Royalty. He would be flanked by Issachar, who represented the concept of Torah Issachar would be flanked on his other side by Zevulun, who represented the concept of wealth. This concept had been envisioned by Yaakov, who in his blessing of Zevulun (Genesis 49,13) had said זבולון על חוף ימים ישכון, that “Zevulun would make his residence on the shores of the sea.” It has also been said of him (and of Issachar) (Deuteronomy 33,19) כי שפע ימים יינקו, that “they will be nourished by the riches of the sea.” [An allusion to Zevulun sharing his wealth with Issachar, enabling the latter to devote himself exclusively to the study of the Torah. Ed.] This group would be the first one to march ahead of the rest of the camp, as we know from ויעבור מלכם לפניהם, “their king would always march ahead of them” (Michah 2,13).
   The direction south is representative of the beneficial dews and the rains that dispense G’d’s blessings on earth. This direction would be represented first and foremost by Reuven, who had distinguished himself as a penitent, and thus had revealed himself as possessing a virtue which is very dear to <i>Hashem</i>, a virtue which evokes G’d’s mercy for His creatures. He was flanked by Gad, possessed of the virtue of גבורה, strength and endurance in the face of overwhelming odds. They had the camp of Shimon between them, to help him atone for the sin at Shittim that had decimated that tribe whose members had permitted themselves to be seduced by the Moabites and Midianites. (Numbers 25) They marched in second position, seeing that the virtue of repentance is second only to Torah itself. Seeing that Reuven had excelled in repentance and this is an important virtue, one which brings to the fore G’d’s virtue of רחמים whenever G’d encounters penitent sinners, it was appropriate for the tribe of Reuven to be positioned in second place.
   West is the direction in which G’d’s storage chamber of snow, hail, and frost as well as heat is stored; the tribes of Ephrayim, Binyamin and Menashe were placed there, seeing that Binyamin’s territory would house the Temple, it was appropriate that he would be positioned in the direction where the <i>Shechinah</i> is presumed to be. North is the direction from which darkness (of the spiritual kind) is presumed to emerge when it does. It was appropriate that the tribe of Dan would be positioned there, as it was this tribe who played a leading role in the re-introduction of idolatry in Israel, King Yerobam later on being the exponent par excellence of this. [Judges 18 describes that the tribe of Dan hired themselves a phony priest and instituted idolatry in their newly conquered territory, formerly known as Layish. These offshoots from the tribe of Dan, who called their new city “Dan,” continued in their idolatrous ways until the first Temple was destroyed. The tribe of Asher was especially blessed, as was the tribe of Naftali, also part of that army group, something that offset the spiritually negative vibes associated with the Danites.
   
   2,4. וצבאו ופקודיהם, “its army and their count, etc.” Whatever is written in this verse and the verses following up until the end of the chapter, is all part of what G’d told Moses and Aaron in verse one of our chapter. In other words, Moses did not count the Israelites for a second time at this stage. Similarly, the paragraph (verse 32-34) also does not contain new information gathered at that time, but these are G’d’s words, not made public by <i>Hashem</i> until now, in order to reveal that since the original count 20 days before the people moved away from Mount Sinai, not a single Israelite had either died by natural causes or become unfit to be part of that army for some other reason. Clearly, this was worth reporting as in view of the enormous number of people involved this was a miracle of no small dimensions.
   
   2,14. אליסף בן רעואל. Nachmanides writes that it is an accepted practice in the Holy Tongue to sometimes change the name of the father of the person concerning whom the Torah reveals some important fact. [In Numbers 1,14, 2, 7,47, 10,20 the father of this tribal leader Elyassaph is referred to as דעואל, Ed.] He was known by both names, each complimentary in its way. Hence the Torah mentioned both names. The former name reflects דעואל,s intellectual attachment to <i>Hashem,</i> the latter his emotional attachment to <i>Hashem,</i> Whom he viewed as his shepherd.
   
   3,1. ואלה תולדות אהרן ומשה....בהר סיני, “And these are Aaron’s and Moses’ immediate biological offspring…at Mount Sinai.” Nachmanides explains the apparently irrelevant mention of the words: “at Mount Sinai,” as well as the absence of any names of Moses’ children, by saying that Aaron’s children were also considered as if they were Moses’ children seeing that they learned the Torah from their uncle Moses, and we have it on the authority of our sages that anyone teaching someone else’s children Torah is accorded the merit of being the (spiritual) father of such a youngster. Moreover, the Torah hints by the wording of this verse that although these children of Aaron had not been anointed as priests until over nine months later, from the day, G’d in His mind, had already designated them to become priests at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai. These appointments had not only been for life, but hereditary, whereas the other appointments, such as the leaders of the tribes, did not have their root already at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai, nor were those appointments hereditary. One of the reasons why the chapter commences with the descendants of Aaron is that seeing that we will be reading about the count of the Levites shortly, it is appropriate to commence with the children of the leader of the tribe of Levi.
   Looking at the plain meaning of the text the meaning of the words “the descendants of Aaron and Moses,” is simply that seeing that Aaron’s sons had been especially anointed to become priests, they were in a category all by themselves compared to the other members of the tribe of Levi. If the tribe of Levi was considered “holy,” then the priests so anointed were considered “holiest of the holy.”
   The allegorical commentaries, <i>drush,</i> support this approach, seeing that Moses’ own children have not even been mentioned, the Torah failing to add: “and these were the offspring of Moses, etc,” especially in view of the fact that the <i>Midrash</i> told us that even Aaron’s sons were considered as if they had been Moses’ own, how is it then that Moses’ own have not even been mentioned?
   Some commentators hold that inasmuch as in connection with the count of the other tribes the Torah speaks of “in the desert of Sinai,” whereas when the sons of Aaron are mentioned these are referred to in conjunction with Mount Sinai, the reason is that their father had already been chosen by G’d to be the High Priest even before the people left Egypt, whereas the other Levites had only been chosen as special in the desert. [After the firstborn had participated in the sin of the golden calf. Ed.]
   
   3,4. וימת נדב ואביהו לפני ה', “and Nadav and Avihu had died in the presence of <i>Hashem,</i> etc<i>.”</i> They died as a direct act of G’d. We find a similar expression used in Numbers 14,37 when the Torah reports the death of the 10 spies who had reported negatively on the people’s chances to conquer the land of Canaan.
   
   על פני אהרן אביהם, “during the lifetime of their father Aaron.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the expression על פני means “during the lifetime of.”
   Nachmanides elaborates that what the Torah means is not that the sons who died had not had already functioned as priests during the lifetime of their father, in the sense of “substituting for their father.” All four sons had been anointed as priests and had functioned or were ready to function as priests. [After all they died on the very first day that Moses had handed over service in the Tabernacle to the priests, as we know from Leviticus 9,1. Ed.] The reason that the Torah adds the words על פני אהרן אביהם, is only that seeing the Torah had spoken of the priests who had been anointed, it was made plain that these two had also been properly anointed. They were potentially High Priests just as their father was in practice.
   I, personally believe, (author speaking) that the words על פני אביהם refer to the beginning of our verse, i.e.לפני ה' as in Chronicles I 24,2 we also read the words לפני אביהם, not על פני אביהם, followed by the words ובנים לא היו להם ויכהן אלעזר ואיתמר תחתיהם, “and they were not survived by children, and Eleazar and Ittamar became priests in their stead.” [Just as in our verse here. Ed.]
   
   3,14. וידבר ה' אל משה במדבר סיני, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai.” Nachmanides writes that seeing that the last communication by G’d to Moses had been introduced with the words ביום דבר ה' את משה בהר סיני, “on the day that G’d had spoken with Moses on Mount Sinai,” the Torah draws attention to the fact that this most recent communication took place in the desert of Sinai, when Moses was not in the lofty regions where he had existed for 40 days without bread and water. 
   [I wonder at the difference in the nuance of וידבר את משה, and וידבר אל משה, the former perhaps suggesting a more intimate relationship between G’d and Moses while the latter was on the mountain. Ed.]
   At any rate, the Torah wants us to know that the appointment of the Levites as a tribe more holy than the others had not surfaced or been revealed to Moses already on Mount Sinai, i.e. before the sin of the golden calf. Only the sons of Aaron, as part of the tribe of Levi, had already been designated as possessing a holier status at Mount Sinai, even though they had not been told about it at that time.
   The Levites were different from the other tribes even in the manner in which they were counted. Whereas the general census of the other tribes began with males who had attained the age of 20, the male Levites were included in the count as soon as they had attained the age of one month. Even so, their total number amounted only to some 22000. They were counted from one month old although they could not perform their function until they had attained the age of 30. According to Nachmanides, at the time of the count of the Levites only some 8000 had attained the age of 30. At the time when the count took place the Holy Ark had not yet been carried, as since being placed in the Tabernacle (holy of holies) the Israelites had not moved from their encampment around Mount Sinai. Moreover, moving the Holy Ark was forbidden on pain of death. The reason why the Levites numbered relatively few members was that while in Egypt, the members of that tribe never had to perform hard labour, for just as Joseph at the time had exempted the priestly caste in Egypt from having to sell their property in order to secure food supplies from his storage chambers, the Egyptians had recognized already then that the Levites were to the Israelites what the priests were to the Egyptians. The phenomenal increase in the numbers of the other tribes had been G’d’s reward, compensation to them for the Egyptians having tried to hold down their birthrate by imposing a cruel regime on them, one involving back-breaking labour. 
   It is also possible that the tribe of Levi was not so blessed, as Yaakov on his deathbed had failed to accord them the generous blessings he had bestowed on the other sons. Although the tribe of Shimon, at this stage, had become quite numerous, in spite of having shared Levi’s fate in Yaakov’s blessings, by the time the Israelites entered the Holy Land, their numbers had been drastically reduced also.
   
   3,23. משפחות הגרשוני אחרי המשכן יחנו, ימה, “The families of Gershon were encamped behind the Sanctuary, in a westerly direction.” The Torah makes a point of mentioning the Sanctuary before mentioning the fact that the Gershonites were encamped there. We find a similar pattern when the Torah describes the encampment of the Merarites in verse 35. This was due to the fact that the members of the Kehatites, who were charged with transporting the Holy Ark on their shoulders during the journeys, had to be encamped immediately adjoining the Sanctuary. The Merarites and Gershonides carried items that were transported on the wagons donated by the 12 princes. (Ccompare Numbers 7,3-11). It is also interesting that the Torah mentions the name of their leader first, as the location did not have anything special to commend it, when giving details of the encampment of the three families of Levites the names of the heads of the family of Gershon and Kehat are mentioned only after the location where they placed their tents, whereas the place of encampment of the Merarites, i.e. in the north, the name of their leader, Tzuriel ben Avichayil, is mentioned before we are told the location of their encampment. The reason is that the Gershonites had their tents in a most honoured position to the west of the Sanctuary, next to the Holy of Holies, and adjoining the flag of the camp of Reuven, the most senior of the tribes. The Kehatites who were encamped in the south of the Sanctuary, also were next to the camp of Ephrayim, the senior tribe of the family of Rachel. In the case of the family of Merari, who were encamped in the northerly direction, the Torah first tells us of the name of their leader, who was more distinguished than the leader of the tribe of Dan, descendant of one of Rachel’s maids.
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah deliberately did not begin by describing the watch being kept on the Tabernacle as starting from the east, [although that was the entrance to the Tabernacle. Ed.] not as when the Torah listed the direction where the army groups were encamped, listing the eastern group first, because the Levites did not post guards at the entrance to the Tabernacle, only the priests, i.e. Aaron and his surviving sons did that, alternating with Moses and Moses’ sons. [Nachmanides tries to show that the order in which the Torah describes everything here reflects the fact that order of preference was very important in every detail. Perhaps, this very fact later on led to distinguished people answering the rebellious call of Korach, who appealed to all those who felt that they had somehow been slighted. Ed.]
   
   3,32. ונשיא נשיאי הלוי אלעזר בן אהרן הכהן, “and the leader of the Levites’ leader was Eleazar, son of the High Priest Aaron.” Eleazar was the leader of the three leaders of the families of Gershon, Kehat, and Merari. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that the word נשיאי carries both itself and the following word הלוי with it, so that the meaning of the sequence ונשיא נשיאי הלוי אלעזר is: “and the prince of the respective leaders of the Levites was Eleazar.”
   
   3,45. תחת כל בכור בבני ישראל, “in place of every firstborn of the Children of Israel.” According to Nachmanides the firstborn males of Israel had attained the status of being sanctified ever since Exodus 13,2 when G’d had told Moses to sanctify the firstborn to Him, seeing that He had not killed the Jewish firstborn when the Egyptian firstborn had been slain. There were in the meantime very many firstborn who had never been redeemed, as up until now it had not been revealed to whom the money for redeeming them was to be given. They were therefore in a state of arrested sanctity, unable to all perform priestly duties, and unable to lead ordinary lives. It is possible, as argued by our sages, that some of them had performed as priests. Nachmanides adds, that as far as he personally is concerned, it is most unlikely that all these 22000 firstborns had been born during the year that had elapsed since the Exodus, as we have no reason to believe that the people had multiplied at such a rapid rate since they had been in the desert. The count included all the firstborn, including the many who had been born prior to the Exodus. All of them were redeemed now for the Levites. The 273 for whom no matching Levites could be found, were redeemed for 5 shekels each, the money being given to Aaron and his sons, as became the law for all subsequent generations.
   
   4,6. ונתנו עליו כסוי עור תחש, “they shall place upon it a covering of <i>Tachash</i> hide.” Nachmanides writes that the Holy Ark was first wrapped in the curtain of blue wool that divided the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies; after that the <i>tachash</i> hide cover was used to wrap both the Holy Ark and the dividing curtain around them. This was unlike the procedure used with the other furnishings of the Tabernacle, such as the table, the golden altar and the <i>menorah</i>. The latter were wrapped in a cover of <i>tachash</i> hide only. The reason why so much more care was used to wrap the Holy Ark was the fact that its sanctity was greater than that of the other furnishings. It was desirable that the blue wool curtain be visible through the <i>tachash</i> hide as it reminds us of the blue sky, which in turn reminds us of <i>Hashem</i> whose throne is in the heavens beyond.
   Other commentators hold that the<i> tachash</i> hide was used to cover both the Holy Ark and the other furnishings, the former having first been wrapped  in the dividing curtain.
   
   ושמו בדיו, “they shall position its staves.” Some commentators understand the word ושמו as meaning: ”they shall adjust,” i.e. the staves were to be adjusted as the Kehatites carried the Ark on their shoulders. Others understand the expression as referring to the positioning of these staves through the rings in the Ark in a manner that assured their proper balance prior to their being hoisted on to the shoulders of the men carrying it. The rings were considerably wider than needed to insert the staves into them. The staves were, however, not to be withdrawn from the Ark altogether.
   
   4,7. לחם התמיד עליו יהיה, “and the constant bread shall remain on it.” According to Nachmanides the meaning of the verse is that the show breads be remaining on the actual  (flat surface of the) table, as opposed to the superstructure on which they rested when the Tabernacle was in its operational mode. The bread was then wrapped in the blue wool cover. The various appurtenances of the table, such as the spoons, dishes, shelving tubes, etc. (compare Exodus 25,29), would be placed above. This procedure was necessary in order to keep the actual breads and the appurtenances apart from one another when the people were on the move. The appurtenances were then covered with a cloth made of wool dyed scarlet. This colour was appropriate as the table symbolized the crown of a king, which in turn symbolizes the attribute of Justice. The other appurtenances that were wrapped in blue wool symbolized the crown of Torah. The cover of the main altar situated in the courtyard was made of purple wool, an intense red, as the altar upon which so much blood was sprinkled on a daily basis was close to that colour anyway. 
   
   4,16. ופקודת אלעזר ...הכהן, שמן המאור, וקטורת הסמים..פקודת כל המשכן וכל אשר בקודש ובכליו, “the supervision of Eleazar, son of Aaron the Priest, was the oil for illumination, the incense of spices the supervision of the entire Tabernacle and everything in it.” In other words, Eleazar was the keeper of all the items mentioned, and would hand to whoever had occasion to use any of these items during the performance of their duties, the correct quantities needed to perform their task.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the expression פקודת כל המשכן means although there were also subordinate tasks and supervisions, some of which had been entrusted to his brother Ittamar, the Torah wanted us to know that Eleazar was the person responsible for the overall functioning of all matters pertaining to the Tabernacle. Seeing that he was the person in charge, the Torah singles out his supervising the oil for illumination and the spices for the incense as being Eleazar’s specific concern
   Nachmanides writes that Ibn Ezra’s commentary is not correct, seeing that we have another verse in which Ittamar’s functions are specifically spelled out (Numbers 4,28, 4,31 <i>et al</i>) In those instances no mention is made of Eleazar. Also in Numbers 3,32 Eleazar is described only as the chieftain of the various chieftains of Levi whose task it was to look after the sacred objects and guard their well being. It is clear from there that what are referred to are the objects to be carried by the members of the group of Levites headed by the descendants of Kehat.
   Therefore, in Nachmanides’ opinion, the meaning of the expression פקודת כל המשכן must be the looking after the oil for illumination, the spices for the incense, the ingredients for the daily <i>minchah</i> offering, the oil for anointment, and other matters pertaining directly to the Tabernacle. It included all the items listed in this paragraph. They are summed up when the Torah writes (4,15) “and Aaron and his sons shall finish covering the holy, and all the holy utensils when the camp breaks up, in order to journey.” At that point the Torah had spoken of Aaron and his sons (pl.), whereas in the verse following, the specific duties of Eleazar are detailed separately. Eleazar was the treasurer or administrator for the three leaders of the Levites as well as the keeper of the furnishings entrusted to the Kehatites, whereas Ittamar was the treasurer of the Gershonites and Merarites. Seeing that the Torah did not mention that Eleazar engaged in carrying any utensils, as it had done in connection with all the other Levites, it seems clear that his task was merely that of a supervisor. He ensured that the other Levites were handed whatever it was they needed to transport, and that when the camp came to rest that they handed back whatever it was they had been carrying during the most recent journey of the people. According to a view expressed in the Jerusalem Talmud as understood by <i>Rashi,</i> Eleazar, personally carried the quantities of spices, a heavy load indeed, seeing that at certain periods of the year 365 portions of such incense were kept in stock, ready and prepared for use. He also carried a full year’s lighting oil supply, surely a very heavy load indeed. (183 login=slightly over 100000 ccm) As far as the daily <i>minchah</i> offering is concerned, we do not know the quantity of components kept in store at all times in the Tabernacle’s storage room. At any rate, it appears that Eleazar must have been of a very powerful physique, like Yaakov who rolled the heavy rock single-handedly, if as reported in the Jerusalem Talmud, he did indeed carry all this by himself.
   
   4,20. ולא יבואו לראות כבלע את הקודש ומתו, “but they shall not come and look as the holy is being wrapped lest they die.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word כבלע means: “when it is being covered.” 
   Ibn Ezra understands the verse to mean that people must not approach and look on when the dividing curtain that enveloped the Holy Ark was being removed from it prior to it being placed back in the Tabernacle. However, he adds that the word כבלע, based on the word בלע as in בלע המוות, “banish, remove death,” refers to the dismantling of the Tabernacle prior to the people’s journeying. The very process of the dismantling must not be watched by people who had no part in performing that duty.
   Parshat  Nasso
   
   4,22. נשא את ראש, “take a census, etc.” The expression נשא for counting in the sense of “elevating” is used only with the Kehatites and the Gershonites, but not with the members of the family of Merari The reason is that Gershon was especially distinguished by reason of being the eldest of the sons of Levi, whereas Kehat was distinguished by reason of his having been chosen to carry the Holy Ark, etc. This is also why the Torah adds the words: גם הם, “they too,” when speaking of the Gershonites, as their distinction was only by reason of heredity rather than merit, and that although they did not perform the task of carrying parts of the Tabernacle that had been sanctified, they nonetheless qualify for this kind of census. When speaking of the members of the family of the Merarites, the Torah neither uses the term נשא nor the term גם הם.
   
   My sainted father, the רא'ש said that the expression גם הם refers to the previous census when the Levites were counted from the age of one month and up. On that occasion the order in which they were counted began with the Gershonites (3,18) seeing that Gershon was the eldest of the three. Now, when the count includes only men who had reached the age of 30 and could therefore begin to perform their allocated tasks, Kehat is counted first as he carried the most sacred furnishings of the Tabernacle, and they had been chosen to carry the holy vessels on their shoulders, as opposed to items of lesser sanctity which were transported by the wagons. The Torah therefore had to write the words גם הם, “they too,” to make plain that these Gershonites were also to be counted from the age of 30 and up at this junction.
   In connection with both Gershon and Merari, the Torah uses the expression כל הבא, whereas in connection with the Kehatites the Torah speaks of כל בא (compare 4,3) The meaning of the letter ה is that these Levites came of their own volition, did not wait to be assigned their tasks. This was natural, seeing that they had to take part in the dismantling of the Tabernacle. At that stage there was nothing as yet for the Kehatites to do. They had to await Moses’ call to indicate that the time had come to wrap up the Holy Ark, etc.
   In connection with both the Gershonites and the Merarites, the Torah speaks of לעבוד עבודה, “to perform heavy labour,” whereas in connection with the Kehatites the Torah speaks of לעשות מלאכה, “to carry out the work.” The duties performed by both the Gershonites and the Merarites involved strenuous physical labour. The Kehatites’ duties were easier to perform.
   
   4,25. ומכסה התחש אשר עליו, “and the covering of <i>Tachash</i> hide which was over it, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that the verse abbreviated the description, omitting reference to the covering consisting of the ram’s hides dyed red, which also covered the Tabernacle. (Compare Exodus 36,19) Some commentators believe that both of these coverings were glued to one another so that they formed one cover.
   
   4,27. על פי אהרן ובניו תהיה כל עבודת בני הגרשוני, “all the work of the Gershonides is to be performed according to the instructions of Aaron and his sons.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that Ittamar was the son of Aaron who was in overall charge of all these activities. [<i>Rashi</i>, based on <i>Midrash Rabbah</i> explains that there is no contradiction with the verse following, which names Ittamar, exclusively, as the executive supervisor. Ed.]
   Nachmanides disagrees with <i>Rashi</i>, saying that if it were so why would Aaron and his other son be referred to in our verse at all? He therefore explains the words in our verse to mean that Aaron and sons appointed different members of Gershon and Merari to be responsible for specific functions, say the loading of the beams on to the wagons, etc., Ittamar was supervisor of all of the Merari’s activities, whereas Aaron and Eleazar supervised the activities of the Kehatites and Gershonites.
   
   ופקדתם עליהם במשמרת, “you are to appoint their entire burden as their charge.” From these words we learn that Moses was present at the time when Aaron and sons made these various appointments. However, once these appointments had been ratified by Moses, Ittamar was the supervisor on site, the one to whom any queries would be directed if doubts about anything arose. His task was in particular to ensure that all of the many items that had been moved from the Tabernacle would be replaced in good order as soon as the people made camp.
   
   4,32. ועמודי החצר סביב ואדניהם ויתידותם ומיתריהם, “and the pillars of the Courtyard all around and their sockets, their pegs and their ropes, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the sockets and pegs mentioned in our verse were needed to support the pillars mentioned in our verse.
   Nachmanides, commenting on this, writes that he does not know how these pegs could have been of any use to the pillars. Moreover, Nachmanides could not see in what sense the pegs of the pillars would have been different from those of the קלעים, the curtains of the courtyard that were transported by the Gershonites. He arrives at the conclusion therefore that the pegs and their ropes mentioned must have been the ones used to hold down the curtains covering the Tabernacle as a roof, and that these were the ones looked after by the Gershonites, whereas the ones pertaining to the pillars of the courtyard and their ropes were the ones looked after by the Merarites.
   
   ובשמות תפקדו את כלי משמרת משאם, “you shall appoint the people keeping watch over these various utensils by name.” In other words, every person in charge of carrying a single beam, etc., would be assigned to “beam # such and such.” What the Torah mentions here in connection with the Merarites applied in equal measure to Gershonites and the Kehatites. You should not think that seeing the Merarites carried heavy burdens there might have been some who tried to shirk their duty.
   
   4,49. ופקודיו אשר צוה ה' את משה, “and his count coincided with what <i>Hashem</i> had commanded to Moses<i>.” Rashi</i> writes that all those mentioned by name were between 30 and 50 years of age.
   Nachmanides writes that if that had been so the subject of the word ופקודיו would have to be Moses.
   Ibn Ezra explains that the words איש איש, refer to Gershon, Kehat, and Merari, respectively, whom Moses had each appointed individually to specific tasks as we have explained earlier. This would be the meaning of the word ופקודיו, i.e. “the tasks to which each person had been appointed.” It is possible to understand the word אשר as part of the plain meaning, i.e. that Moses had assigned to each of the three brothers Gershon, Kehat, and Merari, his specific service, or task respectively. Each of these brothers in turn carried out his designated task in accordance with what G’d had instructed Moses to convey to them. This involved appointing many individuals to many individual tasks.
   
   5,2.וישלחו מן המחנה , “they are to expel from the camp, etc.” After the Torah had organized the encampment of the Israelites around the Tabernacle, the instructions are now issued to remove people afflicted with varying degrees of ritual impurity from the camp in order to prevent the entire camp from becoming infected with ritual impurity which would drive away the <i>Shechinah</i> which rested above the encampment.  Not only the ritually impure but also the mixed multitude that had joined the Jewish people at the Exodus were separated from the camp seeing that the latter did not belong to any of the twelve tribes.
   Seeing that the Torah had already touched on specific rules applicable to converts such as the mixed multitude who could not be part of the regular encampment due to their legal status, it also appends here the laws pertaining to proselytes who died without leaving behind legal heirs, and the kind of guilt offering someone had to bring if he had wronged a convert by stealing from him and the convert had died before restitution had been made. (Verses 6-8)
   
   כל צרוע וכל זב וכל טמא לנפש, “anyone who is afflicted with the skin disease known as <i>tzoraat,</i> or experiences a seminal emission defined as <i>zav</i>, or who is impure due to some kind of direct or indirect contact with the body of a deceased human being.” The three categories of ritual impurity listed here are capable to contaminating others, whereas a person experiencing a normal seminal emission while personally ritually impure does not confer his impurity on others. Hence he does not need to leave any of the tree camps constituting the encampment of the Israelites in the desert.
   
   5,6. איש או אשה, “man or woman, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah mentions a woman here, although it is not usual for women to rob proselytes, is that we might have thought that if a woman had been guilty of this crime she would not have to do more than make restitution without adding the fifth mentioned here as a penalty; to make sure we do not err in this matter the Torah made sure that we understand that man and woman are subject to the same rules. [Nachmanides presumably is bothered that the Torah did not simply write אדם that would have included man and woman. Ed.]
   למעול מעל, “by committing treachery.” The Torah means that the guilty party not only stole, but swore an oath in the name of <i>Hashem</i> denying that he had done so. Seeing that the basic sin had already been discussed (Leviticus 5,15) and the only thing different here is the status of the victim, the Torah was very brief here. It goes on to mention: 
   
    5,9. וכל תרומה לכל קדשי בני ישראל, “and every portion from any of the holies that the Children of Israel bring, etc.” The point of the verse is to inform us that the portions spoken of by the Torah are henceforth the private property of the priest who had received them, and anyone stealing it from them is treated as having robbed the priest. 
   
   Alternately, the meaning of our verse is that at this point the Torah completes previous legislation about the rights and duties of the priests, seeing it had not yet discussed certain aspects except obliquely with words such as מלאתך,  and דמעך (Exodus 22,28). Not only that, but mention of the tithes at the end of the Book of Leviticus 27,30 does not include the תרומה to be given to the priests at all. Therefore the Torah complements the legislation at this stage by speaking both about תרומה and other holy gifts of even higher degrees of sanctity, i.e. קדשי בני ישראל. Both revert to the priests to whom they have been allocated, and become their personal property.
   The מנחת סוטה, meal offering to be presented by the woman accused of but not proven guilty of marital infidelity, is not mentioned in Leviticus at all, seeing that it is a meal offering resulting from a husband’s jealousy, not a free will offering like other meal offerings. This offering does not contribute to the atonement of that woman at all. (Verse 15-17) At this point the legislation governing meal-offerings is completed.
   Similarly, the Torah uses this opportunity to fill us in about the offerings a <i>Nazir</i> has to bring at the end of the term he vowed to abstain from ritual impurity and any grape-related products. After the Tabernacle had been erected and laws about maintaining ritual purity had been introduced, the <i>Nazir</i> legislation also became something of an actual rather than something theoretical. During the term of abstinence the <i>Nazirites</i> used to throng around the entrance of the Tabernacle, hoping to be useful in its service in some manner. Moreover, the Torah thought it appropriate to deal with the subject of the <i>Nazirite</i> at this juncture as a female <i>Nazirite</i> serves as the model for the exact opposite of the <i>Sotah,</i> the wife who by her conduct aroused the suspicion in the mind of her husband that she had indulged in marital infidelity.
   
   וכל תרומה לכל קדשי בני ישראל, “and any portion from all the holies that the Children of Israel bring.” Nachmanides writes that the plain meaning of the verse is as if the Torah had written that seeing that there is no official minimum amount for such a gift set by the Torah [as opposed to the tithes. Ed.], the word כל may be understood as “any.” Such a gift is not one that may be demanded by the Levites or priests, but until it is offered as a totally voluntary offering the priest has no claim on it whatsoever.
   In the <i>Sifrey</i> our verse is interpreted as speaking of the <i>bikkurim,</i> the respective first fruit of each of his crops the farmer brings to Jerusalem, seeing that offering is on occasion referred to as תרומה. The words יקריבו אותה are also understood as the owner having the choice to which priest he wants to give these gifts.
   
   5,10. ואיש את קדשיו לו יהיו, “A man’s holies shall be his.”  Nachmanides writes that the proper understanding of these somewhat enigmatic words is that all the holies someone has consecrated that were not obligatory are his to dispose of. The reason that the Torah had to write this was that we might have thought that as soon as something is described as קודש לה', “holy unto <i>Hashem,</i> it might have become the property of the Temple treasury or the priests administering same. Examples of this legislation are the second tithe, which the owners and his family consume in Jerusalem, or produce of a new orchard in the fourth year after it has been planted, known as נטע רבעי, which the owner may also consume in Jerusalem. Even the holies that have been given by the donor to the priest become the priest’s in the sense that anyone stealing them from the priest is not dealt with as if he had stolen from the Temple treasury, but is considered as having stolen the priest’s private property. Thus even other priests are not able to steal fro their colleagues claiming that it is all property of the Temple treasury.
   
   5,15. לא יצוק עליו שמן, “he shall not pour oil over it.” This is to prevent this offering from becoming something “enhanced” as luxury. Nachmanides adds that this is in line with the opinion of the commentators who consider this offering in the nature of a penalty, [although the woman’s status has not yet been determined. Ed.] Proof, according to these commentators, is the fact that the kind of cereal, i.e. barley, basically animal fodder, which is stipulated here is to remind us of the low rank in terms of their spiritual level, of the person offering this meal offering. [Note that although the husband tenders this offering, the Torah describes it as “her offering.” Ed.] By not having oil added to make it tasty, and being prepared from inferior type of cereal, the Torah makes the point that it is not too welcome, according to these commentators.
   Nachmanides, adds however, that in his own opinion, the expression מנחת קנאות, “a meal-offering of jealousies” refers to the beginning of the verse to remind us that the woman at this stage is presumed guilty, and it would not be appropriate for a guilty person such as she to possess the effrontery to approach G’d with a meal offering from her own funds. The husband offers the meal offering as kind of a mute appeal to <i>Hashem</i> to show that he had not falsely accused his wife, and was entitled to have been jealous of her as a result of her behaviour.
   The reason why this meal-offering consists basically of barley, i.e שעורים is a play on words, the conduct of that woman regardless of whether she actually committed infidelity, being one that is “hair-raising,” in the sense of שערת השם, provoking G’d’s anger. Seeing that the letter ש with the dot on the left side sounds like the letter ס, her conduct sets of a “storm,” סער of outrage in heaven. The author quotes Jeremiah 23,19 וסער מתחולל על ראש רשעים יחול, “a whirling storm shall whirl down upon the heads of the wicked,” to make his point. He also quotes Judges 7,13 where the צליל שעורים, the loaf of barley bread, in the dream of the Midianite soldier foreshadowed the defeat of his people at the hands of the Israelites. [Additional quotes are provided on the subject. Ed.]
   
   5,18. וביד הכהן יהיו מי המרים המאררים, “and the bitter waters shall be in the hand of the priest.” Nachmanides writes that numerous commentators describe these waters as bitter, מים מרים, as the Torah supposedly names these water so in light of the ultimate tragic results that are likely to occur after they have been drunk by the <i>Sotah.</i> The Talmud in <i>Sotah</i> 20 however, says that the priest adds something to this water that ensures that it will taste bitter. The purpose is to awaken the woman to her endangering herself by toying with her future by denying her guilt and ignoring the fact that G’d Himself will bring it to light. This would explain the line in verse 22 that describes graphically that the waters in question will have the power of bringing a curse upon those who drink it while guilty.
   As to the plain meaning of the text, Nachmanides continues, he believes that as soon as the woman in question drinks these waters they will prove to taste sweet to her just as ordinary drinking water. If she was guilty however, once these waters have entered her entrails, they will display the devastating effect described in our paragraph. She may even disgorge these waters, after their having turned bitter. The expression מאררים refers to the effect that these waters have upon the guilty woman drinking them, i.e. they act as a curse.
   
   5,19. אם לא שכב איש אותך ואם לא שטית טומאה תחת אישך, “if a man has not lain with you, and you have not strayed in defilement with someone other than your husband, etc.” Nachmanides writes that we are dealing here with what at first glance appear to be two conditions, whereas in reality they are one and the same condition. How so? 1) You did not have sexual relations with someone other than your husband. 2) In a manner that would make you defiled <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> your husband. The reason we have to explain the verse in this manner is that if it were not so, the word איש in the first part of the verse would include her husband, so that she could not possibly swear that she had never had sexual relations with her husband. The words:לא שטית טומאה תחת אישך, therefore must mean that by drinking these waters she swears that while married to her husband, i.e. תחת אישך, she had never done anything as a result of which she would have become defiled for her husband.
   It is possible that the fact that the word איש which lacks the prefix ה describing which man it refers to, is intended to mean that the woman is asked to swear that she had not lain with the man of whom she has been suspected and accused of having lain with. In that event, we would deal with two separate conditions, the first one speaking of a specific sexual misdemeanour with a specific person, whereas the second one broadens the area of her oath to include any other hitherto unsuspected sexual involvement that would make her defiled for her husband.
   Ibn Ezra explains the first condition as involving rape, sexual relations by her with another man against her will, whereas the second condition would speak of a sexual relationship with another man in which she had been a willing participant.
   
   5,20. ואת כי שטית, “but you who have strayed, etc.” According to Nachmanides the words above relate to the words יתן ה' אותך לאלה וגו', “may <i>Hashem</i> render you as a curse, etc.” in verse 21, so that we may understand the sequence as follows: “may you who have strayed and lain with someone other than your husband become a curse, etc.” The reason why the Torah repeated the introductory words והשביע הכן once more in verse 21 is not that the priest adjures the woman a second time, but seeing that so many words had intervened since the words above in verse 10, the reader might have lost track of the proper meaning.
   Ibn Ezra explains that the first time we encounter the words והשביע הכהן the priest adjures her in the name of <i>Hashem,</i> but not spelling out the nature of the curse, whereas the second time in verse 21 he adjures her on pain of a curse spelling out precisely what would happen to her. This, according to Nachmanides, cannot be right, as an oath in the name of the Tetragram cannot possibly be linked to a conditional word such as אם. This would be tantamount to using the name of the Lord in vain.
   Our author draws attention to another anomaly in these verses, In verse 19, where the priest allows for the possibility that the woman is in fact not guilty of what she has been accused of, the possibility that she might have defiled herself is mentioned only after the possibility that she is innocent, and the words תחת אישך appear at the end of that phrase, whereas in verse 20 the words תחת אישך, “other than your husband,” appear before the priest spelled out that she had thereby defiled herself. Also, while in verse 19 where the possibility of the woman being innocent of the accusations leveled against her is mentioned first, the priest speaks to her directly, i.e. “you have done, you will be found pure, etc.,” in verse 21, where she is presumed guilty, priest phrases her sin in such a manner that even coitus interruptus would make her liable to the same punishment as if the act had been completed. This is implied in the words ויתן איש בך את שכבתו, “another man has lain with you,” (verse 20). The words יתן ה' are spoken by the priest when he turns his face away from her already, signaling his disgust. This is why the Torah did not add the words אל האשה, i.e. “to the woman directly.”
   
   5,23. וכתב את האלות האלה הכהן בספר, “The priest shall inscribe these curses on a scroll, etc.” The Jerusalem Talmud (<i>Sotah</i> chapter 2) explains the reason for these various elements in the procedure. מים, water, represents the origin of life, return to one’s origin. עפר, dust represents man’s ultimate destination. כתב, the scroll, symbolizes that all man’s actions are being recorded in anticipation of his giving an account of himself after his soul has departed from him.
   Nachmanides writes that it is remarkable that this is the only legislation in the Torah that relies on Divine intervention to establish a truth we were not able to establish on our own. This was a נס קבוע, a predictable miracle available for the rare instances described in our chapter. This legislation, i.e. its application, was predicated on the fact that the vast majority of the Jewish people would be Torah observant, so that the case of a woman being suspected of infidelity was an exception. As soon as the moral standards of the Jewish people deteriorated so that marital infidelity became more frequent, Divine intervention of this nature came to an abrupt halt. While marital infidelity had been a rare exception this very Divine intervention to determine if the accusation was true was liable to act as a deterrent to straying wives. As soon as the mores of the people changed, such an intervention would no longer have been a deterrent, on the contrary G’d’s effort to restore harmony between man and his wife would have been wasted. The prophet Hoseah 4,14 speaks about this when he says: לא אפקוד על בנותיכם כי תזנינה ועל כלותיכם כי תנאפנה כי הם עם זונות יפרדו ועם הקדשות יזבחו, “I will not punish your daughters for fornicating, nor your daughters-in-law for committing adultery; for they (the husbands or fathers) themselves turn aside with whores and sacrifice with the prostitutes.” The meaning of Hoseah’s statement is not that those guilty of such sins will escape retribution seeing that their husbands are not better than they are, but it means that their husbands cannot invoke the legislation discussed in our chapter seeing that they themselves are no better. The waters described in our paragraph are effective only if the jealous husband is himself free from any extra marital indiscretion.
   
   6,1. According to the opinion of the sages of the <i>Midrash, t</i>he legislation dealing with the Nazirite follows hard on the heels of that dealing with the <i>Sotah,</i> the woman suspected of marital infidelity, as what may have inspired the Nazirite to impose the vows upon himself he is described here as doing is that he had seen the disgrace which the <i>Sotah</i> had brought upon herself by giving in to her temptations. The <i>Nazir,</i> ideally speaking, uses his vows to reinforce his determination not to fall victim to excess consumption of alcohol, etc. We learn from Hoseah 4,11 that זנות, יין, ותירוש יקח לב, “lechery, wine, and even new wine destroy the mind.” Allowing the hair on one’s head to keep growing without restraint is a conduct diametrically opposed to the people, mostly young men, who style their hair excessively, something that Joseph was considered guilty of as the commentators say on the beginning of <i>parshat vayeshev.</i> Our sages have always objected to people who are overly concerned with their exterior. Extreme growth of one’s hair leads a person to worry that he may not contract ritual impurity; such a concern in turn leads one to strive for holiness. In practice, the <i>Nazir</i> voluntarily imposes upon himself a mode of conduct that every priest is duty bound to observe from his earliest youth.
   This brings us to the question of why the Torah demands that at the end of his term of such abstention the <i>Nazir</i> has to bring a sin-offering, חטאת; surely we would have expected the very opposite, that the Torah would compliment him on his vow! Nachmanides draws attention to the fact that the Torah does not offer an explanation for this. 
   According to the plain meaning the reason appears to be clear. The person who had assumed the vow of being a <i>Nazir</i> would indeed have been lauded if he had not placed a time limit on his spiritual elevation. The fact that he is content to voluntarily lower his spiritual <i>niveau</i> is something that must be criticized. The sin offering is the vehicle by means of which the Torah calls such a <i>Nazir</i> to order. We know from Amos 2,11 ואקח מבניכם לנביאים ומבחוריכם לנזירים, “I will choose from amongst your sons some as prophets, and from amongst your young men some as Nazirites<i>,”</i> that the prophet equates the prophets with the Nazirites. Just as the former is appointed for lifetime, so it is expected that the Nazirite will maintain his status indefinitely. Seeing that the Torah wrote of the <i>Nazir</i>: כל ימי נזרו קדוש הוא לה', that he will remain holy only as long as he is a <i>Nazir</i>, it is clear that he requires atonement for voluntarily abandoning his lofty status. 
   
   6,2. כי יפליא, If someone clearly utters, etc.” He either separates himself from the community or he does something mysteriously different, seeing that most people follow the inclinations of their greedy hearts.
   
   נדר נזזיר, “a vow of abstinence.” Generally this is a vow to abstain from wine, alcoholic drink. Some commentators relate the words נזר to ”crown,” i.e. the Nazirite adorned himself with a spiritual crown. He placed G’d’s “crown” on his head, so to speak.
   
   6,21. זאת תורת הנזיר, “this is the law with respect to the Nazirite.” Concerning the offering the <i>Nazir</i> has to bring at the end of the term of his vow of abstinence, Nachmanides writes that the unusual words קרבנו אשר ידור לה', ”his offering that he is to vow to <i>Hashem,</i>“ may mean that he must not have any additional thoughts in mind when bringing the prescribed offering, and the word זאת in the above verse may draw our attention to the fact that the relative value of the offering is not determined by his financial ability, as it is in the case of many sinners where the Torah settles for even a meal-offering when the party obliged to bring the offering is in financial difficulties, but is a fixed standard, involving three mammals and a meal-offering. He may even be expected but not be obligated to add another animal or two corresponding to his ability.
   It is also possible to explain our verse as saying that if at that time the <i>Nazirite</i> simply says: “this is my offering for my vow,” this is sufficient, seeing that as soon as he had made the vow to become a Nazirite he had been aware that at the end of the term he would have to bring the offerings in question.
   מלבד אשר תשיג ידו, “apart from what he personally is able to afford.” This is an encouragement to the wealthy Nazirite not to be content merely with the offerings specified in the Torah.
   
   על תורת נזרו, “in addition to the law governing his abstinence.” Here the Torah spells out once more that whereas it is commendable for the Nazirite at the end of his vow to voluntarily add more offerings, it is forbidden to present less than the offerings stipulated in our text. It may also mean that if this Nazirite had vowed at the beginning of his period of abstinence that he would offer X number of sacrifices at the conclusion of his term, then all these sacrifices fall due on the day his period of abstinence comes to an end. He would therefore not be allowed to drink wine until he had offered all these sacrifices. The above coincides largely with <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation.
   
   6,23. כה תברכו, “Thus shall you bless, etc.” The fact that the Torah wrote the details of the priests’ blessing to the Jewish people immediately after the passage dealing with the Nazirite is to be understood as an oblique reminder that the priests are not to bless the people while they are intoxicated, i.e. after having drunk even a single glass of wine. The paragraph following this short passage deals with the erection of the Tabernacle, seeing that was the first occasion when the priests were commanded to publicly bless the people. They were commanded as of now to always perform this duty, and when the blessing was pronounced on the holy grounds of the Tabernacle/Temple they would invoke the Ineffable Holy Name of <i>Hashem</i> while doing so. When the priests bless the people outside the Temple they may not use that name. When performing the blessing in the Temple, they would recite it as a single blessing, i.e. as if it was all a single verse, whereas when doing so outside the Temple the blessing would be divided into three verses although the total number of words would be the same and identical. The blessing when pronounced inside the Sanctuary is directed exclusively at the Holy Name of <i>Hashem.</i> [there is no one around to answer “Amen” in the Sanctuary. Ed.]
   
   אמור להם, “saying to them.” The reason why the word אמור is uncharacteristically spelled with the letter ו is that the priests actually bestow six blessings in these verses, i.e. יברכך, ישמרך, יאר ה פניו, יחונך, ישא ה' פניו, ישם לך שלום.
   7,1. ויהי ביום כלות משה, “It was on the day that Moses completed, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the meaning of the word כלות, completing, as opposed to הקים erecting, is to tell us that on the first day when the Tabernacle was put up to become functional, i.e. on the seventh day of the מילואים, the consecration rites, Moses did not dismantle the Tabernacle as he had done on the previous days. Whereas G’d had spoken to Moses on the first of those seven days from inside the Tabernacle and He communicated to him all the chapters of the Torah beginning with the first chapter of Leviticus. He issued all the laws about the sacrifices, both animal and meal offerings. On the eighth day of the consecration rites, i.e. after their conclusion, G’d communicated to Moses the legislation about what may and may not be eaten (Leviticus chapter 11) All these laws contain some aspects of the legislation pertaining to sacrificial offerings, the maintenance of the Tabernacle, and the service to be performed in it by the priests. Having dealt with these aspects, the Torah proceeds to describe the donations of the people and the princes that enabled the Tabernacle to have been erected. The donations of the princes were brought between the 8th and the 19th day of <i>Nissan.</i>
   ואת המזבח ואת כל כליו, “and the altar and all its appurtenances.” Conceptually, these words belong to the beginning of our verse, i.e. להקים, Moses did not only erect the Tabernacle on that day but also the altar etc., as he had been doing for the previous seven days.  He also performed the anointing, etc. all on that day.
   
   וימשחם ויקדש אותם, “He anointed them and sanctified them.” Nachmanides, quoting Ibn Ezra writes that the anointing was done with the special oil for anointing described in Exodus chapter 30, whereas the “sanctification” was accomplished by taking the blood from the sin offering as we read in Leviticus 8,15ויחטא את המזבח ואת הדם יצק אל יסוד המזבח ויחטאהו לכפר עליו, “he purified the Altar; he poured the remaining blood upon the base of the Altar and he sanctified it to provide atonement for it.” Nachmanides disagrees with Ibn Ezra, basing himself on similar language used by the Torah when describing the sanctification of the Tabernacle, and at that sanctification there certainly was no blood involved. (Compare our verse above)
   7,3. ויביאו את קרבנם, “they brought their offering, etc.” Nachmanides, in justifying the Torah’s referring to the wagons presented by the princes as קרבן, a sacrificial offering, writes that seeing that these wagons were an indispensable part of the entire process known as service involving sacrificial offerings, claims that their description is קרבן are quite correct. He cites as proof for his approach Numbers 31,50 ונקרב את קרבן ה' איש אשר מצא כלי זהב וגו', “we have brought an offering each man who has found golden vessels [in the loot of the war against the Midianites. Ed.] There too the term קרבן, is applied to man-made items. The gold in question was brought as a gift to the Temple treasury.
   It appears that what motivated the princes to bring the wagons was that they could not imagine that the Levites would be able to carry all these heavy beams on their shoulders, nor that they would be able to carry the heavy silver sockets of each of those beams. They therefore brought these wagons without their having been requested. It was customary in those days that Royalty and similarly highly placed individuals would transport their belongings on wagons.
   It is also possible to interpret the words ויביאו את קרבנם לפני ה' שש עגלות צב וגו', to mean that the six wagons transported the sacrificial offerings of the princes, whereas the 12 oxen transported the wagons. The oxen and wagons came to a halt before the entrance of the Tabernacle, and then G’d commanded Moses to also accept the oxen and the wagons from them as gifts for the Temple treasury. As a result, both the oxen and the wagons now became לעבוד את עבודת המשכן  “tools to perform the service connected with the work connected with the Tabernacle.” Subsequently, the princes took their respective sacrificial offerings and presented them in front of the Altar. They had meant originally to all present all their offerings on that very day. At this point in time, G’d told Moses that they were to present these offerings one prince at a time, one day at a time.  This is why there was no need for the Torah to write קח מאתם, “accept it from them,” in connection with the princes’ respective sacrificial offerings. Why would Moses not accept these offerings until G’d had given him specific instructions to accept them? What they had been doing was no more than commonplace; however, in connection with the oxen [too old for the Altar as animal sacrifices, Ed.] as well as for the wagons Moses did have to have special instructions to accept these also. It is a norm in our holy tongue to describe even what is being transported on the wagons as being a part of the wagons, similar to when the prophet in Kings I 18,19 speaks of אוכלי שולחן איזבל, which, of course does not mean that “people were eating Izzevel’s table,” but that “people were eating food at Izzevel’s table.”
   It is possible that the meaning of the word צב in our context is: “loaded with,” as in Isaiah 66,20 where these “covered wagons“ are understood as being loaded with many travelers each. In that case the Torah describes the six wagons as fully loaded with the various sacrificial offerings of the princes.
   7,12. נחשון בן עמינדב למטה יהודה, “Nachshon, son of Aminadav, of the tribe of Yehudah.” It is noteworthy that the title of these princes, i.e. נשיא, is mentioned with all of them except with the prince of Yehudah. This was a lesson to the other princes to be humble and not to introduce themselves with their title when asked who they were. A classic example is when Yehudah begs Joseph to accept him as a slave instead of his brother Binyamin, and he says ישב נא עבדך תחת הנער עבד לאדוני, “let your servant take the place of the lad as your servant, my lord.” (Genesis 44,33)  We find similarly that David is described as דוד הקטן Samuel I 17,14, [although as opposed to his older brothers he had already been the king’s court musician. Ed.]
   7,13. וקרבנו, “and his offering, etc.” At this point the Torah wrote an apparently superfluous letter ו at the beginning of the word וקרבנו, seeing Nachshon was the first one of the princes to offer his קרבן, so that a prefix connecting it to something previous appears totally uncalled for.  Similarly, we find an uncharacteristic letter ו in the word עתודים, rams, in verse 17. [On the other 13 occasions when that word occurs in the Torah it is always spelled defective, i.e. without the letter ו. Ed.] The reason for these exceptions is to draw our attention to 6=ו new developments which occurred on that day. 1) It was the first day on which priests performed their functions. 2) It was the first day that the priests began the daily routine of blessing the people. 3) It was the first day on which the publicly financed sacrificial offerings in the Tabernacle were presented on the Altar. 4) It was the first day of the first month of the year. 5) It was the first anniversary of the calendar reform introduced in honour of the Exodus from Egypt. 6) On that day the first red heifer was burned and its ashes preserved to enable the Israelites to purify themselves.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the meaning of the additional letter ו at the beginning of the word וקרבנו is grammatically completely justified in view of the Torah having written previously in verse 12 that Nachshon was the first of the princes to offer this particular offering. The Torah continues therefore by listing the details of his offering.
   Of the princes who offered the parallel offering on the second day, (verse 18) the Torah writes: הקריב קרבנו, although at first glance these words appear superfluous, because so much verbiage had been written since verse 12. We have similar examples of such apparently superfluous verbiage when the Torah writes (Genesis 22,7) ויאמר יצחק אל אברהם אביו ויאמר אבי!, “Yitzchok said to his father Avraham, saying: “My father!” You will note that the Torah does not bother to write the word הקריב, ”he presented the offering,” in connection with any of the other 10 princes. This was in order to be as brief as possible without becoming misleading.
   
   סלת בלולה בשמן למנחה, “filled with fine flour, mixed with oil, as a meal-offering.” Nachmanides writes that the princes consecrated the Altar with all the different kinds of offerings that would be offered on it in the future; this was the reason why they also offered meal-offerings on this occasion. Seeing that neither the incense offering nor the sin offering were of the categories that qualified for free-willed offerings, special dispensation had been required to enable them to present these offerings. Seeing that the guilt offering, אשם and the sin offering, חטאת are in respect of inadvertent transgressions, they are basically the same kind of offering so that the guilt-offering is not mentioned separately.
   It is possible that what is legislated here is a מצוה לדורות, not just a one time legislation, but whenever a Temple and an Altar would be inaugurated, the same procedures would apply, and that would explain why when Solomon consecrated his Temple he performed rites called חנוכת הבית, as did the men of the great Assembly when the second Temple was consecrated. (Compare Chronicles II 7,5 and Ezra 6,15) In all these instances the people initiating these rituals had divine inspiration and G’d subsequently anchored what they had done in the Holy Scriptures, eternalizing it..
   
   7,84. זאת חנוכת המזבח, “this was the consecration of the Altar, etc.” In this instance the Torah had first familiarized us with all the details of the ritual, and then proceeded to summarize it once more. <i>Rashi</i> says that the reason why the Torah summarized all this once more was to teach us that the weights described here were so accurate that when each bowl or basin had been weighed individually, and when subsequently they were weighed collectively, the total corresponded precisely to the multiple we were led to believe. 
   Nachmanides writes that he did not understand what <i>Rashi</i> had in mind when he wrote these lines, quoting Rabbi Moshe <i>Hadarshan.</i> What possible advantage could we gain from having this information? If he considered the fact that the weights correspond to one another as so remarkable that this was considered a miracle, what purpose would this miracle serve? G’d does not work miracles unless they were needed. If it was something natural, why did this fact deserve special mention? <i>Rashi</i>, i.e. Rabbi Moshe<i> hadarshan,</i> wanted us to learn that ordinary vessels are not judged by the same standards as holy vessels, vessels used in the Temple. When ordinary vessels are weighed you will find that their weight varies slightly each time they are being weighed. When holy vessels are weighed they weigh precisely the same each time they are put on the scales.
   Rabbi Nathan described an experiment performed with the vessels used in the Temple. (Second Temple) according to which the vessels were not only melted down, but coins were minted from them. Subsequently, the coins were melted down and reconverted into the original vessels. It was found that there had been no loss of the original weight at all. All of this proves that already originally the gold used in those vessels was of the most refined kind, so much so that it contained no dross that would be burnt off during the repeated processes of melting those vessels down. Nachmanides concludes that the lesson to be learned from all this is that G’d honours those who fear Him. The princes brought all their various offerings on the same day, a day that all of them had agreed upon previously, so that it would become unavoidable that one of them would get his turn before his colleague when they lined up. Each prince would be given his flag in recognition of his offering. The order of the days in which the offerings were accepted on the altar corresponded to when the prince in question had received his flag. It was important to G’d  (the Torah) that each prince and his offering would be named individually, as this was part of the honour paid to them by G’d. This is why the Torah did not write simply: “on the first day Nachshon brought the following offering, and he was followed by 11 other princes presenting duplicates of Nachshon’s offering”, although the Torah would have saved about 75 verses if it had done so. The reason for summarizing the offerings once more was to convey that the second prince had not needed to be inspired by his predecessor, etc., but that all had presented themselves at the entrance of the Tabernacle already on the first of <i>Nissan,</i> the first day when such offerings could be brought.
   
   Parshat  Beha-alotcha
   
   8,2. בהעלותך את הנרות, “when you kindle the lights, etc.” The day on which the Tabernacle was erected was comparable to the day on which the universe was created. This is why just as the report of the creation of the universe began with G’d commanding that there be light, the Torah here begins with detailing how Aaron should kindle the lights of the <i>menorah.</i>
   The reason why the paragraph dealing with kindling the <i>menorah</i> was placed immediately after the paragraph describing the gifts of the princes on the occasion of the consecration of the Tabernacle, is, as <i>Rashi</i> has pointed out already, that Aaron had been upset that he had apparently not been given a role in those rituals. In order to set his mind at rest, G’d told him that He had reserved a more important role for him even than that of the princes, i.e. the kindling of the <i>menorah.</i>
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> comments, asking why G’d consoled Aaron with the kindling of the lights, when He could so easily have pointed out to him that since he had been chosen for presenting the most welcome of the offerings, the incense, surely he must have realized that he had not been overlooked? There is a long list of sacrifices that is acceptable to <i>Hashem</i> only if offered by Aaron, or the High Priests after him, respectively, so that his mental depression seems totally unjustified?
   We must therefore try and understand the allegorical explanation quoted by <i>Rashi</i> in the name of the<i> Midrash Tanchumah</i> as referring to the Hasmoneans in the distant future, Aaron’s descendants, consecrating the entire Temple anew by lighting the <i>menorah</i> with oil that had been miraculously blessed by <i>Hashem</i> so that it burned for longer than could be expected (8 days instead of one day). Whereas on this occasion the inaugural rites were performed by members of the other tribes, not including the kindling of the lights, on that occasion, in the distant future, the kindling of the lights would become the central feature in the whole rededication of the Temple to the service of <i>Hashem.</i> Moreover, the consecration of the Temple in the days of the Hasmoneans was a more significant event than the consecration of the Altar, seeing that the Altar can only perform its function [the burning of animal sacrifices, etc. Ed.] as long as there is a Temple, whereas the consecration of the Temple by the Hasmonean priests was something of an enduring nature, seeing that we commemorate that event [the annual eight day celebration of Chanukkah and the kindling of the lights every evening. Ed.] still nowadays long after the Temple has been destroyed and there is no longer an Altar on which to offer animal sacrifices. It is clear therefore that the consecration of the Tabernacle was of a subordinate significance when measured against the millennia of Jewish history.
   Ibn Ezra states that the reason why the Torah attached our paragraph to that of the princes’ offerings is to teach that G’d communicated with Moses also at night, seeing that at least one light of the <i>menorah</i> would be burning around the clock. Nachmanides claims that Ibn Ezra’s comments do not conform to the opinion of our sages who claim that G’d communicated with Moses only during the day. [Rabbi Ch. Chavell, in his notes on Nachmanides’ commentary, points out that Abravanel has already justified Ibn Ezra’s commentary, and that what the sages meant was only that Moses did not receive communications from G’d at night, i.e. in a dream, such as other prophets. Ed.]
   Nachmanides adds that the sequence of the subject matters in our portion is justified, seeing that with these details about the kindling of the <i>menorah</i> the whole legislation pertaining to the offerings in the Tabernacle is concluded. The subject of the <i>menorah</i> and its function had commenced originally in Exodus 27,20 with the words: ואתה תצוה את בני ישראל ויקחו אליך שמן זית זך כתית למאור להעלות נר תמיד, “you are to command the Children of Israel that they shall take for you pure, pressed olive oil for illumination, to kindle the light continuously.” In that verse the <i>menorah</i> had not even been mentioned. The impression left from that verse had been that the <i>menorah</i> be lit at all times as long as the <i>menorah</i> was itself in a usable condition. Should the <i>menorah</i> be stolen, become dysfunctional, etc., we would have assumed that the command to keep it lit would automatically have become redundant. This is why the Torah in Leviticus 24,4 elaborates על המנורה הטהורה יערוך את הנרות לפני ה' תמיד, that “Aaron shall arrange the lights on the ritually pure <i>menorah</i> before <i>Hashem</i>, continuously.” The condition that enables kindling the <i>menorah</i> is that it is in a state of ritual purity. Now, in our portion, when the Torah concludes with the subjects of the offerings, after the Tabernacle has been completed and become functional, the details of the seven lamps on the <i>menorah</i>, the décor on its arms, etc., are repeated once more. Even the fact that the lamp on the center shaft was more important than the three arms on either side of it is mentioned, seeing the lights on the arms were burning in the direction of the center shaft.
   The Tabernacle is not mentioned in our paragraph at all, as had it been mentioned we might have concluded that the need for the <i>menorah</i> existed only in the Tabernacle, a structure that was not equipped with windows. Solomon’s Temple, however, which had a number of windows, might not require artificial lighting during the daytime, at least. To avoid our arriving at such faulty reasoning the Torah skipped mention of the word “Tabernacle,” or its equivalent in our paragraph.
   
   בהעלותך את הנרות, “when you kindle the lamps, etc.” I am puzzled by the fact that here G’d apparently singled out Aaron for receiving these instructions, without including his sons at the same time. After all, any ordinary priest is entitled to perform the kindling of the lights on the <i>menorah</i>. When thinking about this it occurred to me that there is no problem seeing that the wording of what Moses was to tell Aaron was not a command at all. Aaron had not been told to light, i.e. תעלה, the lamps, but had been informed about the sequence in which the <i>menorah’s</i> lamps were to be lit. The same sequence would have to be followed by any priest who performed the ritual of kindling these lamps. It is possible that by addressing Aaron in the first instance, the Torah, alluded to the miracle of Chanukkah which occurred in the days of the Hasmoneans when they miraculously discovered a cruse of ritually pure oil, and a descendant of Aaron was able to proceed with the kindling of the <i>menorah</i> without having to wait a number of days until new oil would be prepared.
   Nachmanides writes that perhaps the words מחוץ לפרוכת יערוך אותו אהרן, “outside the dividing curtain Aaron is to arrange for the kindling of the lights” (Exodus 27,21), were an indication to Moses that his brother had been chosen for this task so that he understood the word ובניו which follows, as referring to after Aaron would have died, although subsequently not only the High Priest was allowed to perform this rite. This is also why the Torah reports in verse 3 that Aaron performed this rite, i.e. that as long as he was alive he would not delegate this task even to his sons.
   
   אל מול פני המנורה יאירו שבעת הנרות, “its seven lamps shall illuminate towards the center shaft of the <i>menorah.”</i> The commentators all ask that the wording is misleading, seeing that only 6 of the lamps can direct their light towards the center shaft. They answer that what is meant is that whereas the lamp on the center shaft illuminates the area perpendicularly above it, the other six lamps direct their light either to the left or to the right. Altogether there would be seven lamps.
   
   8,4. וזה מעשה המנורה, “and this was the workmanship of the <i>menorah:”</i> Ibn Ezra writes that the wording of the Torah here is to be understood as pointing to the unique workmanship with which this <i>menorah</i> had been made.
   Nachmanides writes that the words וזה מעשה המנורה מקשה are to be read together, meaning that the unique feature of the workmanship of this <i>menorah</i> was that it was cast completely out of a single chunk of gold and then hammered into the desired shape. This feature was to be preserved throughout the generations whenever for whatever reason the <i>menorah</i> in the Temple had to be replaced. The fact that only this feature, מקשה has been repeated here, whereas the decorative features on the arms of the <i>menorah</i> have not been repeated here indicates that the indispensable feature was the fact that the entire <i>menorah</i> was to consist of a single chunk of gold. [When the people could not afford gold, a chunk of silver would also be acceptable. Ed.] (based on <i>Sifrey</i>)
   
   8,6. קח את הלוים, “take (aside) the Levites, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the reason why this paragraph was written here is to teach us that whereas only Aaron would perform the kindling of the lights, there were many other functions connected with the Temple service in which the Levites could participate, thus lightening the burden of the priests. [My edition of the Ibn Ezra describes the Levites as having been scattered among all the tribes, and they were now to be concentrated in one area. The same supposedly applied to the other tribes, also. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that after the firstborn and the Levites had been counted, they lined up in front of Moses awaiting his instructions. They were presented with the wagons that the princes had donated ready to commence their diversified duties around the complex occupied by the Tabernacle. There was an immediate need to ritually purify the Levites, who previously had not needed to be especially concerned about this in their daily routines.
   
   8,7. הזה עליהם מי חטאת והעבירו תער על כל בשרם, “sprinkle upon them water of purification, and let them pass a razor over their entire flesh.” Ibn Ezra points out that the shaving of their flesh had preceded their being sprinkled with the waters of purification. [He derives this from the switch by the Torah from the singular הזה, an instruction to Moses, whereas the word והעבירו is in the plural, referring to something the Levites had already done.]
   
   8,18. ואקח את הלוים, “I shall take the Levites, etc.”  Ibn Ezra comments that in spite of the fact that G’d had already said (past tense) לקחתי אותם לי, “I have taken them for Me,” (8,16) it is the style of the Torah to repeat what had been said before if an interruption had occurred in the interval, one that interferes with one’s trend of thought. (Verse 17 which provides historical background) The Torah is saying that as soon as the Levites had been singled out by G’d, He handed them over for instruction in their duties by the priests.
   
   8,21. וינף אהרן אותם תנופה...ויכפר עליהם, “Aaron performed a waving motion with each of them,…..and he provided atonement for them.” Ibn Ezra again explains that at that stage the atonement had already been provided for them. [The steps leading to their atonement had already been described in the previous verse. Ed.]
   
   8,24. מבן חמש ועשרים שנה ומעלה יבוא לצבא צבא, “from 25 years of age and up he shall join the legion of service.” <i>Rashi,</i> in commenting on the apparent contradiction in Numbers 4,3 where the Torah gives this age as 30, says that the Levites are to commence training for their duties from the age of 25 and to assume those duties once they have attained the age of 30. 
   Nachmanides commenting on <i>Rashi,</i> says that if so, the meaning of the words לצבא צבא have to be understood as the Levites joining the community of their older colleagues from that age and stand there observing how their senior colleagues performed their duties and to familarise themselves with the details of all the laws governing their activities. This would also explain the absence of the words לעבוד עבודה, “to perform service,” as we are used to reading in connection with this.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the people counted by Moses and Aaron were indeed the thirty year olds, whereas here the Torah calls upon those who knew that they were at least 25 years old to come forward on their own. Such relatively young men were allowed to perform duties although they were not promoted to the status of supervisors over other Levites. In those days, while people did not necessarily keep track of each year they had lived, they did keep track of decades they had lived, as it was commonly known that certain changes in one’s body are experienced with the passing of every decade. Turning 25 did not leave a noticeable impression on their bodies, so that there was no point in counting 25 year olds. Everybody knew when he turned 30.
   Ibn Ezra claims that the Levites were employed to perform heavy duties from the age of 30 and up, whereas until that age they were allowed to perform only duties carried out within the confines of the Tabernacle. Nachmanides does not accept this, as the Torah uses the term לצבא צבא both for the 25 year olds and for the ones above 30 years of age.
   
   25,8. ולא יעבוד עוד, “and he shall work no longer.” This does not mean that a Levite above the age of 50 will “retire,” but that he will no longer perform the kind of physical labour involving carrying heavy loads either on his shoulders or otherwise. He will, however, participate in such tasks as opening the Temple’s gates, sing in the choir accompanying the priests’ sacrificial service, etc., etc. This is <i>Rashi’s</i> understanding of the words ולא יעבוד עוד.
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation saying that if correct the Torah would not have placed an age limit on the Levites’ participating in the choir, and if so why were the Gersonides and the Merrari-ites counted from the age of thirty and up only to the age of 50 seeing that neither of them had to perform such physically strenuous labour as the Kehatites even when they were younger than 50 years of age? He claims therefore that the Levites above the age of 50 were also excluded from participating in the choir accompanying the Temple service, and this was the reason why the other two groups of Levites are counted only if they were between 30 and 50 years of age. [At this point, at least according to this editor’s understanding of both the versions available to us, Nachmanides and the <i>Sifrey,</i> matters become a bit confusing, and I believe the simplest solution is that in the desert when the functions of the Kehatites were different from that of the other Levites as they had to carry the Holy Ark on their shoulders, etc, they might have completely retired from activities in and around the Tabernacle, whereas once there was a permanent Temple instead of a collapsible structure, there no longer was such a distinction between the members of the Kehatites and the other Levites. Ed.]
   9,1. בשנה השנית לצאתם מארץ מצרים, “during the second year, counting from their Exodus from Egypt.” This verse proves conclusively that the Torah has not imposed upon itself the rule of reporting events in historical sequence only, a rule known as אין מוקדם ומאוחר בתורה. It is stated specifically that the Book of Numbers commences with events which took place in the second month of the second year, whereas here the Torah backtracked to the first month of that year. The Israelites observed the Passover only once during all the years they were in the desert, i.e. on the first anniversary of the Exodus. One of the reasons was that the Israelites were not able to perform the rites of circumcision due to the northern wind which blew in the desert, exposure to which presented a health risk to the babies. Had they not sinned by accepting the majority report of the spies, they would not have had to wander in the desert and would have been in the Land of Israel before they would have had to observe a second Passover. Uncircumcised males are forbidden to partake of sacrificial meat, something unavoidable in performing the Passover ritual. 
   [This editor has never understood this reason, as the natural increase of the Jewish people was about 2.5 percent annually, and it would have taken over 20 years before the majority of the male Israelites would have been uncircumcised. Why would the majority not perform such an important commandment because a minority was unable to? Ed.] 
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah did not follow chronological sequence here was that before listing commandments issued to the people in the desert, the Torah wanted to complete the legislation pertaining to the erection of the Tabernacle, its inauguration, and to report on the composition of the encampment as it was to remain throughout the time the Israelites were in the desert. Seeing that the commandment to offer a Passover in the desert, at least according to some of our sages, was a one-time legislation, the record of this legislation and its performance could be deferred until this point.
   It is possible that mention had to be made of this commandment once more as in Exodus chapter 12 where we read about this legislation originally, it had never been stated that the commandment would remain in effect throughout the generations. [I do not follow, as in Exodus 12,14 this has been spelled out. Ed.] Now G’d wanted the people to perform these rites in order to remind them of what had happened exactly one year ago and to recall how many overt miracles G’d had performed in bringing about the people’s redemption from slavery. It was not necessary in the desert to write again the details of the seven day festival of <i>matzot,</i> etc., as being commandments that must be performed by the body they were automatically valid for all posterity.
   
   9,3. בין הערבים תעשו אותו, “you shall prepare it in the afternoon.” The various procedures connected with offering the Passover are all included in the words תעשו אותו, “prepare it.”
   ככל חוקותיו וככל משפטיו תעשו אותו, ”you shall make it according to all its decrees and its laws.” Here the Torah means to include the laws governing the eating of the Passover, such as that it must not be eaten on the day it was  slaughtered but only on the night following it; as had been pointed out in chapter 12 in Exodus already, as well as the fact that similar rules apply to the people offering the substitute Passover known as פסח שני, by people who had been unable to do so on the proper date due to being ritually impure on account of contact with the dead.
   
   9,10. בדרך רחוקה, “on a remote road.” The dot over the letter ה in the word רחוקה alludes to the respective opinions concerning the distance the traveler has to be from the Temple at sunrise of the 14th of Nissan, the day the Passover must be slaughtered. One sage holds that anyone more distant than the threshold of the courtyard of the Temple during the period that the slaughtering was in progress is included here, whereas the other sage holds that a distance of approximately 30000 cubits, equivalent to the distance of the Hasmonean town of Modiin from Jerusalem constitutes “remote” in the sense that if the person was ritually impure he was equated with someone too far distant to be able to reach Jerusalem on that day. (compare <i>Pessachim</i> 69)
   Nachmanides writes  that although in connection with the substitute Passover known as the “second Passover,” nothing has been written concerning the distance of a potential pilgrim from the Temple on the morning of the day the Passover must be slaughtered, the same rules that apply to someone offering the Passover on the 14th of <i>Nissan</i> also apply to a person who is permitted (commanded) to offer it on the 14th of <i>Iyar</i>. He who omitted offering the first Passover even deliberately, is still commanded to make up for this on the 14th of Iy<i>ar,</i> whereas someone who on the morning of the 14th of Nissan was beyond Modiin and thus legally free to wait until the 14th of <i>Iyar,</i> is nonetheless permitted to offer his Passover on the 14th of <i>Nissan</i> if he managed to reach the Temple gates while the slaughtering was still in progress. (by driving or flying instead of walking). In fact, such a person is accorded special praise for having made the effort when legally he need not have exerted himself.
   
   9,14. וכי יגור אתכם גר, “when a proselyte shall dwell amongst you, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why in connection with proselytes the Torah emphasized how and under what circumstances he may observe the Passover rites, whereas nothing like this is said about his observing most of the other commandments, is because the parallel paragraph in Exodus 12,48 applied only to converts that had converted prior to the Exodus. If the Torah had not repeated the legislation here, we would have thought that these converts were not obligated to observe the Passover in the desert or subsequently, as their fathers had not been redeemed from slavery, never having been slaves in Egypt.
   
   9,15. וביום הקים את המשכן, “and on the day the Tabernacle had been erected, etc.” now the Torah resumes the report of the Israelites’ journeys in the desert, prefacing it with the reminder that the clouds of G’d’s glory covered the Tent of Meeting by day and that it would be replaced each evening by a fire visible all night. The movements of these clouds or the fiery appearance would signal that the people were to either break up and move, or make camp, as the case might be. Audible signals were heard by means of the trumpets, as we shall be told in chapter 10
   כסה הענן את המשכן לאהל העדות, “the cloud covered the Tabernacle that was a Tent of Testimony.” Nachmanides interprets these words as showing that the cloud only covered the actual Tabernacle, not the courtyard surrounding it.
   
   9,19. ובהאריך הענן, “and when the cloud remained stationary for a longer period, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the meaning is that the people were not always content that the cloud remained in the same place for a long period as it delayed their progress toward the Holy Land. Nonetheless, the people observed G’d’s expressed will, and the Torah compliments them for this. This is why the Torah added the otherwise superfluous words that the people honoured G’d’s wish by not breaking camp until told to do so. Similarly, when the motion of the cloud signaled that they were to continue their journey although they had only pitched their tents on the day before, they did not complain but obeyed G’d’s wish without protest. On occasion this meant that after a whole night’s journey, and making camp in morning, they had to break camp and move on within literally, a number of hours. Although such uncertainties about their movements must have taken a toll on their nerves, it is recorded to their credit that they did not express discontent about this, ever.
   
   9,23. על פי ה' יחנו ועל פי ה' יסעו, “They would encamp according to the word of <i>Hashem</i>, and they would break camp and commence their journey according to the word of <i>Hashem.”</i> This has been repeated once more to tell us that this pattern continued for all the forty years they were in the desert. Previously, the Torah had described the people as journeying followed by their making camp, whereas here the pattern is reversed and their encamping is mentioned ahead of their breaking camp. The Torah wanted to stress that on all occasions the glory of <i>Hashem</i> accompanied them.
   It also appears to me that the verse that concludes with ובמקום אשר ישכן שם הענן, שם יחנו בני ישראל is the verse to which the words על פי ה' יסעו apply, to tell us that after having encamped according to the word of <i>Hashem,</i> they also commenced journeying again only at the command of <i>Hashem.</i> On the other hand, when we read על פי ה' יסעו, the Torah follows with the report that the people started to journey at the command of <i>Hashem,</i> by adding that they did not continue but they encamped at the command of <i>Hashem</i> although they might have preferred to keep on journeying toward their ultimate destination.
   
   10,2. עשה לך שתי חצוצרות כסף, “make two silver trumpets for yourself!” The trumpets were to be made of silver instead of gold, in order not to remind <i>Hashem</i> of the golden calf each time they would be used. The sound, otherwise, would be associated with the loud noise the Israelites made when they danced around that idol. (Compare Exodus 32,18)
   
   10,6. ונסעו המחנות החונים תימנה, “and the groups encamped to the south shall start marching.” Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation of our verse is that two blasts of <i>teruah</i> will be trumpeted, one to alert the people of the eastern camp to start moving, followed by another alerting the people in the southern camp to get moving. This is why the Torah wrote:
   
   תרועה יתקעו למסעיהם, after already having written ותקעתם תרועה שנית ונסעו המחנות וגו', “you will trumpet a second <i>teruah</i> and the camps in the south will get moving.” Apparently, there was a third <i>teruah</i> signaling the people encamped on the west side to start moving, and a fourth <i>teruah</i> when the time had come to signal to the fourth group, the ones encamped to the west of the Tabernacle to start moving and to make up the rearguard, as it were.
   Ibn Ezra writes that there was no trumpet blast after the easternmost camp had began to move. He offers proof for what he writes by pointing out that the Kehatites and with them the priests who did the blowing of the trumpets traveled ahead of the flag (army group) of Ephrayim. [How could they signal to army groups a long way behind them? Ed.]
   In the Sifrey the opinion is voiced that just as there were trumpets blown for setting the eastern army group and the northern army group in motion, the same may have been done in order to set the two other army groups to get moving. The author does not express a definitive view as to how many such <i>teruot</i> were blown to get the people moving.
   
   10,9. וכי תבאו מלחמה בארצכם, “when you go to war against an enemy who has invaded your land, etc.” Onkelos translates this verse as וארי תעלון לאגחא קרבא בארעכון, “when you go out to fight a battle in your land, etc.” If that were correct, then the letter ל as the prefix to the word מלחמה would be absent in our verse and the meaning would be “if you go to war,” or “when you go to war.” This in turn would raise the question why the Torah here uses the word תבא instead of the word תצא that is standard for describing a war fought outside the boundaries of the Land of Israel. (Compare Deut. 20,1; 21,10; 23,10) Possibly, the Torah alludes to the fact that the trumpets were to be made use of in the manner described only in a war which is defined as מלחמת חובה, an obligatory war, not an expansionary war, a מלחמת רשות. All the wars described with the introductory words: כי תצא, are wars which are not obligatory, as proven by the fact that it was possible to dodge the draft and to return home after having answered the original roll call, as elaborated upon in Deut. 20,1-9. In our verse the Torah speaks about an obligatory war, and this is why the term יצא is not mentioned here. This is also why the Torah adds the word בארצכם, “in your land,” i.e. you have been invaded. According to <i>Sifrey</i> our verse speaks of wars both within our borders or without, but in either case we are the victims of aggressive neighbors. The letter ו at the end of the word תבאו is therefore quite unnecessary and may be used in lieu of the missing letter ל in front of the word מלחמה. 
   
   10,14. ויסע דגל מחנה יהודה, “The flag of the camp of the tribe of Yehudah journeyed, etc.” Whereas the Torah writes the word נסע, when reporting the other camps as starting their respective journeys, in reporting that the camp of Yehudah began its journey the Torah wrote ויסע, using the inverted future mode. In terms of the respective numerical value of these two words, it results in Yehudah being shortchanged 40 as the word ויסע=146, whereas the word ונסע amounts to 186. This may be an allusion to the tradition that the bones of Yehudah were constantly in restless motion in their coffin throughout the 40 years that the Israelites wandered in the desert; a delayed retribution for his leading part in the sale of Joseph to the Ishmaelites.
   
   ועל צבאו, “and in charge of its army, etc.” Nachmanides writes that he did not know why the Torah at this stage mentions the princes in charge of each army group once more. If the Torah meant to tell us that all of these princes were still alive, we already know this from Numbers 2,4. We have a tradition that from the day of the count reported in that chapter until the beginning of the journey of the Israelites from Mount Sinai not a single Israelite died. Perhaps what the Torah wanted to hint to us is that during the journey the respective prince always marched at the head of his army group and generally performed the functions incumbent upon him, issuing instructions to his tribe and ensuring that these instructions were carried out. Each tribal leader performed the function performed in later periods by the כהן משוח מלחמה, the priest anointed especially for duty during expansionary wars.
   
   10,17. והורד המשכן, “The Tabernacle was dismantled.” The meaning of the paragraph starting with ויהי בשנה השנית in 10,11 is to describe the journey of the Tabernacle, i.e. the camp of the Levites traveling surrounded by the various army groups, as <i>Rashi</i> has outlined when he described that as soon as the army group of Yehudah had started marching the sons of Aaron would lower the dividing curtain in the Tabernacle and would wrap up the various sacred furnishings. When these had been wrapped, the Levites, i.e. Gersonides and Merarites, took apart the beams comprising the walls of the Tabernacle and loaded them onto the wagons, etc. These wagons with those Levites would be traveling behind the army group of Yehudah, ahead of the army group of Reuven.
   
   10,29. ויאמר משה לחובב, “Moses said to his father-in-law Chovav, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that Re-uel was the father of Tzipporah, as we know from Exodus 2,18 ותבאנה אל רעואל אביהם, “when they came home to their father Re-uel, etc.” Chovav was the brother of Tzipporah and he is identical with Yitro, for the Torah wrote that Moses said of him: (verse 31) ידעת חנותנו במדבר, “you are familiar with where we are encamped in the desert,” and it is also written in connection with Yitro (Exodus 18,5) אל המדבר אשר הוא חונה שם, “to the desert where he was camping” (Moses). If someone were to argue that Yitro was Moses’ father-in-law, the answer is that it is the custom of the Torah to refer to the father of the girl as well as to her brother as חותן, proof being the line לחובב בן רעואל המדיני חותן משה after it had already been made clear that Chovav was a brother of Tzipporah.
   Many commentators are of the opinion that Chovav and Yitro are identical, that he was the father of Tzipporah, whereas Re-uel was the grandfather. As far as the words אל רעואל אביהם is concerned, this is no different than when the Torah quotes Yaakov as referring to אלוקי אבי אברהם, the “G’d of my father Avraham,” when we all know that Avraham was Yaakov’s grandfather and not his father.
   Nachmanides writes that Moses pleaded with Chovav to accompany the Jewish people, saying to him in general terms והטבנו לך, “we will treat you well;” Chovav understood this to mean that the Jewish people would let him share in the spoils of war but that he would not receive a share of the Land of Israel as an ancestral piece of land. This is why Chovav replied that in that case he would prefer to return to a land that was his own, where he was not just tolerated as a newcomer to whom one had accorded a courtesy. When Moses became aware of Chovav having misunderstood the nature of his offer, he changed his approach by begging Chovav not to abandon him and the Jewish people, seeing that he had already become so valuable to them by having served as their eyes. He added that they would share with him all the good G’d were to do for His people on an equal basis. He hinted that Chovav would receive a portion of the land as an ancestral heritage. Nachmanides believes that Chovav accepted this offer and bases himself on the Jerusalem Talmud (<i>Bikkurim</i> 1,5) where the descendants of the Keyni, (Yitro’s offspring) are granted the right to refer to the land of Israel as their heritage and they read the passage about <i>bikkurim</i> just as does any natural born Jew whose ancestors had been slaves in Egypt. Their claim is based on Moses having said to Chovav לכה אתנו, “please join us,” in our verse above.
   
   10,33. וארון ברית ה' נוסע לפניהם דרך שלשת ימים, “and the Ark of the Covenant of <i>Hashem</i> journeyed before them a three–day distance.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this was the Ark containing the broken pieces of the first set of Tablets. This Ark traveled ahead of the main body the distance normally covered in three days’ march.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text neither the Ark nor the cloud preceded the people at all in terms of physical distance; the Torah describes that the Ark and the cloud would move for three days uninterruptedly without taking time out to make an even temporary “pit stop” until the evening of the third day. On that evening the cloud came to rest in the desert of Paran, and this is the meaning of the words לתור להם מנוחה, “to espy a suitable resting place for them” in our verse. The people would not make camp until they had reached that location. They then proceeded to re-assemble the Tabernacle and they brought into it the various furnishings, first of all the Holy Ark. What is not clear is whether during these three days the people marched also at night.
   Ibn Ezra writes that when the Torah wrote in verse 21 that the Kehatites journeyed and erected the Tabernacle before the people arrived, refers to the Kehatites journeying behind the first two flags, (army groups) does not apply to the first time the people moved away from their 11 months encampment at the bottom of Mount Sinai. During that journey the Ark did travel a distance of three days’ march ahead of them.
   
   10,35. ויהי בנסוע הארון, “Whenever the Ark would journey, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that this short paragraph that is bracketed within two inverted letters נ has been inserted here in order to separate one unhappy occurrence from the next one. According to his opinion the Israelites deviated from G’d’s path already during the three days of their very first march away from Mount Sinai. The group of people described as אספסוף, rabble, (11,4) already cultivated a craving for meat, thereby rebelling against the manner in which <i>Hashem</i> had fed the people thus far.
   Nachmanides has difficulty with <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, pointing out that the unhappy occurrence mentioned in verse 1 of chapter 11, preceded the craving of the people for a meat diet. This פורענות, is followed by the rabble’s craving for meat immediately, without any intervening verses in verse 4. Where then did the verses 35 and 36 in our chapter separate one unhappy event from another? Nachmanides concludes that what <i>Rashi</i> meant was that the moving away from Mount Sinai (verse 33) was the first of the unhappy events which occurred so frequently from now on. The <i>Midrash</i> describes the moving away of the people from the spiritually lofty environment of Mount Sinai as similar to a child turning its back on the books from which he is supposed to absorb useful information.
   
   11,1. ויהי העם כמתאוננים, “It happened when the people were in a frustrated mood looking for things to complain about;” Nachmanides, quoting Ibn Ezra who considers that the root of the word מתאוננים is און, (as in Job 15,35) does not agree, saying that there is no reason why the Torah should gloss over the people’s sinful behaviour by being so oblique. We have no other instance where the Torah downplays the people’s errant conduct.
   Nachmanides therefore believes that the correct interpretation is that when the people now faced the terrible desert, they became full of misgivings and fear as to how they would fare on the journey ahead of them. He therefore understands the word מתאוננים as in Lamentations 3,39 מה יתאונן אדם חי גבר על חטאיו?, “Of what shall a living man complain? Each one of his own sins.” Such a negative attitude by a nation that should have looked forward with joyful anticipation to coming ever closer to the promised land, was considered as sinful by <i>Hashem.</i> He had shown them ample proof of making their lives tolerable even in the desert, and they had no reason to be despondent. When we view matters from this perspective we can understand why the Torah writes in verse 4 וישובו ויבכו גם בני ישראל, that the Children of Israel wept a second time, etc.” The first time had been what we read about in verse 1. The people had not learned a lesson from the heavenly fire that had claimed many lives among the people.  
   11,3. ויקרא שם המקום ההוא תבערה, “He called the name of that place <i>Taveyrah.”</i> According to Nachmanides theמקום ההוא refers to the edge of the camp where the heavenly fire had descended the people called <i>Taveyrah,</i> and they did not move on from that place, as it was at that very same location that they cultivated their craving for meat. Subsequently, they called that whole town or that place קברות התאווה, “graves where the victims of inordinate desire were buried.”
   
   11,4. התאוו תאוה, “they induced a craving in themselves.” Nachmanides writes that actually they did not lack anything at all as they had enough manna to satisfy each one of them, and they were able to satisfy their palates by wishing how that manna should taste each time they ate it. However, they abused these powers of imagination and wished the manna to taste revoltingly in order to have an excuse to complain about not getting proper food.
   
   ויאמרו מי יאכילנו בשר, “they said: ‘who is going to feed us meat?’” Nachmanides explains this request by saying that not all the people had meat to eat on a daily basis, even though most of them had access to meat on frequent occasions, as a good part of the people owned livestock and they would slaughter them regularly. The adults would eat of these animals, whereas the younger people were not so lucky. The fact is that, seeing that they spoke of “remembering we used to eat fish in Egypt without needing to pay for them,” (verse 5) indicates that as far as even fish were concerned they could do no more than ”remember” it 
   
   11,5. זכרנו את הדגה אשר נאכל, “we remember the fish we used to eat, etc.” Nachmanides understands these words literally, pointing out that the Egyptian fishermen would employ the Jews and would let them eat the fish they did not think they could sell at the local fish market. The various vegetables mentioned in our verse were so plentiful in Egypt that even Hebrew slaves could afford them, or that they dug them out of the ground and no one would protest this. We have the Torah on record as comparing the whole of the land of Egypt to a garden full of greens. (Genesis 13,10) [The author paints one or two additional scenarios that would explain the words in our text. They are of speculative character. Ed.]
   Some commentators do not understand the word דגה as fish at all, but view it as a simile describing abundance, as in Genesis 48,16 וידגו לרוב בקרב הארץ, “may they proliferate abundantly.” Accordingly, the people would have been complaining about the abundant sources of food they had enjoyed in Egypt and the variety, compared to what they condescendingly described as the monotonous diet of manna.
   
   11,6. נפשנו יבשה, “our life is parched;” Nachmanides describes the emotional state of the Israelites as having “died out,” due to the many different cravings they had been experiencing. Alternately, he writes, the meaning of the phrase could be that whereas natural foods provide the body with moisture, lubricating it, they did not experience such feelings when eating manna, but felt parched instead.
   
   בלתי אל המן עינינו, “we have nothing to look forward to but manna.” Even the food that we live on now, i.e. the manna, we must always hopefully and expectantly look for it if it will materialise, and we have no stored surplus enabling us to experience peace of mind; rather we need to crave for it, never knowing if it will materialise. In response to these spurious complaints the Torah gives us details in verse 7-9 of the multifaceted uses the manna could be put to. Even its external appearance was extremely pleasing to the eye.
   
   11,8. טעמו כטעם לשד השמן, “it tasted like a dough kneaded with oil.” The Torah testifies that this answers the accusation that the manna was completely dry-tasting, saying that, on the contrary, it contained elements which made it taste moist without requiring the people to even have to add an additive in order to make it moist tasting. After eating it the person having eaten it would feel very refreshed.
   
   11,12. האנכי הריתי, “did I conceive this people?” Nachmanides writes that Onkelos’ opinion that the words mean “am I their father,” which is based on the phrase ברכות הורי, “the blessings of my fathers” (Genesis 49,26) is an expanded version of the role of fathers who are viewed as if they had conceived, as without the insertion of their semen in the mother’s womb the mother could not have conceived.
   
   אם אנכי ילידיתיהו, “did I perhaps give birth to them?” Am I their mother the one who has given birth to them? The scholars who concentrate primarily on the plain meaning, פשט, take the opposite approach, saying that the word הריתי should be understood as referring to a mother, Moses asking if he, a man, should really be expected to relate to the Jewish people as a mother is expected to relate to them, i.e. to carry them in his bosom as a mother carries her baby, etc. The verb ילד is used by Moses to describe a father’s part in producing a child, as in ויולד את נח, (Genesis 5,28) whereas the verb הרה is used by Moses to describe the mother’s input, as in ותהר את מרים “she became pregnant with Miriam.” (Chronicles I 4,17) This is why Moses illustrates further כאשר ישא האומן את היונק, “as the nurse carries a suckling.”
   I believe that Moses spoke in terms of what mothers have to go through before they have a baby, followed by the possibly far greater difficulties in raising their children. A mother is constantly reminded of her pre-natal pains, etc. whenever the children do not act in a manner that compensates her for the pains endured before they came into this world.
   
   11,14. לא אוכל לבדי שאת, “I cannot carry this burden all by myself.” Nachmanides writes that Moses did not request that the elders become his assistants in his supplying meat for the people, for where would they take it from? Moreover, he was quite aware that even if a large number of providers would be appointed, whenever they would find reason to complain these complaints would continue to be addressed to him, seeing that it had been he who had taken them out of Egypt, and the source of all their complaints were always traced to that event. What Moses hoped to accomplish by having the elders appointed was that if the people had a number of leaders, by the time the complaints would be transmitted to him if they proved beyond the competence of the elders to deal with, the people’s anger and fury would have at least partially spent itself seeing that the elders would have tried to blunt their anger and frustration.
   It is also possible that Moses thought that once the people found out that the elders possessed holy spirit and were able to prophesy, they would show loyalty to these prophets and not gang up on Moses as they had been in the habit of doing. They would therefore demand from these divinely inspired elders to satisfy their various cravings.
   
   11,15. ואם ככה את עושה לי, “and if this is how You deal with me, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the feminine mode in the word את instead of אתה when addressing <i>Hashem,</i> is an allusion to the fact that Moses’ spiritual reserves were close to being exhausted.
   Nachmanides writes that he did not understand <i>Rashi’s</i> conclusions about the use of the word את<i>,</i> seeing that Moses employed this pronoun of G’d while addressing Him. 
   According to the plain meaning of the text the pronoun את is indeed found being used when addressing a male as in Ezekiel 28,14: את כרוב ממשח הסוכך, “You-who have been anointed to act as protector, etc.” [According to this Moses would accuse G’d of treating him as no longer deserving to be regarded as possessing the strength expected of a male. Of course, Moses would have brought this upon himself by his self-admitted inability to deal with the people’s challenges. Ed. Rabbi Chavel cites an interesting commentary on our verse by Rabbi Wolf Heidenheim.]
   
   הרגני נא הרוג, “”then kill me now!” Moses requested that G’d dispatch one of His agents to kill him even by the sword used by a human being, as he considered it preferable to die at the hands of a human being to continuing to live a life full of frustration. Alternately, he asked for a different mode of death, and he used the word הרג, as one would say המיתני, “arrange for my death forthwith.”
   
   ואל אראה ברעתי, “so that I will not have to watch my wretchedness.” The words call to mind when Jonah said to G’d repeatedly טוב מותי מ.., It is better that I die (now) than…” (Jonah 4,8.)
   
   11,16. אשר ידעת כי הם זקני העם ושומריו, “whom you know to be the elders of the people and its officers.” Ibn Ezra writes that there are elders who are not qualified to perform both the tasks G’d describes here.
   
   11,17. וירדתי ודברתי עמך שם, “I will descend and speak with you there.” Nachmanides writes that the meaning of this verse is that at the time when G’d would speak with Moses the transfer of some of his Holy Spirit to the elders concerned would take place, with these elders experiencing part of the conversation between G’d and Moses. This is not equivalent to what G’d had described in Numbers 27,20 as מהודך, “part of your glory,” when He instructed Moses to appoint Joshua as his successor. Interestingly, when G’d carries out in verse 25 what He had said to Moses here, we do not read a single word about the subject of G’d’s conversation with Moses. This was a departure from all other occasions when G’d was described as speaking to Moses. The reason is that here the whole purpose was for G’d to address these elders via Moses. The latter neither heard G’d’s voice, nor did they have any visual communication such as a dream in which G’d appeared to them. G’d spoke to Moses, and the elders, thanks to the transfer of some of Moses’ Holy Spirit, became instantly aware of a conversation between G’d and Moses being in progress. This is also the meaning of what we read in verse 25: ויתנבאו ולא יספו, “they prophesied but did not continue to do so.” In other words, they were not able to call on their prophetic spirit themselves but had been given such inspiration only with Moses as the vehicle. The meaning of the words 
   
   ואצלתי מן הרוח אשר עליך, “I will deposit some of the spirit that is upon you placing it on them.” The meaning of the word אצל wherever it occurs is that that which is described as being נאצל is being arrested in a certain static condition, forever remaining dependent on its source. A well known example of the use and meaning of that word is found in Kohelet 2,10, “וכל אשר שאלו עיני לא אצלתי מהם, “and I did not deny, hold back from granting, anything which my eyes desired of the joys available in this world.” Similarly, when we read in Exodus chapter 24 about the אצילי בני ישראל, the reference is to the aristocracy of the Israelites, the ones who considered themselves apart from the multitude. When the word נבואה is used, however, the Torah speaks about a divine inspiration which comes from G’d directly, is not dependent on the input by another human being.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word ואצלתי as meaning something similar to אקח מאשר אצלך, “I will take something which is beside you, i.e. I will not thereby diminish what is yours.”
   Some commentators understand the meaning of אצילות as being similar to המשכה, “drawing something away.”
   Personally, I tend to believe that as long as the elders were being indirectly inspired via Moses that they could divine what it was that G’d expected of them and would command the people in any matters relating to the welfare of the people in all the happenings that the Torah reports as having occurred in the desert. This is the meaning of the words: ונשאו אתך במשא העם, “they will assist you in carrying the burden of the people.” They were informed of all that Moses would instruct the people to do; everyone would share this knowledge with his tribe. As a result, Moses would no longer carry the weight of their complaints all by himself.
   
   11,19. לא יום אחד, “not for one day, etc.” The meaning is “not for one day only are you going to eat meat;”
   Nachmanides holds that if someone eats, אוכל something for a number of consecutive days, or performs other tasks עושה, for a number of consecutive days, this is not described by the word אוכל or עושה respectively, and if someone eats something for 30 days consecutively it would be inappropriate to say that he has eaten for 20 days. [According to Rabbi Chavell, Nachmanides’ problem is why the Torah wasted time writing “not one day, not two days, not five days, not ten days, not twenty days, but a whole month of days.” He concludes that unless the Torah had added the words עד חודש ימים, “until a whole month of days,” I might have understood the days mentioned previous to that as not being consecutive days. In that event, eating meat at intervals for, say, twenty days would not have resulted in one’s becoming revolted at the mere sight of meat. It follows that the meaning of the words לא יום אחד, ולא חמשה ימים is not to be understood as we might think at first glance, but that they mean that if someone eats meat for a day, or he eats meat five days out of seven days in the week, his reaction to such a diet is completely different to someone who eats meat for 30 days consecutively.
   Alternatively, the Torah emphasized that the people would learn that when their craving would be indulged by G’d in accordance with their wishes, they would find out to their distress that what they thought would be a blessing could turn into a curse. Indulging a craving for meat without restraint has negative consequences that are not experienced when one eats vegetables or fish for the same number of days consecutively. G’d did not provide the people with a corresponding amount of fish and vegetables, although they had yearned for this also, as what had caused them to break out in weeping had been their unsatisfied craving for meat.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the choice of the Torah of the numbers 2,5,10,20 is not arbitrary but “two” is double of “one.” “Five” represents the number of fingers on one hand, “ten” is double that number, i.e. the fingers on two hands, twenty” is double that number again, i.e the number of fingers plus the number of toes.
   
   11,20. עד אשר יצא מאפכם, “until it comes out of your nose, etc.” They would gorge themselves on such large quantities of meat for an entire month that they would finally become revolted by it, and would vomit it. Eventually, they would view meat as something not fit to eat.
   
   11,22. הצאן ובקר ישחט להם, “are sheep and cattle going to be slaughtered for them?” Nachmanides writes that there can be no question but that the plain meaning of the verse corresponds to the opinion voiced by Rabbi Akiva in <i>Chulin</i> 16-17 where he stated that the emphasis in our verse is on the word ישחט, as he holds that in the desert it had been permitted to kill animals by stabbing instead of slaughtering. The Torah now draws attention to the fact that after the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai this was no longer the case. He also holds that the eating of meat that had not first bee consecrated as an offering on the Altar had never been forbidden. Moses, in this instance queried if the herds of the Israelites were sufficient for their needs for a whole month even if all their livestock were to be slaughtered. The idea that they deserved a miracle did not even cross his mind.
   Onkelos also thinks that way. However, the subject is problematic as pointed out by Rabbi Shimon who said: “how can we even suspect that a person such as Moses whom G’d Himself had described as trustworthy in His entire house, should harbour any suspicions of G’d’s inadequacy in any domain? The very question Moses voiced creates the impression that he queried G’d’s ability to provide what He had said He would provide, no matter how He would go about it?”
   Ibn Ezra answers the problem by saying that Moses’ premise had been that surely the problem faced by the people was not the kind that would cause G’d to employ supernatural means in order to solve it. He thought that G’d reserves resorting to miracles only in order to demonstrate that predictions of His prophets will come true, and the prophet will be legitimized when that happens.
   This explanation also does not satisfy me, seeing that G’d had already performed miracles to prove the authenticity of Moses as a prophet when He provided the people with the quail in Exodus 16,11-13 as well as when He responded to the people’s complaints that they did not have what to eat, by supplying them with the heavenly bread, the manna, starting in Exodus 16,13. The same was true when G’d had told Moses to strike the rock at <i>Massa um’rivah</i> and produce a constant flow of drinking water for the people. (Exodus 17,7)
   I believe that the correct approach is that whenever G’d takes the trouble to perform miracles for the Children of Israel the purpose is for their benefit, i.e. they can recognize the miracle as being for their benefit. The only times G’d employed miracles as an act of the מדת הדין, the Attribute of Justice, is when He punished Israel’s enemies or oppressors by intervening in their fate by miracles, such as the ten plagues, or the drowning of the Egyptians in the Sea of Reeds. Therefore, when G’d predicted that the people will ultimately be revolted by the very meat they were craving, Moses had no reason to believe that G’d planned to perform a miracle for them by providing them with a liberal meat diet. 
   As soon as G’d told Moses that the meat He would provide would become revolting to the people, he realized that G’d did not plan to intervene by miraculous means. This is what evoked Moses’ wondering how this gigantic undertaking could possibly be performed by natural means.
   G’d informed Moses that he had been mistaken, that G’d was able to meet the demands of the people even without invoking supernatural means. This is why He asked the rhetorical question: היד ה' תקצר, “Is <i>Hashem’s</i> power inadequate then?” You will note that here the Torah does not phrase G’d’s answer as had the angels who promised Avraham that he would be the father of a baby boy a year hence. (Genesis 18,14) At that time, this was the answer to an unspoken question by Sarah that she had first denied thinking. The angels employed the phrase היפלא מה' דבר, “Is anything too wonderful for <i>Hashem</i> to do?” This referred to G’d performing miracles, as the Torah had been on record repeatedly that Sarah was not only barren but did not even possess a womb. (Genesis 11,30, <i>Yevamot</i> 64) In the event, G’d did not even have to divert the wind so that the quails touched down around the area where the Israelites were encamped, as opposed to when He brought on the plague of locusts, (Exodus 10,13) or when He dried out the bottom of the Sea of Reeds. (Exodus 14,21) The only new element in what occurred here was the inordinately large number of quails that landed around the camp of the Israelites.
   
   11,28. משרת משה מבחוריו, “the servant of Moses from his youth.” Ibn Ezra writes that some commentators understand the word מבחוריו to mean that Joshua was one of Moses’ most devoted servants, whereas others view the word מבחוריו as if it were glued to the words משרת משה, meaning that he had been a servant of Moses from his earliest youth. This latter explanation cannot be correct as what is described here occurred only in the second year of the people’s being in the desert, and we have no evidence that Joshua who was only about 24 years younger than Moses already served in that function in Egypt. I believe that the proper explanation is that Joshua was one of several men who attended to Moses’ needs. 
   
   אדוני משה כלאם, ”my lord Moses, lock them up!”  Nachmanides writes that the reason why Joshua said this was that Moses was in the habit of communicating G’d’s words to the people and he thereby also caused some of his spirit to devolve on the elders who stood around him at the Tent of Meeting. By prophesying in a location far removed from the Tabernacle, the two men, Eldod and Meydod, had presumed to arrogate to themselves a status similar to that of the elders. He therefore wanted them confined, as they behaved as if challenging Moses’ authority.
   Alternately, Joshua suspected these two men to be false prophets or that they were out of their minds and deserved to be locked up to prevent them causing further harm. Moses, in his characteristic modesty, replied:
   
   11,29. ומי יתן כל עם ה' נביאים כי יתן ה' את רוחו עליהם", “Would that the entire people of <i>Hashem</i> were prophets! If <i>Hashem</i> would only place His spirit upon them!” Moses wished that G’d were to inspire the people with prophetic spirit without having recourse to his own spirit from which such Holy Spirit would be diverted “second hand,” so to speak. He expressed the wish that the entire people be so endowed.
   Judging from the writings on the subject by our sages, it was an old established custom in Israel that no one would make prophetic announcements regarding future events while there was a prophet of greater stature alive. The reason for this custom was that anyone failing to abide by this custom would appear as if he were handing down <i>halachic</i> decisions in the presence of his teachers, something absolutely forbidden, possibly on pain of death at the hands of Heaven. [Compare <i>Berachot</i> 31. Ed.] People endowed with such spirit would form part of the entourage of their spiritual mentor, and they are generally referred to in the Books of the Prophets as בני הנביאים, disciples of the prophets. Moses apparently held that when a Rabbi or prophet does not stand on ceremony and does not feel insulted when someone junior to him makes such pronouncements, then his personal attitude governs the matter and the disciple is not held culpable although other Rabbis or prophets would have taken exception to what they considered a lack of respect towards people known as more learned or endowed with greater prophetic spirit. 
   In the Jerusalem Targum the words כלאם are translated as “deny them holy spirit,” based on Psalms 40,12 לא תכלא רחמיך ממני, “do not withhold Your Mercy from me.”
   The deeper significance of the incident is that Joshua thought that seeing that both Eldod and Meydod were amongst the people whose names had been submitted as candidates for membership in the council of the 70 elders that their ability to prophesy was of the same category as that of the other 70 elders who had received their “holy spirit” via Moses and not directly from <i>Hashem.</i> Seeing that only 70 people were meant to form this illustrious council, Joshua thought that these men had to be stopped from walking around the camp prophesying, as the other elders could do so only while next to Moses and the Tabernacle. Moses responded that it was wrong to assume that it was in Moses’ interest that the seventy men should be able to prophesy only while next to him and next to the Tabernacle; on the contrary, if he had his way the entire people would be endowed with a far more comprehensive layer of Holy Spirit, and there was no need to assume that Moses was interested in keeping the monopoly of Holy Spirit for himself. He was most certainly not jealous of anyone so endowed by G’d.
   
   11,31. ויגז שלוים מן הים, “it blew the quail from the sea.” The quail had not now been created for the benefit of the Jewish people, in fact nothing new had been created. The only extraordinary aspect of the whole phenomenon was the unusually large number of quail.
   
   12,1. ותדבר מרים ואהרן....האשה הכושית, “Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses….on account of the Cushite woman (whom he had married).” 
   Ibn Ezra writes that some people claim that Moses had been king in the land of Cush for many years and had married a Cushite woman in that country. Onkelos, on the other hand, translates the word כושית as describing Tzipporah’s physical beauty. Although generally speaking, the term is derogatory, Miriam is described as referring to Tzipporah as we refer to a blind man by calling him סגי נהור, “endowed with exceptionally good eyesight.” [This makes Miriam’s comment a sarcastic one. Ed.] I consider it most unlikely that Miriam used a term that is used as a complimentary one and turned it into an insulting one. Tzipporah, apparently was dark-skinned, similarly to the Negroes of the land of Cush. Tzipporah’s being a Midianite, people who live like Bedouins in a hot climate, with constant exposure to the sun, was therefore not unlike the Negroes in her skin colour.
   Miriam and Aaron suspected that Moses had separated from Tzipporah due to the colour of her skin. They could not imagine that Moses’ separation from Tzipporah was connected to his status as a prophet, and that is why they asked the rhetorical question: “does G’d only speak to him, did He not also speak to us?” They implied that the status of being a prophet does not require for the prophet to abandon normal family life, as they had not abandoned it either.
   Other commentators believe that Miriam and Aaron criticized Moses for not having married a woman of better lineage, of more aristocratic background. They considered themselves as superior to Moses because of their wives or husbands being of superior background. In other words, they used the word Cushite as a derogatory term. Miriam contrasted Aaron’s wife the sister of Nachshon, who was of impeccable heritage with that of Moses, who in her opinion, had married “beneath” him, socially and culturally. She added, if one were to say that nonetheless Moses himself remained of superior statute on account of his prophetic abilities, they themselves had also been found worthy of having communications from <i>Hashem.</i>
   
   12,3. והאיש משה עניו מאד, “and Moses was an exceedingly humble person.” According to Nachmanides this line has been inserted here to explain why G’d Himself had to defend Moses’ virtue. Moses, was unable, by definition, to defend his conduct without in the process losing his reputation as a truly humble and modest, unassuming person. [Imagine how he would have appeared in the eyes of both Miriam and Aaron if he had used the very arguments on his own behalf that G’d used on his behalf! Ed.]
   
   12,4. פתאום אל משה ואהרן ואל מרים, “suddenly, to both Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.” Nachmanides writes that Moses was not present when G’d spoke to Aaron and Miriam. Nonetheless, the prophetic vision came to all three of them simultaneously. The significance of the word פתאום lies in the fact that at that time neither of them had prepared themselves for receiving a prophetic vision. In fact, Aaron and Miriam were only granted their prophetic vision in honour of Moses, as otherwise they had never received such communications without having first prepared themselves for this in some manner. All the commentators agree that the word פתאום indicates that the recipient of such perceptions had been totally unprepared for them. The word applies only to Aaron and Miriam, since Moses never needed to prepare himself in order to be on G’d’s “wavelength,” in order to be able to immediately assimilate anything that G’d wished to tell him. 
   Onkelos translates the word פתאום as meaning בתכף, as meaning “immediately, without delay.” G’d intervened while Miriam and Aaron were still speaking to one another about this subject.
   
   צאו שלשתכם, “go out all three of you, to the Tabernacle.” G’d wanted that Moses should be there and should become aware that G’d Himself defended Moses’ virtue and his reputation. They would also become aware that G’d did not pardon Miriam and Aaron their slander unless Moses himself did so by pleading on their behalf.
   
   12,5. ויקרא אהרן ומרים, “He summoned Aaron and Miriam.” He called them aside so that He would not have to dwell on Moses’ virtues in his presence, [something that would make him feel most uncomfortable. Ed.]
   
   12,6. אם יהיה נביאכם, “if there will be a prophet amongst you, etc.” According to Nachmanides these words mean: ‘if you will have a prophet amongst you.” (Just as Onkelos translates the words)
   Ibn Ezra reads the words אם יהיה נביאכם ה' as a single sequence, i.e. “if among you there is a prophet of <i>Hashem,</i> etc<i>.”</i>
   
   במראה אליו אתודע, “even though he may be endowed by My attribute <i>Hashem,</i> he will not be able to reveal matters pertaining to this attribute of Mine, but will refer to emanations of Mine of a lower order.” This will become clear, as I will not speak to him when he is awake but I will communicate with him as a dream, in a manner that is indirect. The Torah was careful not to write במראה אליו אראה, “I will become visible to him in a vision,” but במראה אליו אתודע, “I will make Myself known to Him as some sort of vision.” This relegates any audible revelation to one that occurs in a dream. [Whatever the prophet thinks he hears, he only hears in his dream. Ed]
   12,7. לא כן עבדי משה בכל ביתי נאמן הוא , “not so is My servant Moses who is trusted in My entire house.” <i>Hashem</i> describes Moses as a father would describe his own son, or anyone whom he had adopted as part of his family. Just as such children have unrestricted access to any part of their father’s house at any time, so Moses does not need to make appointments if he wants to discuss something with <i>Hashem</i>. You, however, G’d says to Aaron and Miriam, not only do you not always have access to My house, but even when you do enjoy communications from Me, it is on a different level from the way I communicate with Moses.
   
   12,12. אל נא תהי כמת, “please let her not be like a corpse;” Moses drew a comparison with a prematurely aborted fetus, which due to its inadequately developed body is similar in appearance to someone suffering from <i>tzoraat. Rashi</i> offers an alternate interpretation in which he quotes Moses as saying: “if You do not heal her as a result of my prayer, who will be able to declare her as definitely stricken with this disease so that she requires to be isolated; and who would be able to declare her as cured when the time came and the symptoms had disappeared?” The latter words of <i>Rashi “</i>who could declare her as ritually pure,” i.e. as cured, are very difficult! Instead of this being a problem it should be part of the solution seeing that no priest had declared her as ritually impure, for no one had examined her! [The assumption underlying <i>Rashi’s</i> question is that a priest who is related to the person suspected of having been stricken with <i>tzoraat</i> is unable to conduct the examination and to testify as to the result. Seeing that the three priests that were alive at that time were all related to Miriam, either as brother or as nephews, how could she have undergone the procedures necessary? Ed.] If you were to answer that she could have become ritually unclean without the testimony of the priest and that nonetheless her purification would require the services of a priest, why would she not also be able to become purified without the services of a priest? What did <i>Rashi</i> have in mind when he quoted Moses as saying to G’d that He must heal her by means of his prayer? If we were to apply the more stringent <i>halachic</i> yardstick, even if G’d were to heal her (the symptoms) she would still not become ritually pure again so that she could resume living within the camp! Who had had the authority to declare her as purified?
   I have seen a version of this commentary in the <i>Sifrey</i> according to which Aaron asked Moses: “what did you find wrong with my sister that you neither permitted me to declare her ritually impure for temporary or absolute isolation, nor to declare her as ritually pure?” According to this version the second problem we raised is not a problem, and it is even possible to argue that the first problem we raised with <i>Rashi’s</i> alternate explanation is not problematic either<i>,</i> for granted that she could have been declared ritually unclean only by a priest as far as the <i>tzoraat</i> is concerned, this would not however prevent people from keeping a physical distance from her due to her appearance! As a result she would remain condemned to be visibly afflicted for the rest of her life, all because there was no priest at hand to declare her cured. Moses’ prayer for G’d to heal her so that she had never become definitely impure was justified therefore.
   
   12,13. קל, נא, רפא נא לה, “please, o Lord, heal her” In addressing the unspoken question why Moses added the name of the Lord, קל, Ibn Ezra understands Moses as pointing out that G’d, being G’d had the power to heal Miriam immediately, and that Moses was so emotionally upset about the suffering his sister was undergoing that he phrased his appeal so urgently. This is why G’d was obliged to explain to him the nature of Miriam’s sin as deserving at least a minimum period of her being ostracized.
   
   12,16. ואחר נסעו העם מחצרות ויחנו במדבר פארן, “and after (the conclusion of that wait) the people journeyed fro <i>Chatzerot</i> and camped in the desert of <i>Paran</i>.” Nachmanides writes that the people’s journey from <i>Chatzerot</i> does not describe the journey from one desert to yet another desert, but that they journeyed from one point in the desert of <i>Paran</i> to another location in that same desert The precise location where they encamped now was known as <i>Kadesh Barnea,</i> the place from which the spies would be dispatched, as described in the following chapter. (13,26) The reason the Torah did not mention that location by name at this stage may have been that the journey from <i>Chatzerot</i> entailed several brief stops before they encamped around <i>Kadesh Barnea.</i> There was another location called Kadesh, and this is the reason why the Torah in 13,26 is precise so that we should not confuse that <i>Kadesh</i> with the <i>Kadesh</i> in the desert of <i>Tzin.</i>
   
   Parshat  Sh’lach l’cha
   
   13,2. שלח לך אנשים, “Send forth men, on your behalf.” <i>Rashi’s</i> comment on the wording is that G’d did not command Moses to do this, but He did not oppose it if Moses wanted to do it on his own account.
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary by saying that if so Moses would have had a part in the sin of the spies seeing that he is on record in Deut. 1,23 as having specifically approved the people’s request to dispatch these spies. Nachmanides therefore resolves this problem by stating that the people like any people who are about to engage in an aggressive war, wanted to prepare themselves and to know what they would be up against, and how they could most easily conquer their objectives. In fact that is precisely what the people represented as their motives as we know from Deut. 1,22 when they are quoted as saying: “we want to know on which road to ascend and the cities to which we will come.” In other words, the request was of a tactical nature. This sounded like a perfectly reasonable request to Moses, and did not indicate that the people did not believe him when he had told them that the land was a good land.
   
   13,3. כולם אנשים, “all of them distinguished people.” They were well known for their prowess. The word איש appears in that context in Kings I 2,2 וחזקת והיית לאיש.
   
   13,4. למטה ראובן, “for the tribe of Reuven, etc.” Nachmanides points out that the order in which these men are mentioned here does not follow the order in which their tribes’ respective banners are enumerated, neither does the order correspond to the biological seniority of the original founders of their respective tribes. It appears therefore that the Torah lists these men in the order of their relative merits at the time they had been appointed. We find this pattern repeated when the tribal heads are mentioned at the time when the ancestral lands were apportioned.
   
   13,16. אלה שמות האנשים, “These are the names of the men, etc. ”Ibn Ezra writes that the reason the Torah repeated the line after having already named all these men individually, by introducing the paragraph with the words: “these are their names,” is to inform us that none of the names mentioned were changed except the name of Joshua.
   
   ויקרא משה להושע בן נון יהושע, “Moses named Hoseah son of Nun Joshua.” According to the plain meaning of the text his name was changed, as he had been the commander of the army in the battle against Amalek. He had acquired an international reputation as a result of that encounter. Moses changed his name so that he would not be singled out as a target for the Canaanites. After all, they had never seen him, had only heard about him.
   
   13,19. הטובה היא אם רעה, “if it is good or bad, etc.” Nachmanides quotes Ibn Ezra as interpreting the word טובה as referring to the climate in the land of Canaan, and as describing the country’s water supply as offering clear and unpolluted water for its inhabitants. When asking the spies to determine if the land was שמנה, fat, Moses referred to the quality of its produce, in particular the quality of its wheat. Nachmanides holds that the word טובה is an all encompassing word describing the sum total of what the land had to offer, whereas the word רעה refers to any negative aspects that this land presented to potential conquerors.
   It is possible that the expression ארץ טובה referred to the land and its produce being שמנה, good, yielding especially rich flour and its figs and dates being especially rich in flavour. Another possible meaning of the words טובה and רעה may refer to the rainfall, i.e. if the land enjoyed adequate natural rains or if the soil needed to be supplemented with water from rivers of cisterns. It is also possible that both the word טובה and רזה referred to “lean” fruit such as walnuts, carobs, etc, as opposed to the seven types of fruit for which the land was famous, including grapes, olives, pomegranates dates, etc.
   However, Onkelos translates the words as עתירא and מסכנא respectively, which would mean “wealthy” and “poor,” respectively. Onkelos understands Moses as referring to the inhabitants of the land rather than to the land itself. These countries are self sufficient, their soil supplying all their needs so that they do not need to import any necessities, whereas their neighbours may be relatively poor because they have to import necessities, which is far more costly.
   
   13,20. והתחזקתם ולקחתם מפרי הארץ, “strengthen yourselves, and take from the fruit of the land.” Moses encourages the spies not to be afraid of “stealing” from the produce and thereby drawing attention to themselves as spies.
   
   13,22. וחברון שבע שנים נבנתה לפני צוען מצרים, “and Chevron had been founded seven years earlier that Tzoan in Egypt.” Nachmanides writes that following the plain meaning of the text Chevron is identical with the town קרית ארבע that is familiar to us from the time of Avraham. That town had been named after the tallest of a race of giants whose name had been ארבע, and he had built that town. This is why it was named after him. Not only that, but the giants were also named after him. When we are told that in Chevron there used to live Achiman, Sheyshay and Talmay descendents of Anak, the Torah means that Arba had built that town already seven years earlier than Tzoan, a famous ancient town in Egypt had been founded. The point of all this is to inform us of the extraordinary long lifespan of this race of giants. They were not only of extraordinary physical proportions, but they also lived extraordinarily long lives. Their life spans made them parts of a number of generations, all of whom were born and buried while these people continued alive.
   It is possible that the word השמנה היא used by Moses as something worth investigating, was intended to show that Chevron, in spite of its being ancient, still produced such outstandingly good grapes. How much better must be the fruit in the parts of the country that had been under cultivation for far less time so that its soil had not yet become weakened.
   
   13,27. וגם זבת חלב ודבש, “and it does flow with milk and honey.” Nachmaides writes that the word וגם “and also,” is in response to Moses having instructed the spies to find out if the land was “fat” or “lean” as well as to the question “does the country have trees or not?” The answer to the latter question was: “and this is its fruit.” Up until this point the spies reported the truth, replying to the questions that they had been asked to find out about. They should have continued to report that the people dwelling on the land were indeed stout hearted, and that they lived in fortified towns as Moses had also wanted to find out if the people were stout -hearted or weak willed. Their wickedness was displayed when they added the gratuitous word אפס, which is a term that introduces a contrary diminutive element, nullifying something that had been said before. It is a word that describes man’s impotence to carry out his plans; we find this word in Psalms 77,9 האפס לנצח חסדו, גמר אומר לדור ודור, “Has His faithfulness disappeared forever?” Will His promise be unfulfilled for all times?” By the use of this word they negated their previous statements about the excellence of the land into the reverse by proclaiming that their chances to conquer that land were nil,אפס . 
   
   13,28. אפס כי עז העם...והערים וגו', “But…the people are powerful,… and the cities greatly fortified.” Even though by saying this they contradicted what they had said previously, as <i>Rashi</i> had pointed out, by reporting that the people lived in fortified cities they had indicated that they were afraid of invaders, only if they lived in open, unwalled cities, did this signify their confidence in their ability to repel attackers. Perhaps the spies did not even realize that their factual report contradicted the conclusions they had drawn.
   
   והערים בצורות גדולות מאד וגם בני ענקים ראינו שם, “and the cities are greatly fortified, and we even saw descendants of the dreaded giants there.” They added further:
   
   עמלק יושב בארץ הנגב, “Amalek lives in the southern part of the land.” Although this nation was not at risk from invasion by the Israelites, the spies added this comment to illustrate that invading the land from any direction would pose insurmountable obstacles. They began to indirectly shake the confidence of the people, as at this moment they still were afraid to confront Moses directly. They answered on all the points Moses had asked them to report except if the population was large or small. They also did not give a direct answer to Moses’ question if the land was טובה, “good,” as they intended to mention later that the land consumed its inhabitants, planning to frighten the people who even if they were to conquer the land, would not survive in it for long. Their approach to the subject was: there are not too many people there, but the ones that are there are overpoweringly strong. The people understood what the spies were hinting at, and began to complain about the whole prospect they were facing. This is why Calev intervened with his attempt to silence the majority as we read in verse 30:
   
   ויהס כלב את העם, “Calev silenced the people.” He did so by proclaiming loudly:
   
   עלה נעלה וירשנו אותה כי יכול נוכל בה, “We shall surely ascend and conquer it, for we can surely do it.” Calev did not contradict the facts his colleagues had cited, but he contradicted the conclusions they had drawn from these facts. This is why he used the pronoun לה, which referred to the cities of these people. When his colleagues heard this they became more outspoken, contradicting Calev outright by stating:
   
   13,31. לא נוכל לעלות אל העם כי חזק הוא ממנו, “we cannot ascend to that people for they are stronger than we.” The meaning of the expression is not limited to a war of aggression. The majority of the spies meant that even if the Canaanites would leave their fortified towns and wage war against the Israelites in open territory the Israelites would not be a match for them. The wording is parallel to that used by Goliath when he challenged the Israelites to a duel. (Samuel I 17,8)
   
   13,32. ויוציאו דבת הארץ....אל בני ישראל, “They slandered the land of Israel ..in their report to the Jewish people.” The principal effrontery of the spies was the fact that they reported to and appealed to the people directly, instead of making their report to the commander-in-chief, Moses, who was the one who had selected them for their mission by going around to the tents of the people and telling them that the land of Canaan was devouring its inhabitants, whereas originally in the presence of Moses and Aaron they had praised the land, describing how it was flowing with milk and honey. This was a treacherous and underhanded manner of discharging their task. Originally, they had only described the people in that land as strong, which by itself was not too serious a departure from what they had been asked to report about. When Calev had assured the people of his conviction that they would be able to successfully conquer that land the people had still tended to believe him. There were at that time, still quite a number of the people who possessed either self confidence or trust in G’d’s ability and willingness to help them conquer that land. When the spies had become aware of this, they embarked on an intensive campaign to undermine the confidence of those people by spreading the stories of the many people they had observed dropping dead. This was another example of misinterpretation. G’d had allowed even giants to collapse, in order to demonstrate how tenuous was even those supermen’s hold on life, whereas the spies, bent of interpreting everything in the most negative manner, concluded that the climate of the land causes the collapse of its inhabitants. In order to counter the impression Joshua and Calev had made on the people, the spies now resorted to fabrications, deliberate exaggerations, etc. The expression להוציא דבה means more than to highlight the negative aspects of something, it means to spread tales of a negative character that are entirely fictitious, represent as facts figments of the imagination of the tale-bearer. The party spreading such untruths hopes to make them believable because he had initially told his listeners a considerable number of true facts. This is also why the Torah reports Joseph as bringing דבתם רעה, “evil reports,” about his brothers to his father. He had reported a number of facts faithfully, so that his fabrications would also be believed by his father, Genesis 37,2, It was this latter aspect of the spies’ activities that caused G’d to punish them by making these ten men die on the spot through the plague. (14,37)
   
   ארץ אוכלת יושביה היא וכל העם אשר ראינו בתוכה אנשי מדות, “it is a land which consumes its inhabitants, and all the people we saw therein were of enormous proportions.” Nachmanides writes that the spies described the land and its water as health hazards, causing premature births of fetuses and instead of the people who were of outsize dimensions having outsize children, their children were obviously poorly, undersized and below average stature. They tried to convince their peers that the land of Canaan, by reason of its climate, can support only giants, not average sized human beings such as the Israelites. It was not surprising therefore that that land produced giants, as its fruit, its produce, was such that only giants and supermen could assimilate its waters and its produce in their bodies successfully. When previously they had described the presence of giants in that land as limited to singular sightings, now they described the inhabitants as all being giants, אנשי מדות. They took pains to trace the origins of these giants to prehistoric (pre-deluge) eras, implying that they had already then been so powerful that they had survived the deluge without being in Noach’s Ark. (verse 33)
   
   14,2. ויבכו העם בלילה ההוא, “The people spent that night weeping.” The spies had returned to their respective tents in the evening after having made their report to Moses, and on the following morning the people voiced their complaints against Moses and Aaron <i>en masse</i>. Moses referred to that fateful night in Deuteronomy 1,27 when he reminded the people with the words ותרגנו באהליכם, “you slandered in your tents.” Compare Proverbs 18,8 where דברי נרגן, are mentioned by Solomon in that context. [See Alshich’s commentary on that verse. Ed.]
   
   14,3. ולמה ה' מביא אותנו אל הארץ הזאת לנפול בחרב, “and why does <i>Hashem</i> bring us to this land to fall victim to the sword?” The people did not describe the land negatively, as had the spies to them, as they did not want to reveal to Moses that the spies had described the land as consuming its inhabitants. They did not do so, as the spies themselves had not voiced that sentiment in the presence of Moses and the whole community. They were well aware that Moses had first hand knowledge of the land of Canaan from the time he had been raised in Pharaoh’s palace, and the years he had spent in Midian, a land bordering on the land of Canaan. Had they stated as fact the accusation of the spies that the land consumed its inhabitants, Moses himself would have called them liars, testifying that he knew different. This is also why the spies had not dared to voice such an accusation in Moses’ presence. In fact, when Moses recalls the events which happened here almost 40 years later in Deuteronomy, he phrased it as follows: “וישיבו אותנו דבר ויאמרו 'טובה הארץ מאד אשר ה' אלוקינו נותן לנו', “they brought back word to us and they said “the land <i>Hashem</i> is giving us is very good.” Moses continues there saying that in spite of this “לא אביתם לעלות ותמרו את פי ה', “you did not want to ascend and you rebelled against G’d’s command.” (Compare Deut. 1,25-26) According to what had transpired in public the only reason that the people did not want to ascend was that the people in that land had been described as עז, powerful. Seeing that the only reason the people refused to ascend was that they were afraid of the inhabitants of the land of Canaan they displayed a lack of trust in <i>Hashem</i> who had up unto that moment overcome every obstacle that had lain in their path. There is no need to understand the people’s refusal as a lack of confidence in Joshua’s and Calev dissenting report, as if that were the issue, why should the people accept 2 men’s views over that of a clear majority of 10? The Torah had written that Moses had dispatched 12 men, so that when he referred to their report in Deut. 1,25 he clearly referred to the majority report.
   
   14,5. ויפול משה ואהרן על פניהם לפני כל קהל עדת ישראל, “Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before the entire congregation of the community of Israel.” They bowed their faces to the ground in full view of the whole community. The matter is comparable to Samuel I 20,41 ויפול לאפיו ארצה וישתחו שלש פעמים, David bowed with his face to the ground three times, (in taking his leave from Yonathan) [according to our author the expression in our verse above is also one describing deference. Ed.] When Moses and Aaron saw that the people had made up their minds to select a new leader and to head back toward Egypt, they bowed down imploring them not to commit such a grave wrong, one that would become a terrible stumbling block for them. Seeing that all the people were involved, Moses and Aaron made certain that their appeal would be heard by all those assembled.
   
   14,7. טובה הארץ מאד מאד, “the land is very very good!” They repeated the adjective twice in order to counter as much as possible the impression the spies had created that the land was devouring its inhabitants. Not only was the fruit very good, but also the climate is very good and that it why it was flowing with milk and honey.
   
   14,9. אך בה' אל תמרודו!, “Only do not become guilty of rebelling against <i>Hashem</i>!” By being afraid of the strength of the inhabitants of that land you have rebelled against G’d, for you know very well that you did not leave Egypt by having defeated the Egyptians. It had all been <i>Hashem’s</i> doing. He has promised you that you will conquer the land of Canaan, and you have no reason to doubt that.
   
   ואתם אל תיראו את עם הארץ כי לחמנו הם, “and you must not be afraid of the people of the land for they are our bread!” Even if we were to confront them without miraculous help from <i>Hashem,</i> they will fall victim to us as they are already scared of us and have lost their former courage, making them as easy to devour as bread.
   
   סר צלם מעליהם, “their protection has already departed from them.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the word צלם, their shade, as a simile for their celestial, horoscope, i.e. the angel provided for them in the heavens. The most able warriors that these people possessed have already died. Another explanation would understand the word צלם as a reference to the time when these people basked in G’d’s shade, i.e. G’d’s protection.
   Nachmanides, in referring to Ibn Ezra’s commentary that the word צלם is an alternative for מגנם, “their shield,” understands the absence of such a shield now as the absence of fear. The Canaanites had become infected with a fear of the Israelites who had for the last two years defeated every attempt to harm them. As of now the people are not even prepared to battle us with their protective shields held in their hands.
   It is possible that Moses’ words hinted at a tradition we have that on the night of <i>Hoshanah Rabbah</i> people who are slated to die during that year cannot find a shadow of their heads when they go out looking for it in the moonlight. Moses paraphrased this by saying publicly that these people if they looked for such a shadow of their heads would not find it, and that this would make them even more afraid of their fate.
   Yet another possible meaning of Moses’ choice of simile, is an allusion to the protective angel that G’d has assigned to each nation, an angel that is always withdrawn prior to the demise of that particular nation. G’d had withdrawn that angel from the Egyptians prior to their drowning in the sea.
   
   14,11. אשר עשיתי בקרבו, “which I have performed in its midst.” Moses employed the singular mode when speaking of the Jewish people, as at one time they had been a united people. At that time that had been a sign that they were a people loyal to their G’d and His Torah.
   
   14,13. ושמעו מצרים, “when the Egyptians will hear (about this).” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Moses was referring to the Egyptians hearing abut G’d having killed the Jewish people. 
   
   כי העלית, “whom You have brought up, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word כי in this instance means the same as אשר, which, whom.
   Nachmanides adds that if so, the word אל יושב in verse 14, normally understood as “to the inhabitants, etc.”’ must be understood as על יושב, “concerning the inhabitants.” He therefore prefers to interpret that Moses’ intention when giving this answer, was not that the Canaanites would conclude that they had been perceived as brave and powerful and could not be compared to the Egyptians who did not have 31 kings to lead them, and who on account of their having only one king could be defeated by the G’d of the Israelites. The Egyptians, according to Nachmanides’ interpretation of Moses’ argument, would assume that the demise of the Jewish people would prove that the deities of the Canaanites were more powerful than those of the Israelites. The Jewish G’d, they would reason, had prevailed only over relatively weak nations, nations whose deities had proved inferior. This would constitute a major desecration of G’d’s great name, and would strengthen all the pagan nations in their mistaken beliefs. When we consider matters in this light, the words אל יושב may be understood at face value, i.e. that the inhabitants of Egypt would say to the inhabitants of Canaan that what happened had revealed the weakness and inadequacy of the G’d of the Jews who had mistakenly been perceived as invincible.
   
   14,14. אשר עין בעין, “who appeared eye to eye.” Nachmanides refers to the commentators who understand this phrase as describing that G’d, when performing the miracles for His people, appeared to them as visible as when one human being sees another human being performing acts which used to be considered as beyond human capacity. The expression would be parallel to the expression פנים בפנים דבר ה' עמכם, “face to face did <i>Hashem</i> speak to you.”
   He suggests as a possible alternative interpretation of this expression that it describes a great vision, great spectacle, the word being used in a manner similar to when the Torah described the appearance of the manna as being ועינו כעין הבדולח, in Number 11,7, where it meant “its appearance was like the gemstone known as <i>bedolach.”</i>
   
   14,18. ה', the attribute of G’d as the Eternal; The Holy name is not repeated here as it had been when <i>Hashem</i> revealed 13 of His attributes to Moses in Exodus 34,6-7. The reason is that in that context it meant that <i>Hashem</i> is and remains <i>Hashem</i> before man sins as well as after he has sinned and before he has repented. G’d is ready to forgive man’s error, as long as man displays remorse. This was an attribute that it was appropriate to stress in context of the sin of the golden calf as in Exodus 34 the people had already repented and done what they could to cleanse themselves of their sin. In our context, at the time when G’d responds to Moses, the people had not yet become penitents, hence the attribute Is mentioned only once.
   
   ארך אפים ורב חסד, “slow to anger and abundant in kindness.” Nachmanides draws attention to Moses not referring to the attribute אמת which G’d had also revealed to him in Exodus 34. He could not do so now, as seeing that the people had not yet repented, Moses could not invoke an attribute of G’d which comes into play only after the people had owned up their own version of אמת, truth, by having sincerely repented. Moses did not mention such attributes as נוצר חסד לאלפים, “Preserver of kindness for thousands of generations” (Exodus 34,7) either, as he did not invoke the merit of the forefathers in his present prayer. Moses had not referred to Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yaakov in his prayer on this occasion at all, seeing that the land had been deeded to these patriarchs and the people’s sin here consisted of their rejecting this very inheritance.
   Moses did not mention the attribute known as חטאה at this juncture either, as that attribute could be invoked only if the sins committed had been committed inadvertently. When sins were committed knowingly, or even in a spirit of rebellion against G’d, it would have seemed frivolous to mention that attribute. I am not sure why Moses did not invoke the attributes of רחום וחנון on this occasion. Perhaps it is because he was aware that the entire scenario was one in which dominance had been given by G’d already to the attribute of Justice. There could no longer be any point in appealing to G’d’s attributes of pity, etc, as those attributes presuppose at least some redeeming aspect in what the sinner had done. He did mention G’d’s attribute of ארך אפים, inordinate amount of patience when dealing with sinners, which manifested itself here by the people not dying all at once, but their punishment being spread over a period of 38 years. In deference to Moses’ invoking only the attribute of G’d’s patience, G’d responded by saying: “I have forgiven, in accordance with your words,” i.e. by spreading the decree of death in the desert over a whole generation. (Verse 20) Moses also did invoke the attribute known as פוקד עון אבות על בנים, that G’d remembers the sins of the fathers to their children, [another kind of deferment of punishment, i.e. if the fathers had been punished in full, the children would never have been born to them before they died. Ed.] when He decreed that for having wept when they had no reason to weep, they would have to weep for many hundreds of years on the anniversary of the destruction of the Temple, something they would have reason to weep about if they reflected on their history. At any rate, as mentioned, G’d’s response to Moses’ prayer was:
   
   14,20. סלחתי כדבריך, “I have forgiven in accordance with your own terms.” The “forgiveness” referred to the people as a whole, meaning that He would not smite the people with pestilence immediately, and His forgiving the people would result in their children, at least, inheriting the land that had been promised to their fathers. However, He decreed that their carcasses would all be buried in the desert, each one of them dying at a predetermined date already set by G’d at this time.
   In the Book of Deuteronomy Moses makes mention of the prayer he had prayed on behalf of the errant people at the time of the golden calf, and he also mentioned his prayer on behalf of Aaron at that time. He did not, however, refer to the prayer he had offered on behalf of the people on this occasion. The reason is that Moses had not prayed to G’d to forgive the sin of the people, but that he had only tried to get G’d to temper the punishment. He had tried to invoke the attribute of ארך אפים so that He would defer the impact of His decree over a longer period of time. Had he mentioned his prayer to the generation of the children in Deuteronomy, these children most likely would have criticized him for not having appealed on behalf of their parents in stronger language.
   
   14,21. ואולם חי אני, “But, as I am alive, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this phrase as an oath, claiming that it is an incomplete, truncated phrase and actually continues to the end of verse 23
   Nachmanides writes concerning <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation that it is not an oath, and that the Torah deliberately refrained from quoting G’d as having said anything that could be interpreted as an oath, as it would be unseemly to quote G’d as having sworn an oath unless He himself said so specifically. [Remember that the words quoted here, were spoken by Moses. When G’d utters an oath, He is quoted directly, as in Genesis 22,16 בי נשבעתי נאום ה', “I have sworn by My own self, etc. Ed.] According to Rabbi Chavell, Nachmanides means that if the words וימלא כבוד ה' את כל הארץ would not be part of an oath they should have appeared only at the conclusion of verse 23. Appearing as they do where they do, means that they are the rationale why G’d does not kill all the people now, as if He were to do so, the argument which Moses had portrayed the Egyptians as using to demonstrate G’d’s impotence to defeat the Canaanites would gain public support world-wide. When an ordinary person commences a sentence in a manner similar to the above, i.e. כה יעשה לי אלוקים, “may G’d do such and such to me,” and he leaves the other half of the sentence unspoken, this is also to be interpreted as a לשון שבועה, a formula of an oath, according to Nachmanides. (Compare Samuel II 3,35, 19,14. Kings I 2,23)
   
   14,23.וכל מנאצי לא יראוה , “all those who anger Me shall not see it.” Seeing that G’d had already said that the present generation would not be able to set eyes on the Holy Land, Ibn Ezra understands the words here as applying to their children, in the event that these or some of them would anger G’d. Perhaps these words contain a hint applicable throughout the generations that would also apply to all the Jews who would experience exile in the future. Unless they did not anger G’d, they could not hope to be redeemed and would have to spend the 9th of Av each year weeping for the fate that they still endured and which had its roots in the events in our portion. In other words, this “weeping for generations,” was potentially imposed at this point.
   
   14,24. ועבדי כלב, “but My servant Calev, etc.” The Torah, at this point, does not mention Joshua, as it concentrates on promising Calev his share in the Promised Land, whereas seeing that Joshua would in due course become Moses’ successor, mentioning his share in the Promised Land at this stage would have been inappropriate. The reason why Calev is mentioned here ahead of Joshua is that he spoke up against the other spies first. When Moses refers to what had occurred here in verse 38, he mentions Joshua first, saying: “but Joshua son of Nun and Calev son of Yefuneh survived of all these men, etc.” He accorded Joshua precedence as he was endowed with greater wisdom than Calev.
   
   14, 25. והעמלקי והכנעני יושב בעמק, “The Amalekite and the Canaanite dwelled in the valley. This sounds somewhat strange seeing that a few verses later (14,45) we are told that the Amalekite and the Canaanite who dwelled in the mountain descended.” This teaches that the Amalekite and Canaanite joined forces and descended to the valley in order to mount an attack on the Israelites from a position of ambush.
   
   14,26. וידבר ה' אל משה ואל אהרן, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses and Aaron.” Seeing that both Moses and Aaron had fallen on their faces, in this instance <i>Hashem</i> also addressed Aaron directly, in order to give him the strength to get up from the ground on which both had fallen. The command <i>Hashem</i> issued in verse 2 was addressed only to Moses, seeing he was the major prophet of the two.
   
   14,28. אם לא כאשר דברתם באזני כן אעשה לכם, “if I shall not do to you as you have spoken in My hearing.” The wording is to be understood as a rhetorical question. “You will see if what you have accused Me of will not turn into a self-fulfilling prophecy?”
   
   14,31. והבאתי אותם וידעו את הארץ, “I shall bring them and they shall get to know the land.” It is noteworthy that G’d did not say that these children will inherit the land. The word וירשו, “they will inherit,” would imply many generations of tenure of the land. The choice of the word וידעו by the Torah is a veiled hint that even later generations may face exile from the Holy Land.
   
   14,32. פגריכם אתם, “your carcasses;” the meaning is that you are already like carcasses although you may feel perfectly healthy at this time. You will lie down some night and never wake up in the morning.
   
   14,33. יהיו רועים במדבר, “will roam in the wilderness, etc.” Just as a shepherd does not remain stationary in the same location but guides his flock to different pastures, you will be searching out places to make camp.
   
   14,37.רעה מוציאי דבת-הארץ, “spreading slanderous report about the land,” Nachmanides says that the “slander” mentioned here was their claim that the land consumes its inhabitants. This was an outright lie, as not only was the land full of people, but the spies themselves during the forty days they had spent in the land had not experienced any problems with their health. We have a record of Joshua describing the Land of Canaan as densely populated in Joshua 11,4. The precise wording is עם רב כחול הים אשר על שפת הים לרוב, “a people as numerous as the sand on the beaches of the sea.”
   <i>Rashi</i> explains the words מוציאי דבת הארץ as causing people to speak fluently, i.e. in this case as harping on the negative aspects. On occasions, the same expression is used to describe someone constantly underlining the positive aspects of something. This is why the Torah had to add the word רעה when referring to דבת הארץ.
   Nachmanides counters that we have a statement in <i>Pessachim</i> 3 containing the word דבה, where it is clearly referring to negative comments without the word רעה being added.  According to Nachmanides the reason the Torah did add the word רעה here although it had already been implied by the use of the word דבה, is to tell us of how much the spies overemphasized the negative aspects of what they claimed to have seen.
   
   14,40. וישכימו בבקר ויעלו אל ראש ההר לאמור הננו, ועלינו אל המקום, וגו', “they arose early in the morning and ascended toward the top of the mountain, and they said: ‘here we are ready to ascend to the place, etc.” My sainted father the <i>Ro’sh</i> of blessed memory, could not come to terms with people who had said already that they wanted to appoint a new leader to take them back to Egypt having suddenly decided to make a 180 degree turn about, after it had already been decreed that they would die in the desert. Surely, in view of that decree, logic would have dictated that they make every effort to avoid doing something which is the opposite of their expressed wish, namely to return to Egypt. They seemed intent on embarking on a course of action that would hasten their death even more by confronting the Canaanites whom they had considered unbeatable. He explained that we must understand that ever since the Israelites had seen the Egyptian soldiers dead on the beaches of the sea, they had intended to return to an Egypt devoid of men, a rich country theirs for the taking, and had seen no point in journeying to the land of Canaan, a land populated by giants, a challenge that they had no stomach for. Every time there had been a problem, their desire to return to a defeated Egypt had come to the fore. Already in Exodus 15,22 we read that Moses had to forcefully compel the Israelites to turn towards the desert instead of returning as victors to a defeated Egypt. Finally, when they had come to the desert of Paran, they had agreed to send spies to Canaan in order to examine the feasibility of conquering that land. They had hoped that by reporting on the nature of the inhabitants in that country G’d might at least consent to their returning to Egypt, instead. When, in response to the majority report of the spies they had decided to appoint a new leader to lead them back to Egypt, this must not be understood as a rebellion, but as a request to G’d to allow them to return to Egypt where they hoped to live in peace without having to face a war of conquest. When they had now found out that this was not a viable option, they decided to accept the unpalatable alternative and with G’d’s help to conquer the Land of Canaan.
   
   14,41. והיא לא תצלח, ”this plan will not succeed.” Moses explained to these people that the fact that they planned to act against the wishes of <i>Hashem</i> doomed their attempt.
   <i></i>
   14,44. וארון ברית ה' ומשה לא משו, “while the Ark of the covenant of <i>Hashem</i> and Moses did not move.” The Torah mentioned the Ark at the beginning of the verse; we find a similar expression in Samuel I 4,11 when the Ark was taken to battle by the two sons of Eli and captured by the Philistines. The basic difference between here and there is that the two sons of Eli were killed, which is the reason that they were mentioned by name only at the end of that verse.
   
   15,2. כי תבואו אל ארץ מושבותיכם, “When you will come to the Land of your dwelling, etc.” Nachmanides writes that after <i>Hashem</i> had reassured the children of the generation who had experienced the Exodus that they, at any rate would inherit the Promised Land, the Torah completes the legislation about both the public and private offerings. The Torah specifically introduces the subject of חלה, the setting aside of a small portion of any dough for the priest, <i>Hashem’s</i> representative on earth<i>,</i> as symbolic recognition that even basic foodstuffs such as bread that man toiled to produce are, in the final analysis, a gift from the Creator. [I elaborated on the theme with my own words. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why these paragraphs were appended at this juncture was to cheer up the younger generation who had to face the premature death of their parents as a result of the debacle with the spies. The Torah reassured them that they, at any rate, would come to the Holy Land, and legislation at this time applicable only in the Holy Land, would lift their spirits.
   I believe (Ibn Ezra continuing) that more is involved here. On the one hand, this sin -as opposed to the golden calf where only a small percentage of Jews actually took active part, -had involved the entire people, and they had been saved from immediate death only by Moses prayer.
    It was appropriate therefore to write legislation dealing with both inadvertent sin, (compare verse 22) and to provide a mechanism for obtaining forgiveness. (Verse 25) At the same time, the Torah added technical details about offering gift-offerings, מנחות which henceforth were to be added to all burnt offerings and meat-offerings. In addition the Torah spelled out what would happen if the sin were to be committed deliberately. Furthermore, the legislation about ציצית, fringes, was introduced as an act of G’d’s mercy, as these fringes were to remind the wearer when he looked at them that he must not commit sins against his Creator. Finally, we have a report about an Israelite who deliberately violated the Sabbath legislation and who was executed as a result after the method of execution had been spelled out by G’d. (Verse 32-36)
   
   15,4. סולת עשרון בלול ברביעית ההין, “a tenth <i>eyfah</i> fine flour mixed with a quarter <i>hin</i> of oil.” It is peculiar that our verse gives us a relationship between the amount of oil needed to mix with the amount of flour that does not correspond to standard relationships we find elsewhere. If the example described here were a standard example, why would we find that in the case of the libations accompanying offerings consisting of varying sizes of four-legged animals the libations brought with an offering consisting of a ram where two tenths of an <i>eyfah</i> of flour are used instead of half a <i>hin</i> of oil only a third of a <i>hin</i> is required; similarly when the libation of an offering consisting of a bull is described the Torah decrees three tenths of an <i>eyfah</i> of flour to be mixed with only half a <i>hin</i> of oil? Perhaps, although in order to mix the flour thoroughly with oil, in the example mentioned in our verse a quarter of a <i>hin</i> of oil is required, when the quantity of flour is greater, the need to increase the proportionate amount of oil decreases gradually.
   
   15,22. וכי תשגו ולא תעשו את כל מצות האלה, “if you err and do not fulfill all of these commandments, etc.” Nachmanides refers to an error by numerous commentators who mistakenly believed that the offerings described here apply to people who failed to perform positive commandments they were bidden to do. The true meaning of the words is that they apply to negative commandments, and disobedience whether deliberate or inadvertent consists in doing the opposite of what one is supposed to do, i.e. ignoring a negative commandment by acting in opposition to it. It is clear beyond doubt from verse 24 that the error consisted of the people doing something that the Torah had forbidden.
   The offering described here is one that must be brought when the entire people acted in error but in good faith. This is not the same offering as has been legislated in Leviticus 4,2. In that instance the offering required was a bull as a sin offering. The bull that is discussed here is one that is offered as a burnt offering, עולה, not as a חטאת, a sin offering. The accompanying sin offering in our instance is a male goat.  The sin the people became inadvertently guilty of is the sin of idolatry, a sin which is equated with violation of all of G’d’s commandments, i.e. את כל המצות האלה.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, (as opposed to the Rabbinic interpretation) the scenario of which the Torah speaks here is, in the case of an individual, someone who was raised amongst gentiles, unaware of the Torah and its laws. When he becomes aware of his error, he is obliged to offer one single such sacrifice in respect of all the previous violations. In the case of the whole people having erred, the scenario would be that they considered that the laws of the Torah are not applicable for all times, and they had believed that the applicability of the law in question had already expired.
   According to our sages, the subject is violation of the laws of idolatry and it is written here as the Torah (the Book of numbers) concludes the legislation of different kinds of offerings for different reasons. The fact that it has been written specifically here is due to the people now having committed acts of rebellion against G’d as described when they wanted to appoint alternate leaders who would lead them back to Egypt.
   
   15,25. והם הביאו את קרבנם אשה לה', “and they have brought their offering, a fire offering for <i>Hashem.”</i> These words refer to the burnt offering.
   וחטאתם לפני ה', “as well as their sin offering for <i>Hashem.”</i> These words refer to the male goat serving as the sin offering. According to Nachmanides the Torah writes both offerings separately so as to stress the enormity of the sin, and to teach that in spite of the sin itself being of a colossal nature, the fact that it was not committed knowingly qualifies it for forgiveness by the Creator. 
   
   15,26. The Torah also mentions the גר, the stranger, (proselyte) separately, as due to their only recently having converted they are more likely to commit sins erroneously.
   
   15,31 עונה בה, “his sin is upon him.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of this expression is similar to such an expression as דמיהם בם. (Leviticus 20,11, at al) their “blood-guilt” will remain upon them (as long as they have not repented). Another similar expression is ערירים ימותו עונם ישאו, “they will die childless while bearing the burden of their guilt.” (Compare Leviticus 20,20)
   
   15,32. ויהיו בני ישראל במדבר, “The Children of Israel were in the wilderness.” This verse that apparently does not tell us anything we did not know, appears here as explaining how what will be described here could have happened. It was all due to the decree that the people had to keep wandering in the desert.
   This is followed by the legislation about <i>Tzitzit,</i> the fringes to be appended to four cornered garments, a device designed to remind the wearer of all of the Torah’s commandments whenever he looks at these fringes.
   Nachmanides comments on the commentary of <i>Rashi</i> in which he refers to the numerical of the word amounting to 600 (ציצית) When we add the 8 strings involved and the 5 knots used in tying them we arrive at 613, i.e. the umber of laws in the Torah. He questions this whole explanation, pointing out that the spelling in the Torah of the word ציצת [without the letter י in front of the letter ת leaves us with only 590.] He adds further, that according to the school of Hillel, the number of strings is three and not eight. The Torah also requires only 2 knots, not 5. 
   [Nachmanides’ query has already been raised by <i>Tossaphot</i> in <i>Menachot</i>, 39 and is not directed at <i>Rashi</i> who did not originate the explanation, but at any rate the answer given there is that the letter ל in the word לציצת in our paragraph makes up (30) for the three letters י missing in the three words spelled ציצת in the text of the Torah in our paragraph. Ed.] At any rate, according to Nachmanides, the “remembering” of the Torah’s commandments mentioned in our paragraph is due to the colour of the thread of תכלת, ocean-blue wool, and not to any numerical values of any of the letters in the paragraph. Ocean-blue reminds us of the blue sky, which in turn makes us think of the Creator presiding over His universe on His throne in heaven.
   Parshat  Korach
   
   16,1. ויקח קרח, “Korach took, etc.” According to Nachmanides the word ויקח, -seeing that the Torah does not spell out what it was that Korach took- refers to Korach “consulting” with his heart to embark on a certain course of action, the details of which the Torah will reveal shortly. The root לקח may be employed when speaking of “taking” advice, etc. It also occurs in Scripture in the context of embarking on a good and wholesome plan, as in Job 15,12 מה יקחך לבך, “How your heart has carried you away!” Another example of the use of that word in such a context is Proverbs 8,10 קחו מוסרי ואל כסף, “accept my discipline instead of silver!”
   Ibn Ezra explains the word ויקח as an abbreviated version of “Korach took for himself a number of men, etc.”
   Some commentators believe that the predicate of the words ויקח קרח is Datan and Aviram and that the letter ו in ודתן , is extraneous. We encounter something analogous in Genesis 36,24 ואיה וענה where there also appears no need for the letter ו in the word ואיה. The meaning of the phrase in our verse then would be ויקח קרח דתן ואבירם, “Korach took Datan and Aviram.”
   Ibn Ezra, in trying to fix the point in time when Korach’s rebellion took place, claims that it occurred in the desert of Sinai [way before the debacle with the spies and the resultant lack of a future for his generation. Ed.] The flashpoint for the rebellion was the exchange of the privileges formerly accorded to the firstborn for the Levites. The rebels believed that Moses had acted high-handedly and that G’d had not initiated this switch. They believed that what had occurred was an act of nepotism on the part of Moses who wanted to fill the most coveted positions in the nation with members of his immediate family. They included not only his brother and nephews, but even the sons of Kehat, and the Levites in general as they were members of his tribe. Datan and Aviram used this as a pretext for rebelling, seeing that they, as members of the tribe of Reuven, had both already been deprived of their status as “firstborns,” and the tribe of Joseph had i.e. members of that tribe, had been given this preferred status. Perhaps they thought that Joshua, who was Moses’ personal valet and a member of the tribe of Ephrayim, whose own status within the tribe of Joseph had already been amended through his being nominated as the senior of Joseph’s sons by his grandfather Yaakov, although he was chronologically the junior, had been promoted as an arbitrary act by Moses. The Levites, generally, resented that only Moses’ immediate family had been accorded the status of priests, not the whole tribe. 
   Nachmanides accuses Ibn Ezra of speculating, seeing that he cited no sources to support his theory. He does not accept the theory that the Torah reports events other than in chronological order, unless, of course the Torah itself, by giving a date for a happening, draws our attention to the fact that it was not recorded in chronological order, such as the events in Numbers 9,1 which clearly occurred earlier than the count described in Numbers chapter 1-2.
   
   16,4. וישמע משה ויפול על פניו, “When Moses heard these accusations he fell on his face.” The Torah, in this instance does not describe both Moses and Aaron as falling on their faces, as it had done in Numbers 14,5 seeing hat Aaron, whose position had been challenged kept silent throughout so as not to provide further fuel for Korach’s claims by insisting that he was entitled to this high office. [Incidentally, Aaron’s own silence could be interpreted by disinterested bystanders as support for Korach, i.e. as an admission that he had not come by this office on the basis of personal merit. Ed.] The fact is that Aaron’s silence was due to his honouring the instructions he had received from Moses.
   
   16,5. בוקר ויודע ה' את אשר לו, “in the morning <i>Hashem</i> will make known the one who is His own, etc.” Moses referred to the fact that clear proof would be forthcoming if the Levites were performing their service with G’d’s consent or if the firstborn were still acceptable to Him as the ones chosen to represent the people as His servants in the Tabernacle. He would prove by the rejection of the 250 people offering incense that when G’d had said in Numbers 3,12 and 8,14 that the Levites had been chosen by Him, that it was not Moses who had chosen to replace the firstborn. In adding the words: ואת הקדוש והקריב אליו, “and who is holy, and He will draw him close to Himself,” Moses referred to Aaron’s position as High Priest.
   It is also possible that Moses meant that the firstborn must not consider themselves as having been rejected by G’d as we know from Numbers 3,13 and 8,17 כי לי כל בכור בבני ישראל, “for every firstborn among the Children of Israel has a special relationship to Me, etc.” On the other hand, the קדוש, “the priests,” would be confirmed as such by an act of <i>Hashem</i> on the morrow. It is their task to perform service in the Tabernacle/Temple as we read in Chronicles I 23,13 ויבדל אהרן להקדיש קודש קדשים הוא ובניו עד עולם, “Aaron and his sons were sanctified for the Holy of Holies, he and his sons throughout the generations.”
   
   ואת אשר יבחר בו יקריב אליו, “and the one whom He will choose, He will draw near to Him.” Nachmanides, pointing out that Moses said twice in the same verse that G’d would bring near to Him the one He had chosen, draws our attention to the fact that whereas the first time he added ואת הקדוש, “and the one who is holy,” sees in this a hint that the former refers to G’d’s accepting the incense offering of Aaron on the morrow while rejecting that of the 250 men The second time the words אשר יבחר בו refers to the status of the priests, descendants of Aaron, throughout the ages. The addition of the word מחר, “tomorrow,” in verse 7 means that this demonstration would occur only once and would settle the dispute once and for all. No other challenge would arise against the validity of the priests’ position.
   Ibn Ezra explains the words ויודע ה' את אשר לו as referring to the tribe that G’d had selected, i.e. the tribe of Levi. This was the answer to Datan and Aviram as well as to the dignitaries who also happened to be firstborns. He feels that all the people who had assembled in this rebellious demonstration were from the tribe of Levi hence the word הקדוש was meant to single out who amongst all these Levites was the one chosen to be the High Priest. Ibn Ezra uses the fact that Moses specifically addressed the members of the tribe of Levi, asking them if they had not already been honoured sufficiently that they now demanded even greater honours to support his explanation.
   Nachmanides writes that if, as Ibn Ezra claims, all the people ganging up on Moses and Aaron had been members of the tribe of Levi, how can we explain that on the day after Korach and supporters went down into the earth that all the tribes accused Moses of killing G’d’s people, and all of them presented their staffs to the test which staff would produce blossoms, etc.?
         As to Moses having said to the Levites רב לכם בני לוי, “it is much for you, offspring of Levi,” this reflects that Moses was aware that Korach was trying to fool the people into believing that he was a champion of the firstborns of each tribe who had been deprived of the privilege to perform service in the Tabernacle through the Levites having replaced them. This is why he had prefaced his incitement with the words כי כל העדה כולם קדושים, “for the entire Jewish community are holy.”
    Moses was intelligent enough to realize that Korach’s target was the priesthood, and Aaron, Moses’ brother being the High Priest, He hinted that if that were not so, it was strange that Korach, a member of the tribe of Levi, had not objected at the time when all the members of his tribe had been elevated to a privileged status. Korach had gladly accepted his elevation to a superior status, thereby contradicting his claim that all the Israelites were equally holy, seeing that <i>Hashem</i> had revealed Himself to all of them at Mount Sinai. This is why the Torah reports in verse 8 that now, instead of speaking to Korach and his rabble, he spoke to Korach in his capacity as their leader, when the latter did not have to posture in front of his cohorts. Moses, in his attempt to calm the situation and to bring about a פיוס, reconciliation, made his remarks to Korach part of his general remarks to the assembled rebels, instead of taking Korach aside, so that these people would become aware of Korach’s duping them into believing that he was championing their cause, and would not follow in his footsteps.
   
   Moses, personally, believed that his approach would work, and that is why he chose the offering of incense by lay Israelites as the litmus test rather than the offering of some other sacrifice. He thought that the fact that if even Aaron’s son Nadav and Avihu had died when offering unauthorized incense, surely that reminder would act as a brake on the eagerness of these 250 men when called upon to present incense in grounds not consecrated for such an offering.
   He permitted Aaron to participate in this test, basing his ruling on the concept of הוראת שעה, an immediate emergency. [We know that Aaron was specifically called upon to perform during such emergencies in Numbers 17,11-13 when Moses also demonstrated that incense was not necessarily what killed the people, but the reverse. Ed.] It is possible, however, that the time frame chosen by Moses for this test was when Aaron would offer the daily incense offering in the Tabernacle. Moses was confident that <i>Hashem</i> would support the initiative of His prophet on this occasion, although he had not yet asked for special permission to deviate from <i>halachic</i> norms.
   Personally, I do not think that Aaron’s offering of his morning incense could have played a part in this, seeing that the daily incense offering was presented on the golden altar inside the Sanctuary, a location beyond the view of anyone outside, seeing the Tabernacle did not even have any windows.
   Some commentators believe that the line וישמע משה ויפול על פניו, (verse 4) is the Torah’s way of describing how Moses turned to G’d to receive guidance as to how to deal with this rebellion. In response to Moses’ quest, <i>Hashem</i> answered that He would demonstrate on the following morning who were those chosen by Him and who were not. This would not be the only instance in which the Torah is very succinct, saving the details for another occasion. Sometimes we are told what G’d told Moses to tell the people, and the Torah hardly mentions that Moses conveyed the whole message. On other occasions we become aware of all that G’d had told Moses only when the Torah reports Moses as delivering G’d’s message to them. I have noticed that Onkelos who has translated the word קטורת in other places in the Torah as קטורת בוסמין, i.e. as קטורת הסמים, omits the word בוסמין, fagrances, when translating the word קטורת in our portion. [Our versions of Onkelos do not bear this out; maybe Nachmanides had a different version of Onkelos. Ed.] According to that version of Onkelos, he may have felt that the incense these 250 men were asked to offer in the test consisted only of לבונה, frankincense, and thus did not constitute the kind of affront with probably lethal consequences that the arrogant rebels subjected themselves to. Onkelos, according to that version, also understood the “incense” offered by Nadav and Avihu to have been of this variety. [Note that according to the Torah their capital sin was to bring אש זרה, man-made fire, on their censers. Nowhere does the Torah mention that the incense was what caused their death. Ed.] 
   
   16,10. ויקרב אותך, “he drew you near, etc.” Although Gershon was Levi’s firstborn, and had a claim to be given precedence over Kehat his brother in being given the privilege of transporting the Holy Aark, etc., <i>Hashem</i> demoted him in a manner of speaking in favour of your grandfather, and, as a result, in your favour. You are privileged to carry the Holy Ark on your shoulders.
   
   16,12. וישלח משה לקרוא לדתן ואבירם, “Moses sent a messenger to summon Datan and Aviram, etc.” They were at the core of the entire dispute together with Korach, and up until now Moses had carried on a dialogue only with Korach. He had attempted to placate Korach, and was now ready to attempt to placate Datan and Aviram also. He did not summon Aun, son of Pelet, 
   Nachmanides speculates that the reason that Moses did not invite Aun son of Pelet to a dialogue may have been that as a member of the tribe of Reuven, he presumed that Aun would automatically follow the lead of Datan and Aviram who were members of his tribe. If such illustrious men as Datan and Aviram would be reconciled with Moses, he, Aun, would of course follow suit. As it turned out, Aun was no longer with Datan and Aviram, neither did he come to debate with Moses as he had listened to the advice of his wife who had told him not to become a pawn in the hands of such demagogues as Datan and Aviram. Our sages derived this from the fact that when the death of Korach and Datan and Aviram is reported, the Torah never mentioned another word about Aun son of Pelet. Had he persisted in his opposition, surely he would have been enumerated as one of the victims of this rebellion. He clearly did not even belong to the 250 men who presented their incense or he would have died as a result of that. The reason that Moses had to send a messenger to summon Datan and Aviram was that they had gone away during the argument that Moses carried on with Korach. It is also possible that whereas Korach had been positioned in the camp of the Levites, not far from Moses’ own tent, Datan and Aviram being members of the tribe of Reuven, had remained within the confines of their own camp. This entire dialogue occurred on the first day, as the Torah said that G’d had said that on the following morning the issue would be put to the test.
   
   לא נעלה, “we will not go up.” Ibn Ezra writes that it is possible that the Tabernacle was located on a slight elevation outside the general encampment, or that the word “going up” is used in a spiritual sense, i.e. that anyone invited to meet with Moses at the entrance to the Tabernacle was automatically viewed as “ascending.”
   
   16,13. כי תשתרר עלינו גם השתרר, “yet you want to lord it over us, yea, dominate us even further?” According to Nachmanides the word גם, normally translated as “also,” needs to be understood as אפילו, “even,” in the sense of “even more so,” in our context here.
   Others understand the phrase to mean: “is it not enough that you lord it over us, that now you want to impose even your brother over us also?”
   
   16,14. העיני האנשים ההם תנקר, “even if you were to gouge out the eyes of these men, etc.,” Datan and Aviram referred to the men who had come out of Egypt. The phrase is a sarcastic remark suggesting that even if all are as blind as if their eyes had been gouged out, they, Datan and Aviram, could not be blinded by Moses’ pretensions. If we were to accept Moses’ summons or invitation it would appear as if we too were unable to “see” how he had bamboozled the whole nation.
   
   16,15. אל תפן אל מנחתם, “Do not turn to their gift-offering.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that according to the plain meaning the gift offering referred to was the incense that the rebels were to offer on the following morning.
   Nachmanides writes that this is not correct, as the words were said concerning Datan and Aviram, and Moses was especially angry at what they had said. Their reason for dissatisfaction had nothing to do with who would be privileged to offer incense at all. They had had their own axe to grind. The plain meaning of the verse is that Moses said to G’d concerning the people who had demanded the right to perform the priestly duties, that He should not accept their incense in order to demonstrate that they had not been chosen to do so. Moses meant that G’d should neither accept their incense offering nor accept their prayer with goodwill. Prayer is also referred to as מנחה in Scripture. Onkelos also supports this explanation when he writes קורבנהון, without specifying, i.e. any offering including prayer.
   
   לא חמור אחד מהם נשאתי, “I have not taken a single donkey of theirs, etc.” Moses said this in response to the accusation that he had lorded it over the people. He had not levied any taxes on any of the people as is customary and willingly accepted by the subjects of any rulers. He had not even borrowed an animal to carry a load for him. When Onkelos translates this as שחרית, he refers to אנגריא, forced labour owed to the king, or even lesser dignitaries such as town-captains, known as שחוור.
   
   ולא הרעותי את אחד מהם, “neither have I wronged a single one among them.” [This, if taken at face value, would be nothing to brag about. Ed.] The meaning is that Moses never requested from anyone that he perform some menial task for him that he considered it as beneath his dignity to perform himself.
   
   16,16. ויאמר משה אל קרח אתה וכל עדתך היו לפני ה'....מחר, “Moses said to Korach: ‘you and your whole assembly make an appearance in the presence of <i>Hashem</i> tomorrow!” Ibn Ezra points out that Moses had already made the same request in verses 6-7 when he had instructed them to appear with their censers filled with incense. We therefore need to understand this as a reference to what Moses had said before the Torah gave details of the altercation.
   Nachmanides feels that the difference between verse 6-7 and the present verse is that here Aaron is included as participating in this competition. Perhaps Moses hoped that this fact might get some rebels to withdraw, seeing that they knew that on previous occasions <i>Hashem</i> had up to now always accepted Aaron’s incense offering. Alternately, the rebels felt that the participation of Aaron would ensure that heavenly fire as a sign of acceptance would materialize, as it always did. [After all, Moses’ challenge the first time had not been accepted by the rebels, it seems. Ed.] 
   There had been a previous occasion on the eighth day of the consecration rites, the day when heavenly fire had materialized for Aaron’s incense offering, but that could be explained as G’d accepting Aaron as the people’s chosen representative. At that time the firstborn had not yet been deprived of their status. Now that Aaron’s position as representative of the people had been challenged, there was a good chance that his incense offering would not attract heavenly fire as a sign of acceptance.
   Datan and Aviram were present when Moses had issued the challenge for the first time. Now, after they had refused to debate the issue with him and had gratuitously insulted him, he excluded them from this test by saying: “only קרח וכל עדתו, “Korach and his entire congregation.” This is why the number 250 again is mentioned in verse 17, i.e. there would be 252 censers, one for Korach and one for Aaron. Once Korach heard that Aaron would also compete in this test he was willing to participate.
   
   16,19. ויקהל עליהם קרח את כל העדה, “Korach assembled (on the following morning) the whole congregation (all the people)” Nachmanides claims that this phrase cannot be understood at face value, as if indeed Korach had succeeded in rousing the entire people into this confrontation we are faced with a dilemma. How could Moses respond to G’d’s threat to wipe out all the people instantly by saying “if one man sins should the whole people pay the penalty” unless the people had been innocent bystanders? (Verse 22) If G’d had indeed meant to wipe out the whole people, He would have concluded as He had at the time of the golden calf, by saying to Moses that He would found a new Jewish people whose patriarch Moses would become. The words כל העדה in our verse therefore must refer to all of the people’s dignitaries, i.e. they represented the people as a whole.
   Whatever I have mentioned about the subject of the firstborn, is based on the approach to our portion by our sages of old, who were convinced that the Temple service was the domain of the firstborn prior to the sin of the golden calf
   If we were to follow the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, originally any Israelite was acceptable for performing sacrificial service in the Tabernacle, something that was the practice during all the many years that private altars were acceptable for presenting offerings to G’d. Aaron’s special privileges extended only to his performing the sacrificial service within the area of the Tabernacle. Korach’s objection concerned this special privilege accorded Aaron, and he wanted that every Israelite would share in that privilege seeing that he claimed that they were all holy.
   
   16,20. הבדלו מתוך העדה הזאת, “Separate yourselves from amidst this congregation!” Nachmanides raises the question that if the people were not guilty in the matter of Korach’s rebellion, why was G’d so angry also at them, that He threatened to kill them forthwith? On the other hand, if they were guilty, how could Moses ask G’d why He would kill the whole people on account of one man’s sin?
   Rabbeinu Chananel answers this question by writing that the words העדה הזאת, “this congregation” refers to the congregation of Korach only. [I find it strange that Nachmanides raises the question seeing that Rabbeinu Chananel lived several centuries earlier, and Nachmanides must have known his answer before he raised the question. Ed.] He adds further that G’d’s response to Moses’ question indicates that Moses had misunderstood Him, hence he was told to remove himself only from around the tents of Korach and Datan and Aviram (verse 24) He adds that it was G’d’s hope that when Korach and Datan and Aviram saw that Moses distanced himself from them they would still decide to repent and avoid disaster.
   Nachmanides goes on to write that he disagrees with the interpretation of Rabbeinu Chananel, seeing that the Israelites were not among the group with Korach in the first place, so that they had no reason to separate themselves from a group which stood apart. Moreover, Aaron was not with Korach and Datan and Aviram at that time but with the 250 men who readied themselves to offer their incense. Moreover, the term עדה never applies to a group of fewer than 10 adults, and Korach, Datan, and Aviram did not constitute a עדה, a congregation. If Rabbeinu Chananel were correct, the Torah should have omitted the words מתוך העדה הזאת, “from the midst of this congregation.” Besides, the very assumption that Moses the greatest prophet of all times should have so grossly misunderstood G’d’s instruction is quite beyond our imagination! 
   The reason for all this is that originally the hearts of the Israelites sympathized strongly with the arguments of Korach, and when Korach and the 250 men lined up with the censers and the incense, Korach reminded the people that what he was about to do was all on their behalf. When the people heard that, they were persuaded by Korach’s arguments and they drew near to watch what would happen. They were actually hoping that the privilege of performing service in the Tabernacle would be restored to the respective firstborns in each family. Thereby they had become guilty of the death penalty, for if someone doubts and suspects his teacher, and especially a teacher and prophet of the caliber of Moses, of acts such as Korach accused him of, he has made himself guilty of death at the hand of heaven. Moses and Aaron tried to find excuses for them by saying to G’d that the people had not translated their doubts and suspicions into punishable acts, and that therefore they did not deserve to die. This is a standard practice when one appeals to G’d’s attribute of mercy, to portray the sin of the accused as being less severe than it might appear at first glance. In doing so, the person pleading the case allows that there are individuals who deserve the full punishment, as it is they who are the instigators.
   
   16,26.  ואל תגעו בכל אשר להם פן תספו בכל חטאתם, “and do not even touch any of their belongings lest you will also perish on account of their sin.” The plain meaning of the verse is that the Israelites are to distance themselves sufficiently far from the guilty people to escape the gaping hole in the earth that would swallow Korach and company, and to on no account try and grab some of their belongings as loot which the sinners had forfeited. All their belongings were totally taboo, חרם as of that moment.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the words פן תספו refer back to not touching any of these men in order to save them, as instead of saving them they too would become victims.
   
   16,29. אם כמות כל אדם ימותון אלה, “if these die like the death of all other people, etc.” Nachmanides writes that there had been many people who on different occasions had expressed the wish to return to Egypt, expressing their dissatisfaction with Moses’ leadership, in particular his taking them into the desert. Why then should Korach and Datan and Aviram be singled out for a special kind of punishment? The sin of these men was twofold. First they had refused to meet Moses in dialogue and accused him of being high handed. In doing what they did they had denied everything that G’d had done for the Jewish people commencing with appointing Moses as their Saviour. They had also violated the specific commandment issued at Mount Sinai to have absolute faith in the person and mission of Moses, i.e. וגם בך יאמינו לעולם,  (Exodus 19,9)
   
   The people, at this juncture, had demonstrated that they did not believe in Moses’ divine mission, not when he had come to take them out of Egypt, nor when he led them on the way to the Holy Land after the Egyptian pursuers had drowned in the sea. This is why Moses stressed in verse 28 that the key to their survival lay in their demonstrating that they did believe that all Moses had done he had done at the command of <i>Hashem</i>. The people had not only protested the exchange of the firstborns’ privileges in favour of the Levites, but they had staged a far more serious ideological rebellion, something known as כפירה בעיקר, a denial of basic tenets of Judaism. 
   The swallowing of the 250 men by the earth was unlike any other earthquake where the fissures in the earth remain open, but here the earth swallowed the men and their belongings and closed again immediately leaving no trace of what had occurred.
   
   16,32. ואת כל האדם אשר לקרח, “and all the people who had joined Korach.” According to Nachmanides this included the servants and maids in Korach’s household who were bodily owned by him. Perhaps he had Jewish helpers in his household also, as well as some proselytes. They could have suffered the same fate as they supported him. It is not possible to understand the words “and every person belonging to him,” as referring to members of his immediate family, seeing that his grown up sons did not die, as the Torah has spelled out elsewhere. (Numbers 26,11) His younger children surely were included in the wordsותבלע אותם ואת בתיהם “it swallowed them and their households.” Or, he had no children that were minors, as the Torah would have mentioned them under the heading of טף.
   
   16,33. ויאבדו מתוך הקהל, “they were lost from amongst the congregation.” This is a graphic description of how this spectacle affected the onlookers who saw these people one moment and when they looked again they had disappeared from sight within seconds. There was no visible trace of where they once had been.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the Torah selected the expression ויאבדו to illustrate that seeing that they did not leave any children behind them who would have replaced them, they could be considered as if “lost.” [I have not found this comment of Ibn Ezra in my editions. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra adds that there are different opinions as to what happened to Korach himself. Some say that Korach himself was also swallowed up by the earth, what else could the meaning of the words ותבלע אותם be if afterwards the Torah adds: “not only they but all those who belonged to them?”  Compare also Numbers 26,10, which is even more specific.  Other commentators hold that Korach was burned to death, based on the second half of the same verse that speaks about the fire that consumed the two hundred and fifty men who presented their incense.
   Some of our most ancient sources believe that Korach was both burned and then his body was swallowed. 
   Personally, (Ibn Ezra speaking) I believe the earth only opened beneath the feet of Datan and Aviram. Korach, at that time stood alongside Aaron and the 250 men offering their incense. Concerning the words ואת קרח “as well as Korach” in Numbers 26,10, these words do not belong with the word ותבלע, “it swallowed,” but belong to the words following, i.e. במות העדה, “when the congregation died.” The reason why the Torah does not mention Korach specifically in the same context as the people who were burned when offering the incense, is simply that once we had heard that the people making common cause with Korach had been burned, their instigator surely did not escape that fate? 
   
   17,2. כי קדשו, “for they have become holy.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word “holy” here in the negative sense, meaning that they are out of bounds to the people, that no one is allowed to derive private advantage of these remains as they have attained the same status as holy vessels in the Tabernacle.
   Nachmanides does not understand why these remains should have become forbidden for private use seeing that the incense offered by these two hundred and fifty men had never become sanctified, was not part of the sacrificial service. When something becomes sanctified for use outside consecrated grounds it is not holy in the true sense of the word. One may answer that when such items have become sanctified at the express command of Moses, they become truly holy as the 250 men had sanctified them for use in the service of heaven, believing that G’d would respond positively by means of heavenly fire consuming their offerings as it expressed their innermost desire to serve Him in the capacity of priests, their censers would all have become sanctified for all times.
   Personally, (Nachmanides speaking) I believe the Torah itself answers any of our doubts when it testifies that “these 250 men had used the censers to come closer to <i>Hashem</i> so that they had become holy, henceforth serving as a sign for the Children of Israel,” G’d says that He Himself had sanctified these censers.
   
   17,5. כאשר דבר ה' ביד משה לו, “as G’d said concerning him (Aaron) through Moses.” Nachmanides writes that the word לו refers to Eleazar who had been mentioned previously in verses 2 and 4, and who had been commanded what to do with the copper remains of the censers and who had made them into a cover for the altar. [The first half of the verse makes better sense if we understand the whole verse as confirming Aaron’s exclusive position as High Priest. Ed.]
   
   17,6. אתם המתם את עם ה', “you have killed the people of <i>Hashem.</i> Nachmanides points out that Onkelos by his translation of אתון גרמתון דמות עמא, i.e. “you have caused the death of the people,” that the accusation meant that by inducing the 250 men to offer the incense, Moses and Aaron had made themselves guilty of their deaths. The people did not believe that this suggestion by Moses had been either made at the command of G’d, or even with the silent approval of G’d, but had been of his own doing. They felt that the point Moses and Aaron were trying to make could easily have been made by a test such as the one with the staffs, and then no one would have had to die. They claimed that Moses must have known that presenting incense in an unauthorized manner would lead to the death of those offering it. Their accusation then was: “although you knew that following your suggestion meant that they would die, you still made this suggestion.”
   Ibn Ezra, taking a different approach, writes that the people rejected the notion that the death of the 250 men as well as the death of Korach and his family proved that G’d had selected the tribe of Levi over the firstborn, and that Aaron was His choice as High Priest. Moses may simply have prayed to G’d to kill the rebels, and in his capacity of prophet, an undisputed capacity, G’d had accepted his prayer. Ibn Ezra’s explanation makes sense seeing that the people accepted the ruling that Aaron was the chosen High Priest only after the staff representing the tribe of Levi had sprouted blossoms and produced almonds, as we have been told in 17,23. Concerning that experiment, the Torah had written (verse 20) that <i>Hashem</i> would cause the complaints against Him to cease. According to Ibn Ezra, the people’s complaint at this stage did not refer to the descent below the earth of Korach and his cohorts, it only concerned the death by burning of the 250 people who had genuinely wanted to come closer to G’d by exercising the privilege to present an incense offering. After all, they had all heard (or understood) that G’d had told Moses that the people should remove themselves from around Korach, whereas no such instruction had been given concerning standing close to the 250 men. The guilt of Datan and Aviram, who had publicly ridiculed G’d’s appointed leaders was obviously even greater, so that no one challenged the fact that they had died for their sin.
   Personally, (Nachmanides writing) the correct interpre-tation of all the foregoing is that the people did believe that Aaron was G’d’s chosen priest, for they had observed previously that fire had come down from heaven consuming his incense without his coming to any harm thereby. What the people wanted was that the firstborn be allowed to continue performing secondary tasks in the Tabernacle, the tasks that had now been allocated to the Levites. Only in this way, did they feel, would all the tribes have representation in the Tabernacle and the service being performed therein. They accused Moses of having designed a test for the firstborn that would have equated them with the priests, something that they had not even aspired to, and as a result by their overstepping themselves Moses had caused the death of these 250 firstborn.
   
   17,10. הרומו מתוך העדה הזאת, “remove yourselves from among this congregation!” Nachmanides commences his commentary by writing that he fails to make sense of this whole verse, as well as of the parallel verse in 16,20 where Moses and Aaron are also commanded to put physical distance between themselves and the complainants. Why was this necessary? Surely G’d possesses the power to kill many people and leave those whom He does not wish to harm alive and unscathed without their first having to “run for their lives!” G’d had demonstrated this power when killing the firstborn in Egypt while no Israelite firstborn had to run for his life. Even Egyptian firstborn hiding in homes of the Israelites would not have been spared. We must assume that in our situation G’d’s anger was directed at people who formed part of an assembly, as this was indicative of their sympathies being with the person or persons at the core of that assembly. In order to be saved one had to demonstrate by an act, such as the act of removing oneself physically from the rebels, that one did not share their attitudes.
   It is also possible that G’d issued these instructions not so much in order to save the righteous as to show them respect, as He did not feel free to kill the wicked while the righteous were still among them, trying to get them to desist from their rebellious attitude. Moses hastened to inform the innocent that they themselves were in need of mercy, and that if they did not separate themselves they would share the fate of the sinners.
   
   17,17. שנים עשר מטות, “twelve staffs.” Aaron’s staff was included in the twelve, seeing that it does not say that Moses should take the staff of Levi and inscribe Aaron’s name on it, but it does say: “inscribe Aaron’s name on the staff representing the tribe of Levi.” In other words, there already was a staff representing the tribe of Levi. The tribe of Joseph was represented here by only one staff as it is axiomatic that the total number of tribes in the Jewish people would be 12 at all times.
   Nachmanides writes that there are some scholars who believe that the meaning of the words is that the names of the respective staffs were Reuven, Shimon, Levi, etc., but this is not correct. The names inscribed were those of the princes of each tribe at that time, i.e. Elitzur, Shlumiel, etc, and Levi’s prince was Aaron.
   
   17,25. למשמרת לאות לבני מרי, “as a safekeeping to serve as a sign for the rebellious ones.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this line as “a reminder that I have selected Aaron as My Priest, and that further complaints about the priesthood should cease.” 
   Nachmanides counters that the staff and its blossoming was a sign only that the tribe of Levi enjoys a special status among the other tribes, but it did not signify anything about the priesthood. He therefore understands the word לאות as a reference to the special status of the tribe of Levi. He claims that there was no need at all to furnish a sign that the priesthood belonged to Aaron, seeing that whenever heavenly fire descended on the censer of Aaron and he did not get burned by it this was sufficient proof that G’d approved of him in his capacity as High Priest. This is also the meaning of the words והנה פרח מטה אהרן לבית לוי, “here the staff of Aaron, member of the house of Levi blossomed.” Aaron’s position among the tribe of Levi, which was already special, flowered even further.
   
   18,7. עבודת מתנה אתן את כהונתכם, “your priesthood as a service that is a gift.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the meaning is that Aaron and his descendants being priests was a gift to them from <i>Hashem.</i>
   Nachmanides feels that the meaning is that the priests should not view their priestly duties as being burdensome, but they should welcome it as one welcomes a gift, which is what it is. It is an honour for you, not a burden.
   
   18,10. בקודש הקדשים תאכלנו, “In the most holy shall you eat it.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this means that only male priests may consume the edible portions of the most holy of offerings. This must be done within the courtyard of the Tabernacle. 
   Nachmanides questions this, as the term קודש הקדשים is not familiar to us as a place where sacrificial meat may be consumed, and our verse speaks of the eating of such meat. The term is familiar to us as the most sacred part of the Tabernacle, the secluded room beyond the dividing curtain where the Holy Ark with its lid and the cherubs was kept. There was never any eating or drinking that occurred in that section. According to Nachmanides the meaning of the words בקודש הקדשים תאכלנו, is that the male priests eating of the parts of the offerings described may only do so when they have first sanctified themselves to the highest degree possible. In the previous verse the Torah had written קודש קדשים לך הוא ולבניך, “it shall be as most holy to you and to your sons.” This was already an implied warning not to enjoy the portions mentioned in the same way as קדשים קלים, sacrificial meat of a lower degree of holiness, such as peace-offerings, thanksgiving offerings, etc. The Torah now repeats this warning as applicable as it had interrupted its list by mentioning such offerings as מנחה, meal-offerings, which do not have such a high degree of holiness.
   
   18,9. Our author, when comparing the position of such words as לך יהיה, or יהיה לך, or a list of what is under discussion before adding that at least parts belong to the priest, explains that these are not stylistic nuances but they have a deeper meaning. Basically, he concludes that whenever parts of the gifts mentioned have first been presented on the Altar, the remains belong to the priest without restriction.  He also explains why there appears to be an exception to this rule in connection with the פטר רחם, in 18,15, the reason being that this legislation was written in conjunction with the sanctity of the firstborn males of animals which are permitted to be offered on the Altar.
   
   18,19. ברית מלח עולם, “ a salt-like eternal covenant.” Ibn Ezra interprets this expression ברית as closely related to the root כרת, destroying something absolutely; as salt destroying the earth. The covenant between G’d and the priests, is as absolute as changes made by the addition of salt to earth that prevents it sprouting vegetation. Compare what גפרית ומלח did to the fertile valley of the Jordan when it turned it into the Dead Sea.
   
   18,20. בארצם לא תנחל, “you will not share in the inheritance of their land.” Nachmanides understands the verse to mean that the Levites (priests) will not share in the Land of Israel on the same basis, as do the other tribes. In fact, they would not even get any real share as the 48 cities set aside for the Levites were basically all on soil belonging to the respective tribes on whose territory they were situated. Basically, these cities functioned as cities of refuge for inadvertent killers. The warning spelled out in our verse is actually directed at the priests; the warning to the Levites is only a corollary of this. Our sages interpreted the words בארצם לא תנחל as applying primarily to the time when Joshua would divide up the land as the loot accruing to the people from their war of conquest. 
   Parshat  Chukat
   
   
   19,2. זאת חוקת התורה, “This is the decree of the Torah, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the reason that this legislation is preceded by the word חוק, decree, statute, is that what follows defies reason in the eyes of the nations of the world and they ridiculed the Jewish Torah. [The Torah, by prefacing the legislation in such a manner reminds us that the Creator does not need to justify Himself all the time. Ed.]
   Nachmanides adds that there is a reason that the nations of the world zero in with their criticism on the red heifer legislation more than on the other animal sacrifices some of which also achieve ritual purity for the person bringing the sacrifice, such as people suffering from <i>zav,</i> seminal discharge of a certain type, or the sacrifice brought by a mother who recently gave birth which resulted in her becoming ritually impure is purified as a result of her sacrifice. They argue: how could the ashes of a heifer that had not even been a sacrifice and was slaughtered outside consecrated grounds, confer ritual purity for someone stricken with the most severe kind of impurity? 
   Actually, this paragraph was revealed to the people at the end of the legislation in the Book of Leviticus, concluding the legislation pertaining to sacrificial offerings. The reason why it had not been inserted in the written Torah until this point is that after having heard about the gifts the Israelite has to give to the priests, this concludes a further stage in how the average Israelite obtains his atonement. With the laws about purification from impurity incurred through contact with the dead, especially when burying one’s near and dear ones, the entire subject of ritual impurity is concluded. 
   
   זאת חוקת התורה אשר צוה ה', “This is the decree of the Torah that <i>Hashem</i> has commanded;” There are a few other instances where someone is reported as speaking in the third person, “he,” although clearly the quote shows that “he” or “He” was speaking in the first person. The examples coming to mind are Exodus 24,1 עלה אל ה', “ascend to <i>Hashem”</i> or in Genesis 4,23 נשי למך האזינה, “wives of Lemech listen!” Lemech himself was speaking.
   
   דבר אל בני ישראל, ”speak to the Children of Israel.” Although we would have expected the word for ”speak” to be in the plural mode, i.e. דברו, seeing that Moses was the more important one of the two, the Torah used the singular mode.
   
   אליך, “to you,” the meaning of this word in this context is that at this time such a red heifer should be burned for the needs of the people; in the future, this should be done only as and when the need arose. The reason that the Torah wrote the word ונתתם in the plural mode instead of ונתת in the singular mode, in verse 3, is to give Aaron a share in the performance of this commandment so that both Moses and Aaron commanded Eleazar to carry out this commandment by slaughtering the heifer in his presence.
   Alternatively, the meaning of the word ונתתם in the plural mode is simply that the instruction issued here applies also to future generations. Eleazar, by slaughtering the red heifer acted as the person designated to do so on behalf of the Jewish Supreme Court.
   
   לא עלה עליה עול, “it had never borne a yoke.” The word “<i>Ol</i>,” yoke, is spelled here without the letter ו in the middle, to indicate that even if that heifer had only very briefly had a yoke placed on it without performing any kind of task for man, it would be disqualified from serving as the red heifer required. [in other words, the spelling of the word is the same as על, ”on.”
   
   19,3. ונתתם אותה אל אלעזר, “you are to hand it over to Eleazar, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that the reason why this heifer was handed over to Eleazar, was to indicate that the task of slaughtering the red heifer would primarily be performed by the High Priest’s deputy. 
   Nachmanides writes that this does not mean that ideally this commandment was to be performed by the High Priest’s deputy rather than that it be performed by the High Priest personally, or even by any ordinary priest, for we have a disagreement of <i>Tannaim</i> about this as described in the commentary of <i>Sifrey. O</i>ne school of thought holds that in the future it would always be carried out by the High Priest personally; this school argued that in this instance the reason why it was performed by Eleazar was that there was an emergency so that the Torah designated the deputy High Priest Eleazar instead of Aaron. According to this latter opinion we must conclude that the deeper meaning of this commandment was such that it was appropriate that the High Priest, who normally would also be a Torah scholar of outstanding caliber, would be entrusted with this task. [It is important to remember that according to tradition there were only 7 red heifers altogether, so that this commandment was not one that even a High Priest would normally be called upon to fulfill. Ed.] Our author speculates that Aaron [a High Priest of special qualifications. Ed.], of whom the Torah had said in Leviticus 21,12 that he was not to leave the consecrated grounds of the Temple, was not to be charged with a task that is carried out outside these grounds, such as the red heifer that was taken outside the camp before being slaughtered, etc. Alternately, this opportunity may have been the one to prepare the people for who was going to be the successor of the first High Priest, Aaron. [This is reasonable only if we assume that this paragraph was written in the fortieth year. Ed.] By assigning the task to prepare the ashes of the red heifer which would purify people who had incurred ritual impurity due to physical contact with a dead body, or even by being only in the same roofed airspace with such corpses, to Eleazar, a clear message was sent out that he would be next in line for his father’s office when the latter would leave the scene.
   On the other hand, it is possible that the fact that this time Aaron himself was not charged with handling the red heifer was a punishment for his part in the sin of the golden calf, which necessitated the people having to be purified. Moses had treated the golden calf itself as the first red heifer and he had sprinkled its ashes on the water with which the people had to be sprinkled. (Compare Exodus 32,19)
   
   19,12. ואם לא יתחטא וגו', “if such a person does not undergo sprinkling of these waters and ashes on the third and seventh day, etc.” Nachmanides writes  (in his commentary on verse 20) that the thrust of this verse is to inform us that purification is impossible without the above steps, although the person that had embarked on the purification process had already undergone immersion in a ritual bath. We know that this need for a ritual bath first is also a requirement from Leviticus 17,16 ואם לא יכבס....ונשאו עונו, “if he does not immerse himself in a ritual bath he will bear his guilt.”
   
   19,13. עוד טומאתו בו, “his contamination is still upon him.” A condition that continues indefinitely until he has purified himself.”
   
   19,14. אדם כי ימות באהל, “a person who dies in a tent (roofed airspace).” The verse describes real, not potential, scenarios. The legislation described here applies equally to people who die outdoors and to whose remains are transferred to a roofed airspace such as a tent or house.
   
   כל הבא אל האהל וכל אשר באהל, “whoever enters the tent or whatever is in the tent already, etc.” This includes the utensils in the tent already, as well as the tent itself. We know this from the requirement to also sprinkle the tent itself with the waters and ashes from the red heifer. (Compare verse 18 where this is spelled out).
   The reason why the verse mentions the word אהל, tent, is to tell us that the person entering that tent itself has become ritually contaminated for seven days minimum. The verse also informs us by inference that the Israelites during their 40 years in the desert lived in tents. The Torah paints scenarios familiar to the people, seeing that the legislation would apply immediately, not only once they crossed the river Jordan into the Holy Land. The same rules would apply to permanent housing. However if such a house would be firmly attached to the ground it stood on the house itself would not become ritually contaminated. [The repeated use of the word אהל, tent is meant to exclude certain structures that perform functions similar to those of tents, i.e. houses attached firmly to the ground they stand on. Ed.]
   
   19,16. בחלל חרב, “one slain by the sword,” Nachmanides writes that here too the Torah uses a scenario that is commonplace, but the same law would apply if the dead had been slain by a stone or other means even if he had become the victim of his killer’s fist. The reason why the Torah uses the word מת, “someone dead,” without elaborating, as well as the detailed description חלל חרב, “slain by the sword,” is to make us aware of the <i>halachic</i> difference of an animal that was killed by ritual slaughter, (sword-like instrument) and only thereby does not become ritually unclean upon death, and a human being where such a death confers immediate severe ritual impurity. Our sages add another lesson to be learned from the word חלל חרב, namely that the sword that killed the person in question contracts the same degree of ritual impurity as the corpse, not one degree less as is commonly the case when one touches the source of the ritual contamination.
   
   19,17. ונתן עליו מים חיים אל כלי, “and put upon it spring water into a vessel.” A superficial reading of the plain meaning of the text would lead us to believe that the water is to be poured into the container already containing the ash of the red heifer. However, this is not so. Our sages derived from the text that if someone puts the ash into the container first before adding the water, the whole procedure has become invalid. They base this on the words מים חיים אל כלי, implying that something live must first be in the vessel, in other words that the ash must be mixed with the water, so much so that the water eventually is covering the ash completely. (Compare <i>Temurah 12)</i>
   
   19,20. כי את מקדש ה' טמא, “when he contaminated the Sanctuary of <i>Hashem.”</i> The word כי here does not mean “for, because,” but “if, when,” as it does in Deuteronomy 22,6 in the verse commencing with כי יקרא קן צפור, “if, or when a bird’s nest happens, etc.”
   The reason why the Torah mentions the penalty for failing to purify oneself as being <i>karet,</i> exclusion from one’s people [after death, of course, Ed.] both in verse 13 and in our verse is, according to some of our sages, to inform us that the legislation is applicable both to the Tabernacle, i.e. someone causing contamination of the Tabernacle, and to the permanent Temple in the future. (<i>Makkot 13,14)</i> 
   It is possible to understand the two verses at face value, by understanding the expression את מקדש ה', as referring to the sacrificial offerings inside the Temple, meaning that in verse 13 the Torah speaks about the person having eaten from such offerings while in a state of ritual contamination he did not only become guilty for that but also for having conferred ritual contamination on the Holy Temple, whereas here the Torah speaks about someone who, though he immersed himself in a ritual bath, did not submit to the sprinkling with the ash of the red heifer on the third and seventh day of his contaminated status. The words מקדש ה' then refer to the structure itself, not to what had become consecrated within it as an offering. [“Within” includes the courtyard, the location of the principal Altar. Ed.]
   Personally, I believe that the correct interpretation is in accordance with the plain meaning, i.e. that the first time we hear about the penalty of <i>karet</i> in connection with ritual impurity in verse 13 refers to touching the dead, as spelled out there, הנוגע, and the second time this penalty is repeated is to teach us that even if one only contracts this ritual contamination by being in the same roofed space, the penalty for failing to purify oneself properly is the same. This is why in our verse no mention is made of “touching” anything.
   
   20,1. ויבואו בני ישראל כל העדה מדבר צין, “The Children of Israel, the whole community, arrived at the wilderness of Tzin.” Nachmanides refers to <i>Rashi</i> as well as to Ibn<i> Ezra</i> who see in the words כל העדה an allusion to the nation now being “whole,” seeing that all the people upon whom death in the desert had been decreed had died by now. 
   He queries that if this indeed were so the words כל העדה need not have been written again in verse 22 when the people arrived at הר ההר.
   Ibn Ezra says that the reason why the Torah repeated the expression כל העדה in verse 22 is that seeing that Edom had begun to war against Israel, the Torah wanted to inform us that no casualties were suffered on account of that. Nachmanides questions this also, disputing that there had been any confrontation between Israel and Edom, seeing that the Torah tells us that the Israelites backed down from their request to cross the Edomites’ territory as we have been informed already in verse 21. Nachmanides therefore arrives at the conclusion that it is customary for the Torah to describe the Israelites as having arrived “whole,” in paragraphs which precede complaints by the people, as in Exodus 16,1, 17,1, Numbers 14,6 Numbers 17,6, etc. The reason that the Torah used the term כל העדה in verse 22 is to inform us that the entire people participated in eulogizing Aaron and mourning him, seeing that he had died there.
   
   20,2.-3. ויקהלו העם על משה ועל אהרן וירב העם עם משה, “The people gathered against Moses and Aaron and they quarreled with Moses.” Although they gathered against both Moses and Aaron, their principal target was Moses with whom they started quarrelling.
   
   20,4.  ולמה הבאתם את קהל ה' אל המדבר הזה “and for what purpose did you bring the congregation of <i>Hashem</i> to this wilderness<i>?”</i> Why, at this juncture, did the people describe themselves as <i>Hashem’s</i> congregation? They implied that up until now when the presence of <i>Hashem</i> had not seen fit to reside with the people until the last of the survivors of the people tainted by the sin of the spies had died, there might have been some justification for their grueling march through these inhospitable deserts; but now after the last of these people had already died, why did they still have to be in the desert although they had regained their status as קהל ה', “<i>Hashem’s</i> congregation? Why would they need to die from thirst?
   
   20,5. לא מקום זרע, “not a place where you can plant seed.” From these remarks of the people we can learn that as long as Miriam’s well had supplied them with water, it had been possible, especially in places where they had sojourned for many years, such as Kadesh, to plant seeds and grow crops, for during all the years we never heard the people complaining that they could not even plant any seeds.
   
   ותאנה וגפן ורמון, “neither are there fig trees, grape vines or pomegranates.” In another context the order of these trees is reversed, such as the vision of people enjoying tranquil life תחת גפנו ותחת תאנתו, “beneath his vineyard and his fig tree.” (Kings I 8,5 and Micah 4,4) There may be an allusion here as to why the firewood for burning the red heifer is traditionally the wood from the fig tree. Seeing that we had just concluded reading about the red heifer, this may explain the source of this tradition. [I have not found a source for this tradition. Ed.]
   
   20,8. ודברתם אל הסלע, “you are to speak to the rock.” According to Nachmanides the word אל in our verse is to be understood as על, when in the presence of, meaning that when Moses and Aaron would speak to the rock, the people should all be present to watch the miracle. The people should all know which rock Moses was speaking to. Moses and Aaron complied with the first part of these instructions.
   
   לעיניהם, “before their eyes.” The meaning is the same as לפניהם, in their presence, in front of them.
   Another meaning of the word לעיניהם could be that it refers to the act of Moses speaking to the rock being performed before the very eyes of the people. This would correspond to what is reported in verse 10 where we read: “Moses and Aaron gathered the people before the rock, and he said to them: etc.” The reason for all this publicity was, as our sages have said, in order that the people would not be able to say later that there had been subterranean wells beneath those rocks.
   It is also possible that the emphasis is on the words ונתן מימיו, that the rock will immediately respond and produce a lot of water, not as if the rock only reluctantly followed Moses’ instructions. Compare Psalms 78,20 where the psalmist describes how these waters drenched everything in their immediate vicinity. 
   According to our sages this rock was the same rock that the people had already encountered at Mount Chorev. It was Miriam’s well that had moved with the people during all their journeys. [I presume the source for this is both the definitive article ה in front of the word סלע and the word מימיו, “its waters,” i.e. it had already provided water on previous occasions. Ed.] The well had ceased functioning when Miriam died, and was now reactivated. The word נתינה i.e. ונתן it will “give,” always implies that the giver does so in a generous fashion.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text there was a rock situated close to the site where the people had made their camp so that when G’d told Moses to speak to the people, etc., the word לעיניהם means “the one that is before your very eyes.” It is also possible to understand the expression אל הסלע, “to the rock,” to mean that Moses should speak to the first and nearest rock he would encounter in his search. The meaning of the word מימיו would be a reference to the first jet of water the people would witness as coming out of that rock. The deeper reason why the Torah chose this word is that the people would see that this water did not originate on the surface of that rock but from deep with in it, it was integral to the rock. This is different from wells emerging from beneath rocks, the customary scenario.
   
   והוצאת להם מים מן הסלע, “you are to bring forth water for them from the rock.” The meaning is that these waters will materialise while you are still standing at the rock. Everybody will witness this impressive spectacle.
   
   והשקית את העדה, “you will provide drink for the congregation.” You will order them to drink from this water in your presence. All these details were spelled out in order to provide maximum publicity for this great miracle. Interestingly, when it came to the execution the Torah does not speak about Moses giving the people to drink but about the people drinking of their own accord, without prompting. (Compare verse 11) They were so thirsty that they did not wait to be asked.
   
   20,10. המן הסלע הזה נוציא לכם מים, “are we supposed to bring forth water for you from this rock?” Nachmanides writes that we must not misunderstand Moses as saying that it was most unlikely that he could extract water from this or any other rock. He had already produced more impressive miracles than the one he was called upon to perform at this time. Not only that; there were many people alive who had observed him producing a similar miracle at <i>Massa</i> and <i>Merivah</i> in Exodus 17,7. Moses implied by this question that the people and their conduct did not entitle them to expect such a miracle from him. We find a similar construction in Samuel I 2,27 הנגלה נגלתי, which according to Kimchi, is a rhetorical question, the questioner being aware that the subject he questions is not at all in any doubt. The question is one that confirms the listener’s expectation. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that Moses was chastising the people who had imagined that it was within the power of himself and Aaron to produce water from a rock, a power reserved for <i>Hashem,”</i> so why had they complained to him instead of to <i>Hashem</i>, who alone is the Provider? It is only G’d Who brought you to this situation, and it is He Who will extricate you from your predicament. According to Kimchi, the introductory letter ה when preceding a question could sometimes be used when the answer is affirmative and sometimes when the expected answer is negative. When Moses charged the spies to report if the Land of Canaan had many trees, and he phrased it as היש בו עץ או אין, it is clear from the second half of the question that both answers were well within the possibilities. Similar questions are sometimes posed without the questioner spelling out the alternative as Moses had done when he sent off the spies. When Joseph asked the brothers who had presented Binyamin to him, if this was the younger brother they had spoken of, he only asked הזה אחיכם הקטון, “is this your younger brother?” He did not add the words: “or not?” When Yaakov asked the shepherds around the well if they knew Lavan, he also left the alternative, i.e. that they did not know him, open. (Compare Genesis 29,5.) Sometimes such questions are posed only to examine the true state of mind of the people who will answer it. When addressing the Israelites as “rebellious,” Moses implied: “do you really think that it is beyond G’d’s ability to produce water from this rock if He wants to?” He added the word המורים to show the people that he considered their conduct outrageous. He implied that they quarreled with him only because they thought that their situation was beyond G’d’s and His prophet’s Moses ability to resolve?
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that the rock to which Moses had pointed had in the meantime moved to a spot amongst other rocks, so that the people had become despondent, and demanded that Moses produce the water from a different rock. Moses asked them angrily if they really thought that he could produce water from any rock he wanted to, a rock that G’d had not designated for such a miracle?
   
   20,12. יען לא האמנתם בי, “because you did not believe in Me, etc.” Nachmanides writes that Moses’ and Aaron’s sins were not spelled out in detail by the Torah.
   <i>Rashi</i> says the sin was that whereas <i>Hashem</i> had instructed them to speak to the rock, but they had struck it instead. The difficulty with <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary is that seeing that G’d had told Moses to take his staff along, Moses had clearly assumed that the reason for taking the staff along was to hit the rock, similar to the manner in which he had used the staff repeatedly to bring on the plagues upon the Egyptians. Surely, if G’d had only wanted Moses to speak to the rock to what purpose did He tell him to take along his staff? When G’d, in Egypt, had told Moses to take along the staff that had turned into a snake at the burning bush, it was from then on to serve as an instrument with which to bring on the plagues. Furthermore, how would Moses speaking to the rock instead of striking it enhance the quality of the miacle? We have several instances when G’d told Moses to stretch out his staff (in order to bring on a plague) and it is assumed that Moses was to use the staff to strike with, not just to gesture with. Besides, speaking to the rock was meant to inform the rock that this man who was standing before the rock addressed the rock in the name of its Creator Who had given him an order to extract water from it. Moses and Aaron fulfilled this part of the task as we know from when the Torah writes that they made the entire community assemble in front of the rock (verse 10) Furthermore, as far as the rock was concerned what is the difference in the quality of the miracle whether it responds to words or to physical impact with Moses’ staff? Why is the sin of Moses and Aaron described as a מעילה, a term usually reserved for someone who makes unauthorized private use of something belonging to the Temple treasury?
   Some say that Moses’ sin consisted in his expressing himself unclearly, due to his anger, so that when he said: ”can we extract water from the rock,?” at least some of the people thought that he had included G’d in this question, leaving doubt that even G’d could perform such a miracle. As a result G’d accused them of not sanctifying His name when having had an opportunity to do so. According to the commentators this is what the psalmist had in mind when he said in Psalms 106,33, כי המרו את רוחו ויבטא בשפתיו, “for they had provoked his spirit so that he spoke rashly.” From these words of the psalmist we see that Moses did not sin by hitting the rock but by not phrasing his words carefully enough.
   Other commentators see the sin not so much in what preceded the miracle of the water but in the failure of the people as well as Moses, who should have led the people singing a song of thanks to G’d for having provided such a miracle. This is the meaning of the words לא קדשתם אותי, “you have not sanctified Me.”
   Still other commentators see the sin in Moses and Aaron asking: “how can we produce water from this rock,?” i.e. the one the people had chosen, seeing it was not the one G’d had chosen. Moses had been afraid to deviate from the precise instructions he had, thereby missing an opportunity to demonstrate that G’d can provide water from any rock if He so chooses.
   Maimonides feels that the real sin of Moses was that he lost his composure and addressed people who were thirsty as “rebellious”. A man of Moses’ stature could not permit himself to so lose his composure that he publicly called his people by an insulting term. Such conduct amounted to a public desecration of the Holy name of <i>Hashem,</i> seeing that Moses was the man whose body language, mode of speech, not to mention his actions, etc., all the people were to use as a model for their own behaviour. The people had been hoping that by modeling themselves on their leader they would succeed in life on earth as well as in the hereafter. How could a display of anger possibly contribute to the esteem in which they held this man of G’d? Such displays of anger are presumed to be the sudden manifestation of some negative character trait within the person, something he had been able to conceal up until such time as he lost his “cool.” According to our tradition, the Israelites of that generation were extremely wise, and on a par with prophets, so that they would minutely examine and analyze each word Moses spoke, how he spoke it, how he conducted himself, etc., and draw far reaching conclusions from this. They therefore would mistakenly conclude that unless Moses had been aware that G’d Himself had been angry with the people for having demanded water he would not have allowed himself to reprimand them in the manner in which he did. Moses’ behaviour therefore contributed to the people being mistakenly made to feel that G’d had been angry with them when this had not been the case at all. He had therefore “shortchanged” G’d, another way of describing the sin of מעילה, fraudulent use of someone else’s property. Moses’ technical error had been to interpret the words: “take the staff and assemble the people,” as an instruction to use the staff to strike with. According to Maimonides there is not a single word in the paragraph that could lead us to believe that G’d had been angry with the people.
   Nachmanides challenges Maimonides’ explanation by pointing out that when punishing Moses and Aaron G’d had said specifically both in Numbers 20,24 and again in Numbers 27,14 that both Moses and Aaron had been guilty of מריתם פי, ”you rebelled against My word.” There was therefore more to Moses’ sin than presenting the people with an image that did not correspond to the facts. G’d also accused them of not having had sufficient faith in Him,לא האמנתם בי, which shows that their punishment had nothing to do with their having allowed themselves to become angry and to display their anger. If the anger had been the major misdemeanour, surely the Torah would have mentioned this directly. Moreover, when in Numbers 31,14 Moses displayed anger at the officers of the punitive campaign against Midian who had allowed women to survive, we do not hear that Moses was punished for that display of anger. Moses’ anger on that occasion had been quite unjustified. Furthermore, the Torah itself on this occasion never accused Moses of having been angry. Addressing the people and describing their conduct as rebellious, does not mean that he had lost his “cool” and was displaying anger. In his parting speech to the nation (Deut. 9,7 and 9,24) he repeatedly reminded the people that they had displayed rebellious tendencies throughout the years he had been their leader, and no one suggested that Moses deserved to be punished for using such language. Besides, we see nowhere that Aaron had displayed anger on this occasion, and yet his punishment is lumped together with that of his brother Moses. Besides, it is psychologically impossible that of all the many occasions when the people had behaved in a rebellious manner ever since the Exodus, this occasion was so severe that it alone should have produced in Moses an unforgivable burst of anger. How many times did the people accuse him of having taken them out of Egypt only to have to face death in the desert when they would not even be buried with dignity? The people had sinned against G’d again and again, and Moses had accused them later that he had been punished on account of their sin as G’d had been angry with him! (Compare Deut. 1,37) From all the above it follows that the people sinned, not Moses. When reading the words of Maimonides we do not find a single word of indictment against the people; he treats the subject as if Moses alone had been at fault in the episode.
   When Maimonides said that we do not find that G’d had been angry with the people in this episode at all, but that by way of contrast G’d reacted with complete calm saying to Moses: ’take the staff, etc., and provide them with water,’ the reason, as we should know by now, is that whenever the people asked for life’s necessities, even if they did not ask in an appropriate fashion, G’d in His great patience responded positively, instead of chastising them for a relatively minor offence, i.e. the “how” of their request. Usually, G’d reacted only after having supplied the people’s needs, such as naming the location in a manner that recalled the people’s misconduct, examples being מסה ומריבה, קברות התאוה, תבערה. The names were reminders of the people’s sins at that location. On the other hand, when the people voiced totally unjustified complaints, G’d did react with anger. In this instance the phrase וירא כבוד ה' אליהם, “<i>Hashem’s</i> glory manifested itself to them,” is an allusion to G’d’s displeasure, similar wording being associated with a pestilence following as a sign of G’d’s displeasure after the revolt of Korach or the episode with the spies. (Numbers 16,19, 17,7)
   The most serious difficulty with Maimonides’ interpretation is the specific verse in Psalms 106,32 ויקציפו על מי מריבה וירע למשה בעבורם, “They (the Jewish people) provoked wrath at the waters of Merivah, and Moses suffered on their account.” The psalmist lists that sin of the people as part of the long list enumerated in that chapter.
   The explanation most likely to meet all the various problems we encounter in the Torah’s description of this episode, is that of Rabbeinu Chananel who writes that Moses’ major error was the use of the pronoun “we” when asking המן הסלע הזה נוציא לכם מים, “shall we produce water for you from this rock?” If Moses had said “shall He produce water for you?” he would not have created the impression that the power to produce water resided within him. When announcing the impending fall of the manna from heaven, (Exodus 16,8) Moses had announced the fact by crediting G’d with the phenomenon. When he failed to do so here, the people could have thought that he credited himself with the power to produce this water. [Aaron’s presence throughout, and his failure to remind Moses to speak to the rock although he had heard G’d’s instructions to Moses, made him guilty also. Ed.] A comparison with Exodus 17,5-7 shows that on that occasion G’d had announced that He would personally be on Moses’ side, directly above the rock, while Moses would strike the rock and water would come forth. The fact that on this occasion G’d did not indicate His personal involvement in the miracle, may have misled Moses into using language which could be misinterpreted. On the first occasion when the people still had the cloud of G’d traveling with them, the very position of that cloud indicated the <i>Shechinah’s</i> Presence. There had not been a promise this time that this cloud would, instead of resting above the Tabernacle, move to above the rock that would produce its waters. [This was not surprising, as on the first occasion there had not yet been a Tabernacle for the cloud to rest above. Ed.] In lieu of the cloud that showed that the water emerged as a miracle, this time, if the water had come forth from the rock only as a result of Moses addressing the rock, the miracle would have been manifest. By producing (apparently) the water as a result of striking the rock, Moses had missed an opportunity to sanctify the name of <i>Hashem,</i> a major sin of omission.
   Perhaps the criticism of Moses and Aaron as having מעלתם בי, “fraudulently abused something that is Mine,” refers to the fact that they made personal use of something that is G’d’s, seeing that the people now credited their water supply to Moses instead of to <i>Hashem.</i> The accusation מריתם פי, “you countermanded My order,” may have referred to the fact that neither Moses nor Aaron spoke to the rock as they had been told to do. Alternately, the meaning could be that G’d meant “seeing I did not tell you to speak the line: ‘shall we produce water for you from this rock,’ you in effect substituted your own words for Mine, an act of insubordination.” The meaning of the accusation לא האמנתם בי, “you did not have faith in Me,” is in the causative mode, i.e. your conduct is directly responsible for the fact that the people have less faith in Me.” It is also possible that the additional word להקדישני is meant to define the sin more narrowly not in the sense of the people losing some of their faith in <i>Hashem,</i> but in Moses and Aaron not having strengthened the people’s faith in <i>Hashem,</i> something which would have resulted from their carrying out their orders properly.
   According to the approach of our sages the fact that Moses had to strike the rock twice instead of only once, as on the previous occasion, resulted in a diminution of the people’s faith in <i>Hashem.</i>
   20,13. המה מי מריבה, “they are the waters of strife;” in <i>Parshat Pinchas</i> (Numbers 27,14) we read about מי מריבת קדש “the waters of the strife at Kadesh,” the letter ה in the word מריבה being missing. This is a hint at 5 errors Moses had committed. 
   1) Instead of assembling עדה a congregation of elders, as G’;d had commanded, he had assembled the whole community, כל הקהל. This resulted in the manifestation of G’d’s glory not taking place as it had on the occasion of the rock near Chorev. On that occasion G’d had promised Moses to be personally manifest (Exodus 17,5-7) The reason why G’d did not manifest Himself this time was that He could not do so in the presence of people who were ritually impure due to seminal discharges by people who had not purified themselves first, As a result of this absence of a manifestation of G’d’s presence Moses and Aaron asked: “do you expect us to produce water from this rock?”
   2) He struck the rock.
   3) He called the people: “rebellious people.”
   4) He struck the rock twice.
   5) He asked: ”are we to produce water from this rock?”
   ויקדש בם, “He was sanctified through them.” According to <i>Rashi</i> Moses’ and Aaron’s death for their sin was a way of sanctifying G’d’s name as when people observe that G’d applies strict yardsticks of justice even to His chosen people this will make them more G’d-fearing.
   Concerning the above Nachmanides writes that he does not agree with this explanation seeing that the people had not yet witnessed the death of either Moses or Aaron. Neither had the decree of Moses and Aaron’s impending death been made public at this stage. When they would die eventually, it was not clear what sin had brought about their death. When Uzzah, who had sinfully steadied the Holy Ark, died on the spot, this was a death that induced fear of the Lord as it occurred immediately after the sin. (Compare Samuel II 6,8) The same held true when Nadav and Avihu, the two sons of Aaron who took unauthorized fire in their censers died on the spot. Such deaths contributed to increased fear of the Lord, and the expression ויקדש בם, that G’d’s name became sanctified by their deaths, is appropriate in such instances. [Compare the expression בקרובי אקדש as a similar expression, in Leviticus 10,3. Ed.] Furthermore, seeing that the Torah wrote explicitly אשר רבו בני ישראל את ה' ויקדש בם, “where the Children of Israel quarreled with <i>Hashem</i> and He was sanctified by them,” we cannot make Moses and Aaron the subjects of this verse.
   In my opinion, we must understand the verse by comparing it to the first occasion when water from a rock was produced miraculously. On that occasion Moses had assembled only the elders, whereas on this occasion he had assembled all the people. The first time the miracle had been witnessed only by a small group of people, whereas this time the entire nation had witnessed it. It is therefore appropriate for the Torah to refer to these latter waters as the ones through which G’d had become sanctified as all the people had witnessed the miracle and had been impressed by what they had seen. We have a similar verse where G’d is described as having become sanctified as a result of the multitude having witnessed something. (Compare Ezekiel 39,27: וקבצתי אותם מארץ אויביהם ונקדשתי בהם לעיני הגוים, “when I have brought them back from the land of their enemies I will be sanctified in the presence of all the nations.”)
   You should realize that the confrontation the Torah speaks about began with the people quarreling with Moses, as the Torah wrote: וירב העם עם משה, and as it continues when Moses complained to G’d when he said: ”if they continue in this way they will stone me to death.” (Exodus 17,4) At that time they had sorely tested the patience of G’d when they said: “we want to see if G’d is indeed in our midst or not.” This time around they addressed their complaints also against G’d, but there was no נסיון, testing of G’d’s power or ability involved. This is why this time the waters are only referred to as מי מריבה, waters of strife, whereas the first time the waters were called מי מסה ומריבה, waters where a test of G’d and a quarrel had occurred. On the first occasion G’d had become sanctified only in the presence of the elders, whereas this time He had become sanctified before the eyes of all the people. Seeing that there had been two similar occurrences involving water coming out of a rock, it was necessary for the Torah to tell which of these events caused Moses’ premature death.
   
   20,14. אל מלך אדום, “to the King of Edom.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah does not bother to tell us the name of that king, as in the case of the King of Moav, Balak, whom the Torah named, or the names of such kings as Sichon King of the Emorites, and Og, King of Bashan, is simply that there was no need for us to know his name. The King of Edom was not known for any outstanding qualities, such as bravery, successful conquest, etc. Those kings, whom the Israelites defeated with <i>Hashem’s</i> help<i>,</i> were named in the Israelites’ prayers of thanksgiving. It is the Torah’s, respectively the Book of Joshua’s, custom to mention by name the kings whose countries the Israelites conquered.
   
   20,17. נעברה נא בארצך, “please allow us to traverse your land.” If you will compare a similar request made by the Israelites in connection with Sichon, King of the Emorites, you will find that there was no: “please,” and “let us,” but that the Torah reports the formula אעברה, “I wish to cross.” The reason is that by using a formula Esau himself had used in Genesis 33,12, i.e. נסעה ונלכה, emphasizing that they had similar interests, had something in common, Moses hoped to secure the king’s consent. Moses reminded the King of Edom that basically the two peoples were related by blood, and should have common interests.
   
   עד אשר נעבור גבולך, “until we have completed crossing your territory.” Nachmanides points out that Moses made no mention of the Israelites’ purpose in all being to reach the land promised by <i>Hashem</i> to their forefathers and to settle in it. He did not want to give that king any cause for being jealous of the Jewish people by making reference to their future. He did not want to open an age-old rivalry between Yaakov and Esau and thereby to renew ancient animosities. The Edomites might have disputed the validity of their forefather Esau having sold his birthright to Yaakov. Seeing that no such considerations applied to Moses’ dealings with Sichon and Og, he did not conceal from them why the Israelites needed to cross their respective countries.
   
   20,18. ויאמר אליו אדום, “Edom said to him, etc.” The Torah no longer adds the title “king” when speaking of Edom, indicating that the whole nation concurred with their King’s refusal to allow the Israelites passage through their country.
   
   20,19. במסלה נעלה, “we shall go up on the highway.” Nachmandes writes that in the initial request Moses implied that the people would enter the cities and but they would be careful not to enter rural areas and cause ecological damage. They would thereby distinguish themselves favourably when compared to undisciplined hordes of men and beasts invading a country. Now he narrowed this down even further implying that they would not even consume any of the drinking water available in that country except that which was freely offered for sale.
   
   רק אין דבר, “nothing negative will happen (due to our passage).” Moses tried to calm the fears of the Edomites as best he could.
   Ibn Ezra writes that that the expression דרך המלך refers to the route taken by the king himself, and that just as the king does not veer to the right or to the left, neither would the Jewish people. Alternatively, Moses meant that whatever route the king would assign to them they would be willing to abide by.
   
   20,21. ויט ישראל מעליו, “Israel turned away from him.” The Torah uses an abbreviated text, seeing that the Israelites desisted only because G’d had commanded them to desist and had forbidden them to provoke any confrontation wit the Edomites.
   
   20,26. והפשט את אהרן, “and disrobe Aaron;” the reference is to the removal of his priestly garments, the ones that were worn in addition to the four garments worn by ordinary priests. These garments were to be worn henceforth by Eleazar. According to the plain meaning of the text, Aaron was to exchange the normal garments for a shroud, a garment he already had at the ready. Eleazar stripped off his ordinary garments and exchanged them for the garments befitting a priest as he had done on the day he had been anointed as a priest.
   
   21,1. וישמע הכנעני מלך ערד, “When the Canaanite King who dwelled in Arad heard, etc.” According<i> to Rashi</i> the “Canaanite” mentioned here was in fact the Amalekite, as we know from the description of the spies who reported that the Amalekite dwelled in the south of the Land of Canaan. (13,29) However, they had misrepresented themselves to look like Canaanites, and this is why the Torah here describes them as they appeared to the Israelites at that time.
   Nachmanides writes that Arad was one of the (legitimate) Canaanite kings (Joshua 12,14) Furthermore, in Numbers 33,40 this king is described specifically as dwelling in the south, in the Land of Canaan. It is not customary for the Torah to refer to the “Land of Canaan” without further detail  (such as which tribe) except to the areas east of the river Jordan, as in chapter 34,2 later on. If this land had indeed been east of the Jordan, Moses should have included it in the allotment to the tribes of Reuven, Gad and half of Menashe. The nine and a half tribes all received their share of the land on the west bank of the river Jordan.
   Nachmanides therefore explains our verse as referring to a different king by the name of Arad, one whose territory was on the west bank of the Jordan, and this is why the Torah had to add that it was far to the south, not the lands conquered from Sichon and Og. [The whole problem is that if Arad had dwelled on the west bank, how could he have attacked Israel who had not set foot in that region as yet. Ed.] He assumes that this king dwelled between the river Jordan and the mountains of Yehudah, south of Hebron. He invaded the Israelites coming from another country. When this king heard that the Israelites had already reached the plains of Moav close to the river Jordan, the Torah reports that G’d accepted the Israelites’ prayer and delivered the Canaanites into their hands, and they made good on their vow and killed them now while Moses was still alive, who had decreed that none of the loot from that campaign was to be used personally, and it was all donated to the Temple treasury. The Torah added that even the cities belonging to that Canaanite king were placed in ban by the Israelites when they conquered them later in the days after Joshua’s death, and that they named that area <i>Chormah.</i> All of this has been recorded in Judges 1,16 where also the conquest of a town by the name of Tzefat is mentioned. At that time the tribes of Yehudah and Shimon co-operated in that campaign. In that chapter we are told that the sons of the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, ascended from the city of palm trees, (the former Jericho) to the desert of Yehudah in the south of Arad etc. It is not surprising that these names surface already in our <i>Parshah</i>, as it is not unusual for the Torah to refer to place names that were known to the reader of the Torah in later years although at the time the Torah was first written, and no one had a chance to read it yet, these places had not been known by these names. An example is that in <i>Parshat Beshalach</i> Moses and Aaron were commanded to preserve a bottle of the manna and they are reported as depositing it near the Holy Ark as a memento for future generations, although in fact this bottle was filled with manna 40 years later, shortly before the Israelites crossed the Jordan and the manna would stop falling from heaven.
   It is also completely in order to interpret that Israel at that time placed in ban this King of the Canaanites, i.e. defeated him and his people by the sword and commemorated the event by naming the site <i>Chormah,</i> although Joshua defeated that king after having crossed the Jordan at the same period as he defeated the 30 other kings of the Canaanites. To add detail, we are told in the Book of Judges that the tribe of Yehudah and Shimon had performed this feat, not Joshua personally, although he was the commander 
   
   
in chief, and therefore all the conquests during his lifetime are credited to him, also. In fact, this particular battle occurred after Joshua’s death had already been reported in the Book of Joshua. The author of the Book of Joshua even added that there had been military considerations why this part of the Land of Israel had not been conquered earlier. (Judges 1,19) The campaign represented the payment of the vow the Israelites had made to G’d when the events that occurred at the beginning of our chapter took place. By mentioning the name of the site already here, the Torah established the link between these two events in the mind of the reader of the Holy Scriptures.
   
   
   Parshat  Balak
   
   22,2-3. וירא בלק בן צפור וגו'....ויגר מואב מפני העם מאד כי רב הוא, “Balak son of Tzippor saw, etc…..and Moav was scared on account of The Jewish people because it was very numerous.” Moav was numerically very insignificant among the nations at that time in that region. The reason lay in their relative recent emergence as a nation, not like the Canaanites who dated back practically to 100 years after the deluge. The Israelites far outnumbered the Moabites at that time.
   The Moabites were well aware that the Israelites had no designs on their country as they had been specifically instructed by the Jewish G’d not to harass the Moabites, and not to provoke a military confrontation with them. They were also aware that even where the Israelites had engaged in war, they had not done so except when their request to pass peacefully through a foreign country had been rebuffed and been met with aggression by the ruler of that country. They merely dreaded the ecological damage the Israelites would leave behind in their wake if they were to be allowed to traverse the land of Moav. This is why they explained the nature of their concern when they sent emissaries to the elders of Midian to whom they explained graphically what their land would look like after the Israelites had trampled all the agricultural areas of their land. They were afraid that if the Israelites caused huge ecological damage to their economy they would wind up as totally dependent economically on the Israelites, almost as their slaves.
   
   22,4. זקני מדין, “the elders of Midian.” Quoting Ibn Ezra, Nachmanides writes that it is quite possible that these elders were the five kings of the Midianites, who because of heir advanced ages, are here described as זקנים, elders. If that is so, then the emissaries described in verse six, who included זקני מדין cannot have been the same זקנים mentioned in verse four. Surely, the five kings of Midian did not accompany the far less illustrious emissaries that Balak had sent to Bileam, emissaries, who by their own admission, were not of the highest levels of Moabite diplomats.
   According to our sages, who claim that the present head of state of the Moabites was of Midianite descent, it seems quite natural that Balak should send emissaries to his homeland in the first instance to investigate if he can forge an anti Israelite alliance with them. He would send the emissaries to the elders, not to the kings, as the elders were the ones who, due to their experience, were able to furnish good advice.
   It seems likely, that originally the Midianites had been ruled over by kings, and the same Sichon who had made war against Moav and confiscated a major part of their land, had also conducted a similar campaign against Midian, had defeated them and deposed them, and had instead appointed regional heads with far less political power than that wielded by kings. These are now referred to as זקנים, a title similar to that we read about in Judges 20,16 אל השערה meaning: “to the elders, who congregate near the gate of the town.” When we read in Numbers 31,8 ואת מלכי מדין, “and the kings of Midian,” the reference is to the men who had at one time been kings, but had been demoted by Sichon. The description of these people as ראש בית אב במדין is a clear indication that these people occupied subordinate positions, subordinate to the powers of kings.
   
   ובלק בן צפור מלך למואב בעת ההיא, “and Balak son of Tzippor was the king of Moav at this time.” Nachmanides writes that actually the paragraph should have commenced with referring to Balak as the King of Moav as soon as we are told of his name, describing his reaction to what had happened to Sichon and Og and their peoples. Nachmanides speculates that possibly, Balak had been known as a great warrior in his own right, and the Torah wishes to tell us that although the Moabites had a king who was such a warrior he was so afraid of the Israelites. This would also explain part of Yiphtach’s letter to the King of Moav some 300 years later in Judges 11,25 in which he asked that king sarcastically: “do you consider yourself superior to Balak? Did he start a quarrel with Israel or go to war with them?” He was afraid that he could not frighten the King of the Moabites except with a King of great renown, and Yiphtach himself was not even a crowned head of the Jewish people, so that the Moabites saw this as a sign of weakness of the Israelites
   It is possible that at this time Moav had not been ruled over by a king at all, and that they were terrified by the approaching Israelites. In such a desperate situation they did two things. 1) They appointed a king over themselves, 2) they sent to Midian trying to create a united front of these two peoples against the Israelites. Having come to an agreement with the Midianites, they sent a joint delegation to Bileam to ask him to curse the Jewish people. This would be the reason why the Torah spoke of בעת ההיא, “at that time,” as we would have known without these words that the Torah described current events, not history, in this paragraph. The meaning of the opening lines of our portion then would be: “Balak, a renowned warrior, one of the high ranking dignitaries in Moav, realised that the Israelites had succeeded in frightening his countrymen, and he used this opportunity to persuade them to appoint him as their king. One of the first actions he took was to forge an alliance with Midian, etc.” The Midianites had advised the people of Moav to appoint Balak as their king.
   According to the <i>Midrash,</i> the Moabites had had a king all along. He had held the rank of “prince,” but after the defeat of Sichon he had been promoted to the position of “King,” and the authority that this entailed. Balak’s promotion was not of a hereditary nature but was dictated by pressing external circumstances.
   
   22,5. ארץ בני עמו, “the land of his compatriots.” According to <i>Rashi</i> who holds that Balak was of Midianite descent, the words ארץ בני עמו refer to Balak’s people, i.e. the Midianites.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the words ארץ בני עמו refer to Bileam, informing us that Balak had been born in the same land as Bileam. The point of the Torah providing this detail was that Balak was a sorcerer, coming from a land full of sorcerers, a land in which Bileam was the High Priest of all the sorcerers. (Compare Isaiah 2,6 where the prophet denigrates the Jewish people for having forsaken their tradition in favour of relying on sorcery etc, something which was the domain of the ancient backward nations)
   
   22,6. ארה לי, “curse for me, etc.” In using the superfluous pronoun “לי,” Balak trapped himself as in the end Bileam cursed him. [Predicted the annihilation of the people of Moav. Ed.]
   
   22,7. וקסמים בידו, “with charms in their hands.” According to the interpretation of Rabbi Shmuel Hanagid, the delegation brought with them the money to defray the cost of these charms they expected Bileam to employ, [as they themselves could hardly tell Bileam which kind of charms to employ. Ed.]
   
   22,13. ויאמר אל שרי בלק, “He said to the dignitaries of Balak, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the elders of Midian abandoned the Moabite delegation as soon as Bileam requested that they stay overnight to wait for what G’d would tell him. They were aware through Yitro, Moses’ father-in-law, of how <i>Hashem</i> related to the Israelites and that there was no chance that He would permit Bileam to curse this nation. They had all been briefed by Yitro on the many miracles the Jewish G’d had performed on behalf of His nation.
   Ibn Ezra says that the reason why the elders of Midian are not mentioned again is simply that the delegation consisted primarily of the dignitaries of Moav and they were the principal spokesmen. This is also why only the return of the dignitaries of Moav is spelled out our portion, (verse 14)
   It is possible that the people referred to here as the “elders” of Midian had at one time been its kings (before they had been demoted by Sichon), and had traveled to Moav to hold consultations with Balak concerning the danger the Jewish people posed for them, and as a result of these deliberations they had all agreed to turn to Bileam and to invoke his prophetic powers. When Balak sent forth his emissaries their route took them through Midian as Bileam resided there or near its borders. Once the elders of Midian had reached their home town in Midian, they simply remained there and the emissaries of Balak traveled on in the direction of Bileam’s place of residence.
   
   מאן ה' לתתי להלוך עמכם, “<i>Hashem</i> has refused to allow me to go with you.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that Bileam presented G’d as having forbidden him only to go with this delegation of dignitaries, leaving open the possibility that he would secure permission to go with dignitaries of higher rank.
   Nachmanides disagrees, saying this could not be the meaning, seeing Bileam’s boast had always been that he had such close relations with <i>Hashem</i>. If he were to present <i>Hashem</i> as a deity that could be manipulated by him, he would thereby make himself laughable in the eyes of his petitioners. Bileam was convinced that G’d would not let him accompany dignitaries of higher rank either. It was only Balak who suspected Bileam of seeking a higher fee for his services who felt that he would agree to come if the price was right. This is why he sent a second delegation composed of high- ranking dignitaries.
   
   22,17. כי כבד אכבדך, “for I will greatly honour you.” He meant that he would pay him handsomely.
   
   וכל אשר תאמר אעשה, “and everything you will say (to me) I shall do;” Balak referred to anything he could do to facilitate such a curse on the Israelites he would do.
   
   22,18. ויאמר אל עבדי בלק, ”He said to the servants of Balak, etc.” The first delegation was described by the Torah as consisting of שרי בלק, ministers of Balak. The title conferred by the Torah on the members of the second delegation is that they were עבדי בלק, ”servants of Balak.” This sounds strange seeing that they had previously been described as of even higher rank than the first delegation. Perhaps the Torah merely wanted to show us the haughtiness of Bileam who considered even the members of this delegation as merely: “Balak’s servants.” When he spoke to them he related to them as someone’s underlings, not as high-ranking officers in their own right.
   
   22,22. ויחר אף אלוקים כי הולך הוא  , “G’d became angry at him that he was going, etc.”  Ibn Ezra, (verse 19) quoting Rabbi Saadyah gaon, raises the question: “how could G’d reverse Himself after He had told Bileam once that he must not go and curse that people seeing that they had already been blessed by G’d Himself?” He answers that <i>Hashem</i> did not want Bileam to go until Balak had sent a second and more impressive delegation. Ibn Ezra does not see any need for this explanation, seeing that the consent by G’d to someone undertaking a potentially disastrous enterprise is within the boundaries of his freedom of choice. G’d had told Moses to proceed and to begin the conquest of the land of Canaan (Deut. 1,21) clearly not wanting spies to be sent, and yet when Moses submitted the people’s request to send spies G’d told Moses: שלח לך אנשים, ”send out men on your own behalf.” (13,2) The people at the time were not full of trust in G’d, and claimed to want to investigate the best way to begin the conquest. Here too, the question that could be raised is: what need was there for Bileam to tell the servants of Balak that he would enquire from G’d once more, seeing that G’d had already said “no” once? Clearly, Bileam was ill intentioned, and when G’d saw this, He did not wish to deprive him of his freedom of choice at that point and let him dig a premature grave for himself if that was what he was bent on doing in clearly planning to thwart G’d’s desire. He therefore told Bileam that if he wanted to merely go with these people, He could not stop him, though He would prevent him from saying anything that would not please G’d.  (Rabbi Saadya gaon.)
   Nachmanides (on verse 20) rejects Rabbi Saadya gaon’s explanation out of hand, quoting that G’d had told Bileam the first time not only that he must not go with these men but that he must not curse, and that seeing that these people are blessed already the idea of effectively cursing them would be a non-starter. To Nachmanides it is preposterous to suggest that G’d would permit Bileam to go with higher-ranking dignitaries on a mission that had already been nixed by G’d when it had been requested from Bileam by lower-ranking dignitaries, in the name of the same Balak. As to Ibn Ezra’s describing G’d as having second thoughts and now allowing Bileam to go with the second delegation of Balak, this is not a valid interpretation of what the Torah reports. Bileam’s obstinacy in wanting to go was not what motivated G’d to change His instructions. The assumption that when a person insistently asks G’d to let him do something as being the reason why G’d “changes His mind,” is quite erroneous.
   In my opinion, writes Nachmanides, originally G’d prevented Bileam from going, in order to ensure that he would not curse a people that was already blessed and therefore immune to such curses. G’d showed Bileam that his journey would be foolish, embarrassing even, seeing that he could not keep the bargain he would make with Balak. Seeing that the dignitaries of Balak were not interested in Bileam for any purpose other than cursing the Israelites, what possible gain could Bileam derive from going with them? In other words, G’d had actually tried to save Bileam a major embarrassment by warning him not to go with these people. The delegation had also reported Bileam’s words faithfully, telling Balak that he had explained his refusal by his being duty bound to obey G’d’s command.
   Balak, however, had chosen to ignore the report of his emissaries, placing the least flattering interpretation on Bileam’s refusal, namely that he was only interested in upping the ante, and to demand more money before acceding to Balak’s request. Bileam did tell even the second delegation that the subject of his cursing the Jewish people did not depend upon him at all, and was entirely not within his power. Seeing that Bileam had not misled the delegations, G’d no longer had a reason to forbid Bileam’s accompanying the second delegation, as long as Bileam only lent them his presence as a famous prophet, not as an instrument of Balak who, for payment, would countermand his G’d’s orders, appearing to try and manipulate G’d. G’d even warned Bileam that if Balak were to pressure him to curse the people in spite of what Bileam had told him, He would be with him, seeing that what G’d wanted to show the world was that the Jewish people were not only blessed by Him, but even by an outstanding prophet of the nations at large. Had Bileam been honest and upright, he would have told that delegation that his very going with them would most likely result in his being bidden by G’d not only not to curse these people but to bless them instead, thus adding mankind’s blessing to His own. Had Bileam been frank with them, they most certainly would not even have wanted Bileam to come with them. When they saw that Bileam was quite anxious to come with them, even personally saddling his ass, they realized that Bileam’s previous reluctance was only a “diplomatic sickness” he had feigned, in order to command a higher fee, and that even at this point he was maintaining the fiction of being forced to be only G’d’s mouthpiece, no wonder that G’d was angry at him for misleading the Moabites into thinking that his own and their interest coincided. He had made them believe that the very fact that he was accompanying them now was proof that his G’d had approved of that mission. When Balak noticed that after all these twists and turns, in the end Bileam did not curse the people, he gained the impression that Bileam’s G’d had changed His mind once again, or worse that He was deliberately making fun of him.
   
   22,23. ותרא האתון את מלאך ה', “The ass saw the angel of <i>Hashem</i>, etc.” Nachmanides writes that it is impossible to understand these words literally, i.e. that the ass had a vision of an angel that held a sword, etc. Angels are disembodied beings not visible to the eyes of mortal creatures. Whenever prophets did have visions of angels, this was not a perception with their physical eyes, but they had been given supernaturally charged “eyesight” which enabled them to “see” these disembodies beings. There can be no question that beasts, that do not even possess a נשמה, divine soul, should be so endowed, even for such an occasion. We may therefore explain the words ותרא האתון את ה' as “the ass noticed something that frightened her very much,” the Torah explaining to us what it was that frightened her so much, i.e. the angel. Concerning the graphic description of the angel having a drawn sword in his hand,
   
   וחרבו שלופה בידו, the ass neither saw the angel nor the sword. The Torah tells us that the ass felt it was about to be struck, and therefore the Torah describes its fear in these terms. The ass had the impression that someone or something was about to slaughter it. This is why when the ass was suddenly miraculously enabled to speak, it asked Bileam if it had ever been in the habit of conducting itself in the manner displayed most recently. The ass itself was not clear why it had acted as it did all of a sudden. Had the ass seen an angel with her physical eyes, seeing that it had been granted the ability to speak, it would certainly have told Bileam that it had seen an angel with drawn sword, a most frightening spectacle, and that this was why it had acted so strangely. 
   If we were to say that angels appeared to beasts as visible to their physical eyes, how are we to explain that Bileam, who was a prophet to boot, did not see this apparition? It is, of course, possible that G’d lent special powers of perception to the ass at that time, just as He enabled it to suddenly speak coherently. The reason why G’d bothered to perform this miracle was to demonstrate to Bileam Who it was that endowed man (or beast) with the power of speech, or Who may therefore prevent him from speaking if He so pleases. It was an oblique warning not to resort to sorcery to enable him to curse the Jewish people seeing that <i>Hashem</i> had already pre-empted him. At any rate, our sages, when discussing this whole episode, mention only one miracle, i.e. the sudden ability of the ass to speak intelligently and coherently. This was so that Bileam should realize that the same G’d Who enabled the ass to speak could certainly make man say what He wanted Him to say.
   
   22,26. אשר אין דרך לנטות ימין ושמאל, “where there was no room to turn right or left.” This needs to be understood allegorically, [I suppose because both the words “right” and “left” are superfluous. Ed.] The words are understood as referring to people who veer theologically to the ‘right’ or ‘left, i.e. Avraham and Yitzchok each had a son who did not follow in his father’s footsteps. By the time Yaakov appeared on the scene of history all his children followed in his footsteps. The descriptions of the ability of the ass to pass the angel in the first two instances, though with difficulty, and not without discomfort to its owner, were to be a message to Bileam that by now there was no loophole in the conduct of the descendants of Avraham that would allow him room for his curse to be effective.
   
   אשר אין דרך, ”where there was no path.” Seeing that he had come to a narrow place where Bileam was deprived of the protection of the two lads he had taken along with him, we find here confirmation that when a threesome walks together, or even a twosome such as when Avraham and Yitzchok went to the way to the <i>Akeydah,</i> Satan was unable to frustrate their holy mission. Now when circumstances had arisen that forced Bileam to be on his own, Satan had a chance to target him. [This appears to be a departure from Tanchuma’s approach on that verse. Ed.]
   
   22,31. ויגל ה' את עיני בלעם, “<i>Hashem</i> uncovered the eyes of Bileam.” Nachmanides writes that the principal message of our verse is that there was a need to remove the spiritual blinkers from Bileam’s eyes, the blinkers that had prevented him from becoming aware of the angel. All this teaches that Bileam was not a prophet in the true sense of the word else G’d did not need to remove these “blinkers” from his eyes. We find something parallel in Kings II 6,17, when Elisha’s disciple needed to have similar “blinkers” removed with the help of <i>Hashem.</i> Hagar, the Egyptian maid of Sarah, also underwent such removal of blinkers that enabled her to “find” a well that had been nearby all the time. (Genesis 21,19) Such expressions never occur in connection with true prophets. Bileam is correctly referred to as a קוסם “a sorcerer,” When the Torah quotes him as revealing what “<i>Hashem</i> had said to him” regarding future events, this reflects only knowledge he had acquired by resorting to magic. When G’d did appear to him at night, this was not because he was a prophet, but this was in honour of Israel. Similarly, when he describes himself as מחזה שדי, someone accorded visions of the Divine, this too was only in honour of Israel, where he prophesied Israel’s feats in the future. When he returned to his home he is again referred not as a seer, or prophet but either without title or as the sorcerer when his death by the sword during the punitive expedition against the Midianites is reported in the Torah (Numbers 31,8 and Joshua 13,22 respectively)
   
   22,32. כי ירט הדרך, “for the path (you had taken) was obnoxious to me.” Nachmanides understands these words as “the person taking that path behaves in a manner irritating me extremely.” The root of the word when it appears in Job 16,11 ועל ידי רשעים ירטני, means: “He thrust me in the clutches of the wicked.” Basically, the meaning may be that although Bileam started out going with this delegation having secured permission for the journey, he corrupted it into a journey intended to defy and thwart G’d’s wishes by seeking devious means of cursing the Jewish people.
   
   22,33. אולי נטתה מפני, “had it not turned away to avoid me,” Nachmanides, quoting other commentators, writes that the word אולי here has the same meaning as the word לולי elsewhere, i.e. “if not.” He adds, that in his personal opinion the word is completely in place as is, and can be understood at face value. The ass, not knowing what exactly it was that threatened her, took evasive action as a possible means of saving itself and its rider. [The word אולי, identical to שמא in later Hebrew, i.e. in Nachmanides’ manuscript, means “perhaps, possibly.” Ed.] The angel tells Bileam that whereas he would have killed him he would have allowed the ass to survive.
   
   גם אותך הרגתי, “I would also have killed you, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that the words גם אותך are conclusive proof that the angel did kill the ass as soon as it had concluded what it had been programmed to say.
   Nachmanides writes that he word גם in our verse need not be interpreted in the usual manner, i.e. as meaning: “also”, seeing that it is inappropriate, for when used with Bileam who had not been killed by the angel, it would not make sense. Therefore, there is no reason to assume that the angel killed the ass, as Ibn Ezra would have us believe. Had the ass not evaded the sword, the angel would have killed the ass but would have allowed Bileam to live, [as clearly it had been instructed to do so by <i>Hashem</i> its boss. Ed.] We therefore would have to interpret what the angel said as meaning that if the ass had not taken evasive action the angel would have killed both Bileam and the ass.
   The word גם therefore must be understood in accordance with <i>Rashi,</i> as if the word גם had been written in front of the word הרגתי, meaning that the angel told Bileam he would not only have been prevented him from proceeding or have obstructed his journey, but he would even have been killed by him. In light of the ass’s evasive action, Bileam’s life had been saved and he had only experienced an obstruction. Seeing that your ass has made a detour for your sake and not for its own sake, you have struck it without provocation and you have repaid a kindness with malice instead of with gratitude. 
   The Torah has not taken us into its confidence by revealing if the members of the Moabite delegation had observed what had occurred or not, or even if they had thought that the ass had behaved in an unpredictable manner, as donkeys and other beasts of burden are apt to do from time to time. Possibly, they had been riding well ahead of Bileam and had not noticed what went on behind them. If so, they probably had not overheard the conversation between the ass and Bileam either. Our sages said that the members of that delegation did observe and hear what had been going on, adding that the ass died immediately after having had its say. They most likely derived their information from an oral tradition seeing that there is no indication in the written text about all this at all.
   
   22,35. לך עם האנשים אפס את הדבר, “go with the men, but only, etc.” According to Nachmanides it is quite possible that the meaning of the line is: “go with the men but inform them that you may only speak what I allow you to say.” Alternatively, after Bileam had confessed his sin and said to the angel that he would return home if it displeased the angel that he would continue on this mission, the angel meant “go with them for I have forgiven your sin, but be careful not to say anything other than what I shall tell you to say.” The angel had to add this latter remark so that Bileam would not have an excuse to think that he had now become a free agent. This is why Bileam informed Balak of this condition he was subject to as soon as he met him.
   
   הנה באתי אליך, “here I have come to you;” with these words, unnecessary words, Blieam meant to convey that although he had followed the invitation of Balak to come to him, this, and only this, is what he could do. He could not curse the Jewish people.
   
   22,38. היכול אוכל דבר מאומה, ”am I empowered to say anything?” He referred to anything that Balak wanted him to say.
   הדבר אשר ישים ה' בפי אותו אדבר, ”whatever words <i>Hashem</i> will put in my mouth are the ones that I will utter.” He meant that it did not matter whether these words would be a curse or a blessing, as he was there only in his capacity as <i>Hashem’s</i> mouthpiece.
   
   22,41. ויעלהו במות בעל וירא משם קצה העם, “he brought him up to the heights of <i>Baal,</i> and from there he could view the edge of the people.” Balak had brought him to an elevated piece of land from where it was possible to see some of the people of Israel. The Torah makes a point of telling us that Bileam could not see the whole people, seeing that the pattern in which they were encamped spread out in the four directions of the globe. This made it impossible to see more than some of them at one time. It was commonly believed that for a curse or a blessing to be effective, there had to be at least visual contact between the parties concerned. On the second occasion Balak informed Bileam in advance that he would only be able to see part of the people. Nonetheless he asked Bileam to at least curse the part of the people who were within his field of vision (23,13) He made it plain that he was unable to provide Bileam with a site from which he could see the entire encampment of the Israelites in all directions. Balak thought that possibly among the various sections of the people there could be a group of righteous people whom G’d did not want to be harmed in any way.
   
   23,3. וילך שפי, “He went alone.” Ibn Ezra, quoting Onkelos, says that the word שפי means “alone,” Other commentators understand the word as meaning “at an angle,” i.e. that Bileam was limping and could not walk upright. They derive this from Job 33,21 ושפי עצמותיו לא ראו, “that (from the context) up until then the deformity of his bones had not become visible.” The correct interpretation of the verse is that it parallels Jeremiah 3,21 קול על שפיים נשמע בכי, ”a sound is heard on the bare heights, weeping, etc.” The word אל, “to,” in front of שפי is missing here.
   
   23,4. ויקר אלוקים אל בלעם, “G’d happened upon (met with) Bileam, etc.” The Torah chose this expression for the encounter between G’d and Bileam in light of the fact that Bileam was not a prophet in the true sense of the word. Communications to Bileam from G’d, or even <i>Hashem</i> as in verse 17, are only due to G’d’s benevolent interest in the Israelites, as at the time of Avraham (Genesis 20,3) when He told Avimelech to return Sarah to her husband. This is also why the Torah speaks of G’d appearing to Lavan, warning him not to harm Yaakov. (Genesis 31,24) We must not err and assume that such nocturnal apparitions or voices of heavenly origin are testimony to the recipients being considered by G’d as especially deserving.
   
   שבעה המזבחות ערכתי, “the seven altars which I have prepared, etc.” Bileam sought to secure for himself G’d’s goodwill by means of these offerings, and he wanted that Balak join him in that endeavour. This is why the Torah describes both Balak and Bileam as presenting the bull and the ram offering (verse 2), one of them slaughtering the animal, the other sprinkling its blood on the altar. 
   The meaning of the verse (4) ויאמר אליו וגו, “He said to Him, etc.” are a prayer by Bileam asking G’d to accept his and Balak’s offering. In the course of the account we find that later on Bileam no longer asks Balak to be a participant in his efforts, as he was afraid that Balak’s very presence, -i.e. negative attitude- would disqualify it from having any chance of G’d welcoming it. The subject of ויעל, “he (sing.) offered up,”  instead of “they offered up, i.e. only Bileam, reflects  precisely this feeling of Bileam that Balak’s attitude should not act as a hindrance to <i>Hashem</i> accepting that offering. Perhaps Balak was indeed a party to this, not because he thought that this might be effective, but because he wanted to appease Bileam.
   
   23,5. וישם ה' דבר בפי בלעם, “<i>Hashem</i> put words in the mouth of Bileam, etc.” There are some commentators who derive from this that Bileam was unaware of the utterances he was about to make. G’d filled his mouth with words and told him to go back to Balak and “open your mouth to speak,” and the following words would come tumbling out of his mouth. Perhaps this coincides with what our sages had in mind when they said that G’d twisted Bileam’s mouth until it looked like that of a carpenter having nails between his lips, and is the correct interpretation.
   I do not think so, for the Torah goes on to quote Bileam (24,4) as saying (about himself): ”the one who hears the sayings of G’d and who sees visions of Shaddai.” שומע אמרי א-ל אשר מחזה שדי יחזה. The meaning of the words וישם...דבר is more likely that G’d trains Bileam so carefully what to say. [The difference between ויתן and וישם is always one of degree, the word always implying a more deliberate action. Ed.] In other words, pronouncements made by Bileam in the name of G’d are not “off the cuff remarks,” uttered casually, but are most deliberate and deserve to be examined minutely.
   
   23,7. מהררי קדם, “from the mountains of the east.” The word קדם is reminiscent of the קדמונים, far earlier generations who had erected either a pile of stones, or a מצבה, a monument in the sense of an altar, (Lavan and Yaakov) and had entered into a formal pact of peace between them. They had promised each other that neither would cross these landmarks while intending to harm the other. 
   
   23,9. כי מראש צורים אראנו, “For I look upon it as if from the top of rocks.” Seeing that Balak had taken Bileam to the nearest available hill in order to afford him a glimpse of part of the Israelites, Bileam uses the simile of rocks and hills when describing the vantage point from which he caught a glimpse of the people. Bileam perceives Israel as dwelling in solitary splendour, no other nation considering itself as its companion, unlike when many nations meet and form a united front or an economic or military union. The Israelites are joined together by a common ancestry that forms their national and cultural heritage known as the Torah. They are known primarily as descendants of Yaakov/Israel. This is why Bileam refers to them once as Yaakov, and immediately afterwards as Israel. (Verse 8) While true to their historic mission, they will always tower over all the other nations, and no one will be able to humble them.
   
   23,10. מי מנה עפר יעקב, “Who has counted the dust of Yaakov?” This is an apt simile, suggesting that they are as numerous as the dust of the earth that defies efforts to count it.
   
   ומספר את רובע ישראל, ”or who has numbered even a quarter of Israel?” Bileam declares himself as unable to even count a quarter of the banners of the Jewish people, suggesting that they keep forever increasing in numbers.
   
   ותהי אחריתי כמוהו, “wish that my end (final destiny) would be like theirs!” Bileam wishes himself the kind of share in life after death that is reserved for deserving Israelites. None of the Israelites are destined to perish in purgatory.
   
   23,16. ויקר ה' אל בלעם, ”<i>Hashem</i> happened upon Bileam.” Up until now G’d had manifested Himself to Bileam only in His capacity as the attribute of Justice; something that had kindled hope within the heart of Bileam that perhaps an opportunity would present itself to invoke this very attribute of G’d against the Israelites when he would recite some of their well known sins. Now that Bileam experienced a manifestation of G’d’s attribute of mercy, i.e. <i>Hashem</i>, he knew that there was absolutely no hope to be able to curse this people. This is why the Torah continues in 24,1 that Bileam saw that it was pleasing in the eyes of <i>Hashem</i> to bless the people.
   
   23,21. לא הביט און ביעקב, “He observed no iniquity in Yaakov.” Bileam explains why he had said that he could not countermand any blessing, i.e. why <i>Hashem</i> would not retract blessings bestowed on Israel. They had not given Him any cause to do so. Not a single person among the Israelites had become guilty of dealing deceitfully.
   The meaning of the word און in our verse is iniquity based on lies, deceit. Lies are referred to as און as well as עמל seeing that as a result of lies man is apt to reap only עמל, fruitless endeavour. Bileam is explaining that seeing he had been commanded to bless the people they would not be burdened with fruitless endeavours, their expectations would not be disappointed, prove deceptive, i.e. כזב. The reason why this is so is that they do not place their trust in powerless idols but in the Lord, the Creator, the supreme power that is able to make good on His promises. He had displayed that power when taking this people out of Egypt where their condition had seemed totally hopeless. The awesome display of G’d’s power at that time was comparable to the lofty horns of the wild ox. Seeing that there is no liar or cheat among them, how could their blessings be revoked?
   
   23,23. כי לא נחש ביעקב, “for there is no recourse to divination amongst the descendants of Yaakov.” Nachmanides writes, seeing that Bileam himself resorted to divinations as a tool of his trade, and Balak, who had been well aware of this had even sent him charms with which to ply his trade, charms to employ in his quest to curse Israel, Bileam felt compelled to explain now why such charms would be completely useless if used against Israel. Israel, i.e. Yaakov, have access to G’d all the time, and never have to rely on divinations to get a glimpse of what the future holds in store for them. Their fate is not determined by intermediaries of G’d, such as astrological constellations, but G’d, personally, involves Himself in supervising their fate. They are an integral part of G’d, חלק ה' עמו], compare Deut. 32,9. Ed.] Concerning Israel there is already a prophecy describing that nation as rousing itself like a lion in its prime, as a result of which it will attain ascendancy among the nations of the world as does a fully grown lion among the beasts. It will not come to rest in its own land until it has first devoured the previous inhabitants, much as a lion does not rest until it has devoured its prey. It will drink the blood of its enemies, (Onkelos‘ allegorical description of Bileams’ parable.)
   In effect, Bileam’s message to Balak was that the Israelites would eventually conquer the land of Canaan. Balak was aware that they had no designs on his country. Nonetheless, he wanted Bileam to curse them and he hoped that at least Bileam might be able to weaken that people, inflict some kind of defeat on them; this is why he persisted in taking Bileam to yet another vantage point from where he could see part of that nation. By saying (verse 26) קבותו לי משם, “curse it for me from there,” meant that he had given up on the blessings being revoked, but merely hoped that by adding a curse he, Balak, might achieve some partial victory, as had been achieved by the Amalekites and the Canaanites in the south of the land of Canaan who had put their army to flight. (21,3) Alternately, Balak hoped that by means of Bileam’s curse, all the lands of the Moabites that had been conquered by Sichon would be restored to him now.
   
   23,29. ויאמר בלעם אל בלק בנה לי בזה, “Bileam said to Balak: ‘build for me in this spot, etc.’” On the previous occasion the Torah reports Balak personally as building the altar (verse 14). Perhaps the reason was that at that time Balak still entertained some hope that Bileam would get around to cursing the people. Now, after Bileam had blessed the Israelites twice, he considered the situation as beyond repair and he was in no hurry to build more altars but took his time before following Bileam’s instructions.
   
   24, 1. ולא הלך כפעם כפעם לקראת נחשים, “he no longer went as every other time, toward divinations.” Nachmanides writes that on the previous occasions Bileam employed his sorcerer’s tools, wanting to curse the people, but <i>Hashem</i> happened upon him, i.e. as if by accident, not to endow him with real prophetic insights. Now that Bileam had been told by G’d, i.e. had been made to declare publicly that Israel is superior because it does not resort to divinations, etc., he absorbed the lesson and no longer resorted to the tools of his trade before viewing the people and awaiting inspiration. This is also why the Torah now explains that the source of Bileam’s inspiration had changed and
   
   24,2. ותהי עליו רוח אלוקים, “the spirit of G’d remained upon him.” Now the hand of <i>Hashem</i> rested upon Bileam similar to the phenomena experienced by true prophets. This is similar to what Moses had had in mind when he told Joshua that he wished every member of the Jewish people would be endowed with the kind of prophetic visions granted to Eldod and Meydod. (Numbers 11,29) As a result of this experience Bileam was now able to refer to himself as 
   
   24,4. שומע אמרי א-ל, “the one who has first-hand experience in hearing G’d’s words.” This was another way of declaring himself as a prophet.
   
   אשר מחזה שדי יחזה, “who sees the vision of <i>Shaddai.”</i> He had now received the kind of vision which men such as the patriarchs enjoyed when at the beginning of Avraham’s career the Torah reports in Exodus 6,3וארא אל אברהם, אל יצחק, ואל יעקב בא-ל שדי, “I appeared to Avraham, to Yitzchok, and to Yaakov in My capacity as the G’d <i>Shadday.”</i> It is also possible that here we speak about one rung lower for מחזה שדי is not equivalent to א-ל שדי.
   
   24,7.וירם מאגג מלכו, “his king shall be exalted over Agog.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this is a reference to the king of Amalek, who had been named by Bileam before he was even born.
   Nachmanides writes that it is quite possible that every Amalekite King was known as Agag, much as every King of Egypt was known as Pharaoh seeing that the original Amalekite King was in fact called Agag. Any descendants of that king, if they ascended the throne, adopted the name of the original King.
   
   24,11. ועתה ברח לך אל מקומך, “and now, flee to your place, etc.” He did no longer ask him to curse the Israelites seeing that Bileam had told him that G’d had told Avraham that anyone cursing him or his descendants would himself be cursed by Him. (Genesis 12,3) Another reason was that Bileam had told Balak that the Israelites would consume all those who would oppress them. (24,8) He had included oppressors from all nations. Originally, Bileam had limited his remarks to what would happen to the Kings of the Canaanites, but now that he had widened the scope by including oppressors of the Israelites from any quarter, Balak had decided to refrain from antagonizing their G’d. He was convinced that he could not prevail.
   
   24,14. לכה איעצך, “I shall advise you;” Nachmanides writes that seeing that Bileam wanted to predict the disaster that would befall Moav as we read in 24,17 ומחץ פאתי מואב, “it will smash the nobles of Moav, this is why he now introduces his comments as “well-meaning advice.” This was said to Balak in private, not within the hearing of any of his servants.
   <i>Rashi</i> interprets the words לכה איעצך, as Bileam adding further details to what he had already said concerning what the Israelites would achieve in the future.
   Nachmanides adds that in his own opinion Bileam is telling Balak that he is about to reveal to Balak the advice G’d will give to His people how to deal with Moav when the time comes, just as He gives this kind of advice to Israel concerning any of the other nations at that time. The word עצה appears in that sense in Isaiah 14,26. A person receiving and accepting advice is called נועץ. The prophecy announced here by Bileam applies to the end of time, i.e. to the period immediately preceding the final redemption and the coming of the Messiah. All of Bileam’s prophecies refer to the future, but follow a chronological pattern once the period to which they apply has commenced. They begin with describing the Jewish people as an integral part of G’d Himself and His heritage, followed by the description of their conquest of the land of Canaan, how they will kill many kings, etc. In his third prophecy he envisions Israel on its own land being fruitful and multiplying. A later stage, that of the defeat of Agag, at the hands of a Jewish king, but not yet a king of the Davidic dynasty whose descendant in due course will usher in the Messianic age, is envisioned by Bileam, but he qualifies it by saying that though he foresees it, it is not relevant at this time. At this point, Bileam describes himself as knowing what is in G’d’s mind even in the distant future. In other words, he presumes to foretell events that he has not been specifically told about in a vision, but which he knows by intuition, his being on a wavelength with G’d. 
   When the Torah commences with the words:וישא משלו ויאמר, in verse 16, and he does not mention that what follows is a prophecy as he had done on the previous three occasions, it is clear that what follows is not something that he had heard from the mouth of the divine vision he had experienced. Nonetheless, the fact that he speaks of himself also here as the שומע אמרי א-ל, “the one who has heard words of G’d,” it is clear that the origin of what follows is divine, no less so than the previous prophecy.
   
   24,17. דרך כוכב מיעקב, “A star has come forth from Yaakov;” The reason why the Messiah is compared to a star is that he will gather in the Israelites who at that time are dispersed all over the globe, and a star shines in the sky and is visible all over the world. He envisions a man who will come forth from the edges of the horizon and wield a staff of authority.
   
   ומחץ פאתי מואב וקרקר כל בני שת, “he shall smash the nobles of Moav and the foundations of all of mankind.” The Messiah will not just be a King of the Jews but will be accepted as head of all the nations. The reason that Bileam singles out the nobles of Moav in that context, is to set Balak’s mind at rest that the ultimate destiny of the Moabites is not to fall victim to an Israelite King in his guise as an Israelite, but in his capacity as mankind’s saviour. The Moabites will not escape this man’s grasp although they are insignificant among the nations, and had not fought against the Israelites in the war preceding the coming of the Messiah..
   
   24,18. והיה אדום ירשה, ”Edom will become a conquest;” Bileam prophesied concerning the defeat of Edom at the hands of the Messiah. Nowadays, (at the time of the author) our exile is that imposed upon us by Edom, seeing that the Romans are descendants of the original Edom. The reason Bileam singled out Edom from all the other nations is that Edom had been the first to contest Israel’s right to exist as a separate nation. That dichotomy had already started in the womb of Rivkah, as she had been told by G’d in Genesis 25,23.
   
   24,19. והאביד שריד מעיר, “he will destroy even the remnant of the city.” In other words, there will not remain any survivors of the Amalekites in any city on the globe. At the beginning Bileam had spoken of וקרקר כל בני שת, that the Messiah would uproot all the various nations of the world; now he amplifies that there would not remain any survivors from the people of Amalek anywhere
   According to Ibn Ezra this whole prophecy describes David’s rule. Some commentators understand the words כל בני שת as the descendants of Lot, and that seeing that Bileam mentioned the פאתי מואב, the nobles of Moav [Moav was a son of Lot and his daughter. Ed.], Bileam expands further on the theme of what would happen to the various descendants of Lot. Some commentators understand the שריד מעיר as referring to people whose descent from the original Sheth can be verified. Yet other commentators derive the word שת here not from the third son of Chavah, but from השחית, destroying, so that Bileam would describe the Messiah as destroying even all those who try to hide from him, i.e. he would destroy all organized states.
   
   24,20. וירא את עמלק, “He saw Amalek;” According to<i> Rashi</i> the word וירא, “he saw,” refers to Bileam’s mind’s eye; he observed the retribution that would befall Amalek.
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible that we can understand the word וירא at face value, i.e. as what Bileam saw with his physical eye, seeing that from his vantage point on the top of Peor, it was quite possible to look down on the cities of Amalek who dwelled in the mountains across the valley. He went on to say that although Amalek was (among) the first organized nation-states at his time, so that it bore the title ראש העמים, “first among the nations,” nonetheless, in the end it would be utterly destroyed. Bileam paraphrased what G’d had already foretold Moses in Exodus 17,14 that He, personally, would utterly destroy that nation.
   
   24,21. וירא את הקיני, “He saw the Kenite, etc.” The land of the Kenite was also visible from the elevation on which Bileam was standing, seeing that he dwelled among the Amalekites, as we know from when King Sha’ul asked the Kenites to leave that land before he made war against Amalek (compare Samuel I 15,6) Bileam’s words to them, i.e. וישא משלו ויאמר, were in the nature of advice, such as when he describes the place where that tribe resides. At the time, the Kenite i.e. descendants of Yitro, were still dwelling in Midian, and only after they were allocated land by the Israelites did they become a separate tribe. Their settling on a rock is meant to show that they had something in common with the Jewish nation when they (the descendants of Moses’ father-in-law) ascended from the city of Palms in the valley to higher ground with the tribe of Yehudah. (Judges 1,16) He continued:
   24,22. כי אם יהיה לבער קין, “for if the Kenite should be laid waste, etc.” They would have no reason to worry, as their exile would end at the time the Assyrians would take the ten tribes captive. There would be no residents left in the land formerly occupied by the ten tribes, so that the Kenites would have no one to restrict their tenure.
   
   עד מה אשר תשבך, “where to can Assyria take you captive?” This is a rhetorical question, designed to reassure; “how long could your exile under the Assyrians possibly continue?” You would, at the least, be redeemed at the same time as will Israel, whereas if you were to throw in your lot with Amalek you would face utter annihilation just as Amalek.
   
   24,24. וצים מיד כתים, “and Tzim from Kittim;” a reference to the Romans.”
   
   וענו אשור, “they will afflict Ashur.”(Assyria)
   
   וענו עבר, “they will afflict those on the other bank of the great river.”
   
   וגם הוא עדי אובד, “but it too will be destroyed forever.” It will face destruction in the end just as will the Kittim (the Romans). Bileam concluded his words with a reference to the Romans and their perishing ultimately, as they were symbolized by the fourth of the four beasts in Daniel’s famous vision (Daniel chapter 8) According to the unanimous opinion of our sages the Roman Empire, or its successors, will be vanquished by the Messiah. May we soon live to see this prophecy come true!
   Even though in Genesis 10,4 כתים is listed as one of the four sons of Yavan, (commonly regarded as the forerunner of the Macedonians and Greeks) and they are the third (not fourth) of the four beasts in Daniel’s vision, the true state of affairs is as follows: seeing that the descendants of Elisha Dodanim and Tarshish, the other sons of Yavan, were not numerous, they were lumped together under the heading of their father Yavan, who between them formed the third empire discussed in that chapter of Daniel. The Kittim, however, developed into a numerous and powerful nation so that they are considered the fourth of the empires in Daniel’s vision. This power will be predominant until the Messiah will destroy it when he comes.
   Ibn Ezra explains the expression ראשית גוים, not as “the first of the nations (ever),” but as the first of the nations warring against Israel. Its end will be utter destruction in the days of the first Jewish King, Sha’ul who killed every man woman and child, the prophet Samuel killing the King, Agag, whom Sha’ul had failed to kill, a sin of omission which cost him his dynasty. He explains the words ושים בסלע קנך, (verse 21) not as an advice but as a warning that even if you were to build your nest in a solitary inaccessible rock this will not save you. The words לבער קין refer to the time when the Kenite will be laid waste by the all-consuming army of the Assyrians. “Ashur” is in the feminine mode, a reference to the camp of Ashur [the word מחנה in Hebrew may be used both in the masculine and in the feminine mode. Ed.] When Bileam refers to Ashur taking the Kenite captive, however, in verse 25, Bileam foresees the time when the Assyrians who had thus far taken others captive, will themselves become victims and will perish completely. The meaning of the word עבר, is a reference to the Kenites who had “crossed over” to the Israelites, had thrown in their lot with theirs, and as a result had suffered exile when the Israelites did, but they would not be wiped out as did the other pagan nations Bileam speaks of.
   Some commentators say that the meaning of צים is similar to that of ציים in Isaiah 34,14 where it refers to wildcats or hyenas. Bileam compares Ashur to these animals, animals that men sometimes dress up as, i.e. they are impostors. This explains the previous line אוי מי יחיה משמו א-ל, “who can survive when he comes up against human (such as the King of Ashur) beings that try to play G’d?” [An appropriate comment in view of the boastful messenger of Pul, the King of the Assyrians. [Ravshakeh in Kings II 18,9-19-8. Ed.] 
   
   25,1. לזנות בבנות מואב, “to commit harlotry with the daughters of Moav.” <i>Rashi,</i> basing himself on the Talmud in <i>Sanhedrin 106</i> where Bileam is reputed to have suggested to the Moabites that they seduce the Israelites adopts that version in the Talmud as fact.
   Nachmanides writes that the harlotry described here was not a sexually motivated kind of harlotry initiated by the Moabite women at all. These women were encouraged by their husbands to trap the Israelites into committing a capital offence against the moral code of the Torah, as a result of which they would become guilty of the death penalty. The elders of Midian were instrumental in all this, and this is why a Midianite princess had seduced the leader of the tribe of Shimon. (verse 14-15) Seeing that Bileam was one of these, he too was killed subsequently by the sword of the Israelites.
   However, looking at the unadorned text, the פשט, we must remember that the Torah did not spell out the nature of the advice Bileam offered Balak. All the Torah did spell out was that when the members of the punitive expedition against the Midianites returned from their campaign and among the loot there were female prisoners, Moses became angry at their officers, chiding them for having allowed the very women who had seduced the people at Shittim to live. (31,14-18.) He explained that the main reason why the campaign had been fought was to take revenge on the seducers. By explaining that the Midianites had a prominent share of the guilt in that debacle, he had hinted at the source of the plan to seduce the Israelites. (25,17-18) Bileam’s prediction of what the Israelites would do to the Moabites in the distant future had its rationale in what the Moabites were now about to do to this people, a people who had not provoked them but had meticulously respected their borders.
   It is possible further, that by following the plain meaning of the text, Balak was originally intent on cursing the Jewish people and to wage war against them, but that when Bileam had warned him that he would not succeed, and he had added that at any rate the Israelites would not pose a threat to him even ecologially, at least not until the distant future, Balak decided to welcome them as neighbours, bringing out food to show that he was interested in friendly relations. He seduced them by making believe that he was sincere, and this is the meaning of the words בדבר בלעם, (31,16) i.e. due to the reassurance received from Bileam that he was in no immediate danger. At that time Balak had no evil intentions. However, the fact that he had harboured hostile intentions and had gone to the length of hiring Bileam is enough reason why he should be punished. In the event, the retribution would be long delayed. The Torah spells this out in Deut. 23,5 when Balak is once more referred to as having hired Bileam
   25,5. הרגו איש את אנשיו, “kill, each one of you, his guilty counterpart.” The Jerusalem Talmud <i>Sanhedrin</i> 10,2 reports that each of the judges killed two Israelites, as there were a total of 78600 judges, and according to this 157.200 Israelites were executed on that occasion.
   Nachmanides questions the statement in the Jerusalem Talmud reminding us that a capital crime may not be judged by only one judge. Furthermore, if correct, the tremendous number of missing Israelites should be reflected in the census the Torah reports as having taken place immediately after this event, as per 26,2. He therefore comes to the conclusion that the words איש את אנשיו refers to the judges who had convicted the active participants and whom G’d had commanded Moses to hang after their execution, would each be executed by the court of his tribe, so that not all judges had to participate in all the executions, but only in the executions of members of their particular tribe. [In other words, the word אנשיו restricts the individual judges’ duties as executioners. Ed.]
   I believe (Nachmanides’ words) that the correct interpretation of the whole paragraph beginning with the words (verse 3) ויצמד העם, is that initially the debacle began with some of the people worshipping the idol known as בעל פעור. This evoked G’d’s anger at the people of Israel and the plague began to take its toll among the people. G’d simultaneously told Moses to tell the judges to carry out their judicial duties in order to insure that the innocent would not fall victim to the plague, which did not distinguish between the loyal and the disloyal Jews. Once the whole community had been assembled at the entrance to the Tabernacle in order to carry out Moses’ instructions, and it was found that the plague continued to kill Israelites, Zimri came and presented the Midianite princess using her to incite a rebellion against Moses. by, among other things, challenging Moses who had himself slept with a Midianite woman, Tzipporah. This caused both Moses and the elders to commence weeping, seeing that Moses did not have an answer that would have sounded convincing, This was the signal for Pinchas to take the law into his own hands in order to put a stop to the plague. We know that he succeeded as the Torah reports that as an immediate consequence of Zimri and Cosbi being stabbed to death the plague ceased. (verse 8) There had not been enough time to convict a single member of the people by court of law. The proof is that G’d ordered them to be hanged, seeing that they had not been convicted legally. [Hanging after execution is called תליה not הוקעה. Ed.] This is the reason why the Torah does not report that Moses’ instructions to the judges had been carried out.
   It is possible that the intention of the sages in the Jerusalem Talmud quoted earlier was to inform us that if the order to execute the guilty people had indeed been carried out, each of the judges would have had to execute two Israelites. The vast majority of them were saved by the courageous deed of Pinchas. They survived at this point, but they did not cross the Jordan into the Holy Land as the Torah testifies that G’d destroyed all the persons that had been actively involved in this sorry affair. (Compare Deut.4,3)
   Parshat  Pinchas
   
   
   25,11. פינחס בן אלעזר...בקנאו את קנאתי, “Pinchas son of Eleazar. when he displayed his jealousy on My behalf.”  Seeing that <i>Hashem</i> is also known as a “jealous G’d,” (Exodus 20,5) meaning that He acts as such vis-à-vis people who worship idols, Pinchas’ act of taking the law into his own hands, religious intolerance, need not be interpreted as an act of jealousy on behalf of his own agenda. G’d tells Moses that but for Pinchas’ action and motivation He would have continued killing the Israelites by the plague. 
   
   25,12. לכן אמור, “Therefore, say! etc.” the words “to the Children of Israel,” are implied here. Moses was to announce to the Israelites that Pinchas had acquired hereditary rank as a priest.
   
   הנני נותן לו את בריתי שלום, “I herewith grant him My covenant of peace.” According to the plain meaning of the text family members who might act as גואל הדם, having the license to kill him by reason of being blood relations. Seeing that Zimri was a high-ranking member of the Israelite society there might have been numerous people who would have welcomed a chance to do just this. Apart from this assurance, his real reward would be that both he and his descendants would be priests. 
   
   25,17. צרור את המדינים, “Harass the Midianites!” On the one hand, the word צרור is in the singular mode, whereas the word following i.e. והכיתם is in the plural mode. This is a hint to Moses that seeing he will give the necessary orders and select the soldiers that campaign will be credited to him, although, naturally it would require quite a few people to wage the actual war. The reason why Moses, personally, should not go with those soldiers is the fact that he had been raised and given refuge in Midian and the hand that had been fed by the Midianites should not now turn and bite that hand.
   
   25,18. בנכליהם, “with their conspiracies,” according to Nachmanides the Midianites were the ones who originated the plot to seduce the Israelites by even supplying their own socially high ranking women for the purpose. They also conspired to make sleeping with their women dependent on at least a superficial show of respect for their deity the <i>Baal Pe-or.</i> According to tradition, the manner in which that deity was worshipped was so revolting, i.e. one excreted in front of that idol, that no one in their right minds could have believed that this was a form of worship rather than an insult to their deity. Having dispatched Cosbi, whose rank the Torah describes here, to seduce the highest-ranking Israelite she could find, is an indication of the Midianites’ hatred for the Israelites. It is most likely that even if he did not think up this devious plot himself, Bileam was at least aware of it. This Cosbi, no doubt, was a woman of great physical allure, and she was sent on her ill-fated mission precisely because she was so attractive. It is quite possible that the reason why Bileam detoured on his way home via the land of Midian was in order to find out how the plot to seduce the Israelites had worked out. As a result, the army of the Israelites found him there and killed him. The officers were well aware that he must have had a hand in that plot. Israelites do not kill people who prophesy something negative concerning them unless specifically ordered to do so by the Torah or its authorized representatives. Incitement is a different story, however. In this instance, G’d had ordered all those that had been part of that incitement actively or by not protesting it, to be killed. The campaign was aimed only at the Midianites, as G’d had already forbidden the Israelites to harass the Moabites in any way.
   I am somewhat at a loss how to understand the wording of the <i>aggadah</i> according to which (<i>Baba Kamma</i> 38) it had never occurred to the Israelites to either harass or invade Moav so that G’d had to specifically for bid this? Where had there ever been a precedent that Moses would initiate warfare without express permission by G’d? The Talmud there answers that Moses used his logic, reasoning that if G’d had told him to launch a punitive expedition against the Midianites who had only been involved in the plot at arm’s length, so to speak, and G’d ordered us to punish them, how much more must we launch a similar expedition against the Moabites who were the instigators of all of this? The Talmud appears to have put the cart before the horse seeing that the warning not to harass Moav or wage war against it had been issued by G’d before the incident at Shittim or Bileam’s being hired to curse the Israelites! We may have to answer that it was clear to <i>Hashem</i> that once Israel had defeated and occupied the lands of Sichon and Og, with G’d’s permission, of course, Moses would reason that it was natural that the next step would be to cross into Moabite territory by crossing the river Arnon. G’d pre-empted such reasoning by Moses by forbidding the Israelites to provoke any confrontation with the Moabites. [The Talmud there has G’d explain to Moses why He forbade this, also in light of future events. Ed.] The matter was especially hard for Moses to understand because the very people who were not to be harassed were the people that because of hostility to the Israelites in the past, had been forbidden forever to convert to Judaism and become part of our nation. (Compare Deut. 23,4-8)
   Looking at the plain text, the reason why at this stage at least, no confrontation with either Moav or Bney Ammon was permitted, is the fact that G’d had allocated their lands to them in recognition of the years when their founding father Lot had faithfully served Avraham and had kept his secret and not reveled that Sarah was not only a blood-relation to him but was also his wife. Lot had joined Avraham at the time when the former moved to the land of Canaan, and this was akin to voluntary exile, all in order to keep company with his uncle whom he admired. The eventual commandment not to accept proselytes from either of those two nations, was explained as an act of מדה כנגד מדה, the punishment fitting the crime, as the Torah explained in Deut. 23,4-8.
   
   26,2. מבן עשרים שנה ומעלה מבית אבותם, “from twenty years and up according to their respective fathers’ house.” When enumerating the tribe of Reuven, the Torah here omits the addition למשפחותם, ”according to their families,” which we had found in the previous census (Numbers 1,2). The reason is that in the interval of almost 40 years some intermarriage with the members of Korach’s family had occurred, as a result of which such members of Korach’s expanded family perished with him. [This is not surprising, as the discontented Reuvenites had felt sympathy for Korach’s rebellion and intermarriage between them was based on common interests. Ed.] (The author refers the reader to his commentary on Numbers 1,18 where he dealt with this at greater length)
   
   26,5. חנוך משפחת החנוכי, Chanoch, the Chanochi family;” Nachmanides speculates that the reason why suddenly the tribes are divided into their respective families, may have to do with the opinion according to which the land was distributed in equal measure to the 12 tribes, so that the numerically weak tribe of Shimon received as much land as the numerically strong tribe of Yehudah. The Torah would then be telling us that the distribution of the land within each tribe followed a similar pattern, i.e. the basic family units, בית אב which was based on the 20 year olds at the time of the Israelites arriving in Egypt. At that time Reuven had four sons, so that the land allocated to the tribe of Reuven would have been split into 4 equal parts, regardless of demographic changes in the respective numerical strength during the intervening 250 years. [210 in Egypt 40 in the desert. Ed.] Although, at the time of this census, the families of Chanoch, Phalu, Chetzron and Carmi, were quite different from one another numerically, for the purpose of the distribution of their family plots in the land of Israel they were all treated as equal in numerical strength. As far as the Torah instructing (verse 54) לרב תרבה נחלתו ולמעט תמעיט נחלתו איש לפי פקודיו יתן נחלתו, “to the numerically strong you shall increase the amount of his inheritance, whereas to the numerically weak you shall give proportionately less, each according to his count shall be given his inheritance,” this is a principle that is repeated in Joshua 16,1. This is the reason why at this census the basic units are the composition of the families that had descended from Canaan to Egypt with their patriarch Yaakov. This is also why,- as opposed to the census in <i>Parshat Bamidbar</i> -the word לגולגלותם, “according to their headcount,” does not appear at all.
   
   26,9. ובני אליאב נמואל ודתן ואבירם וגו', “and the sons of Eliav were Nemuel, Datan and Aviram, distinguished etc.;” Nachmanides writes that the latter detail was recorded here so that we would know that the entire inheritance (of land in the land of Israel) of the family of Palu-i accrued only to Nemuel. We know that both Datan and Aviram were swallowed up by the earth together with their entire families during Korach’s revolt.
   Alternatively, in accordance with views expressed by our sages, <i>Baba Batra</i> 118, the purpose of singling them out was to tell us that in spite of the principle of the distribution being governed by who arrived as adult in Egypt, the members of these families had forfeited their claim due to their conduct in the desert.
   
   26,40. ויהיו בני בלע ארד ונעמן, ”The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman.” 
   [Our author refers to a <i>Rashi</i> on verse 36 in which <i>Rashi</i> quoted Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon who tried to account for the 5 missing families when we compare with the seventy members of Yaakov’s family that descended to Egypt and who are presumed to be the counterpart of the 70 families of the nations at large enumerated in <i>Parshat Noach</i> as the backbone of mankind. You will note that of the 10 sons of Binyamin enumerated in <i>Parshat Vayigash</i> 46,21, only 5 are appearing in our verse. Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon is quoted as saying that Ard and Naamon may have been in their mother’s womb at the time Yaakov traveled to Egypt, so that their inclusion in the families to whom land would be distributed would pose no problem, is itself problematic, as are other aspects. I will now continue to let the author speak. Ed.] 
   As to <i>Rashi’s</i> quoting Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon that Ard and Naaman descended with Yaakov to Egypt, while their mother was pregnant with them, he does so because he could not reconcile their being listed as heads of families, seeing only people who immigrated to Egypt are considered as such.
   Nachmanides writes that if it had been possible to argue that these two had indeed immigrated to Egypt at that time, Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon would not have faced any problem at all. As it is, if these two had been born prior to arrival of their fathers in Egypt, the Torah should have listed 72 descendants of Yaakov traveling, not 70, seeing that at that time 10 sons of Binyamin were alive. On the other hand, if they were born after arrival of their mother or father in Egypt, how could they qualify as heads of families that were entitled to a share in the land of Israel under that heading? This is why Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon concluded that they were in the womb of their mother while their mother traveled with her family to Egypt. If we accept this, we need also to accept the notion that Yocheved was born at the entrance to the gates of Egypt, so that she was included in the number 70 that without her is not complete. All of these explanations are extremely forced and difficult if not impossible to substantiate.
   We may say that Ard and Naamon, the real sons of Binyamin, died in Egypt after having married but before having had children, so that the levirate marriage was performed on their widows and the first child of each of these marriages was named after their deceased father. Seeing that their fathers had been of the family members of Yaakov descending to Egypt, they inherited the right to be regarded as founding members of the people in the distribution of shares in the land of Israel.
   The correct interpretation is that Ard and Naamon who had been listed in <i>Parshat Shemot</i> [there is no such in the Book of Exodus, I presume what is meant is Genesis 46,21. Ed] as part of the 70 were in fact grandsons of Binyamin, as they are described here where they are listed as sons of Binyamin’s firstborn son Bela. They are listed similarly in Chronicles I 8,3-4. [Ard appears there as Adar Ed.] On the other hand, we must remember that grandsons are often described as sons in the Bible. The best known example may be Genesis 29,5 where Lavan is described as the son of Nachor although we have met him as the son of Betuel, (Genesis 24,9) who was a son of Nachor.
   If we were to reconstruct history on the basis of what is logical, we must remember that the whole subject of distribution of the land is not dealt with only in terms of who arrived in Egypt and when, but also in terms of who left Egypt and at what age. The enumerating of “families,” משפחות, is not restricted to the ones who existed prior to the descent into Egypt. Examples are the families of Ephrayim and Menashe, whose founders were born in Egypt. It was an old established custom among the Israelites to establish family heads, a custom not as much in evidence among other tribes. It was a source of pride for the descendants of such family heads (founders) to be able to number themselves as members of their respective families. This custom intensified ever since after the Israelites settled in Egypt they began to multiply at an accelerated rate. It became a sort of unwritten law for everybody to know and treasure and correctly trace his ancestry. In view of the enormous growth of the Jewish people during the years they stayed Egypt, the only way to preserve such identities through a number of generations was to know who the founding father of the family had been. Those who were able to trace themselves back to Yaakov in Canaan did so, others traced themselves back to the most distant founding father that could be established with certainty, even if the founding father of that family did not date back to the period prior to the descent of Yaakov to Egypt. The fact is that most of the families mentioned here were able to trace themselves back to the period preceding Yaakov’s descent to Egypt.
   
   26,42. אלה בני דן למשפחותם, “these are the sons of Dan according to their families.” Nachmanides writes that Shuchim had many sons all of whom started families of their own, all of whom both called themselves in a manner recalling the founding father of the family, as well as reflecting in their name that of their respective immediate fathers. This is why at the end of the paragraph the Torah repeats the word משפחות twice in the line אלה משפחות דן למשפחותם, “these are the families of Dan according to their families.”
   According to the school of thought that claims that all these people counted traced themselves back to the members of Yaakov’s family that descended to Egypt, there must have been many families that simply called themselves by names born by their forefathers who had been born already in Egypt but that here they were all traced back to Shuchim as he was the only one of Dan’s sons who had been born before he came to Egypt.
   
   26,46. ושם בת אשר,”and the name of the daughter of Asher, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that the reason that lady was singled out by name as the only daughter of whom there must have been many, was that she was still alive at the time when this census was taken.
   Nachmanides writes that if that were the reason, why did Onkelos translate this verse as ושום בת אחת אשר, “and the name of Asher’s only daughter was Shum.” [This is not the version of Onkelos that appears in our editions where we have ושום בת אשר סרח, “Asher’s daughter’s name was Serach.” Ed.]  
    According to Nachmanides her name was mentioned because seeing that he had only a daughter and no sons, she inherited her father’s portion of the ancestral land when Joshua distributed same. She was mentioned for the same reason that Tzelofchod’s daughters were mentioned by name. If Serach had been the daughter (instead of granddaughter or great granddaughter) she would not have qualified for such an inheritance seeing that Asher did have sons of his own as we know from Genesis 46,17 where 4 sons and their sister Serach are listed. What made her different was that although Asher’s wife was her mother, she did not have the same father as had Asher’s sons who were listed as her “brothers” i.e. half-brothers. This is why the Torah does not simply introduce her as ובת אשר, “and Asher’s daughter, but with the prefix “and the name of Asher’s daughter.” She was known as Asher’s daughter, her name being Serach, although Asher was not her biological father..
   I do not understand his words (our author concerning Nachmanides) for the mystery deepens as we do not know who the man was who fathered Serach, and on the strength of her father not having any sons she inherited her father’s portion of the land. After all, Serach was of the people who took part in the Exodus and the people who descended to Egypt were only seventy in number and all of Yaakov’s sons had sons so that they qualified as males. Furthermore, seeing she is listed as being alive when the Israelites arrived in Egypt she must have survived past the Exodus (210 years +) in order to qualify under the heading of the generation that left Egypt.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, Serach presumably had a great and numerous family, all of whose members were known by the name of their matriarch. The Torah decided to include her in the list of the families of the sons of Asher for purposes of the census, but the Torah did not want to list their genealogy as descended from a female i.e. לסרח משפחת סרח, and that is why the Torah abbreviated here. All of the tribes are listed in the same order as they had been listed in <i>Parshat Bamidbar</i>, i.e. in the order in which the tribes were encamped around the Tabernacle. The only change is that in this census Menashe is mentioned ahead of Ephrayim.
   Ibn Ezra writes that this change of the order in which Ephrayim and Menashe are listed is because the members of the tribe of Ephrayim had decreased by approximately 8000 souls during the 40 years in the desert. Previously, the members of the tribe of Ephrayim had outnumbered those of the tribe of Menashe by approximately 10000, whereas now the members of Ephrayim numbered approximately 20000 fewer than those of Menashe.
   
   26, 54. לרב תרבו נחלתו, “For the numerous you shall increase his inheritance;” According to <i>Rashi</i> this means that the tribe whose population is numerous will be allocated a larger slice of the land than the tribe whose population is fewer in numbers. In other words, different tribes received territorially different amounts of land.
   Nachmanides writes that the opinion of the sages in the Talmud, after a debate on the subject, was that division of the land was not related to the headcount of the various tribes, but that each tribe received the same amount of land. Each tribe took the portion that he drew when the lots were drawn. This explains the complaint of the members of the tribe of Joseph that in spite of their having a numerically strong population, the amount of land per square cubit available for each member was considerably less than that available for a member of a less populous tribe. (Compare Joshua 17,14) This is also the meaning of:
   
   26,55. לשמות מטות אבותם ינחלו, “according to the names of their fathers’ tribes shall they inherit.” 
   26,56. בין רב למעט, “between the numerous and the few.” All tribes received equal amounts of land regardless of how numerous they were. If so, what was the meaning of the words לרב תרבה נחלתו וגו', “to the numerous you shall increase his inheritance?” (Verse 54) We must understand this as the internal division of the land within each tribal territory. Families that had many children received larger plots than families who had only few children.
   Alternately, the internal division was not based on the numbers in each family at this time, but on the numbers in each family at the time of the Exodus. In other words; if a family consisted of a father and ten sons at the time of the Exodus, but that family had by now shrunk to half its original size, the family was still allocated the amount of land based on the family’s original size. This was how the words לרב תרבו נחלתו were applied. On the other hand, if a family at the time of the Exodus had only five sons, and in the interval there were 10 sons, all of them had to share an inheritance based on five sons. This is the meaning of למעט תמעיט נחלתו. 
   The approach to the whole paragraph then would be that the land would be distributed based on families mentioned in the Torah by name. This is why the Torah wrote במספר שמות, “according to the number of names.” In other words, the distribution was based on a head count, but not on a head count of the number of souls, but on a headcount based on people whom the Torah singled out by name. The lot mentioned was used only to determine which named tribe would receive which named share of land, the shares being equal in size, though, of course not equal in value. The reason why the matter of the גורל is repeated once more in verse 56 is to tell us that even within the tribe the plots of land were distributed by lottery, so as to minimize friction and jealousy.
   
   26,57. ואלה פקודי הלוי, “And these are the numbered ones of the tribe of Levi.” Nachmanides writes that he does not know why the census of the Levites is introduced at this juncture. He suggests that perhaps it is because the ones numbered now are the ones to whom each of the tribes had to cede some portion of their land in order to have the 48 cities populated by the Levites who had no land holdings other than the strip of greenbelt surrounding their respective towns. The size of those towns would be based on Levites already alive at this time, those born later would not be able to establish additional such towns or to increase the size allotted to the town in which their parents lived.
   It is also possible that the Torah inserted this paragraph at this time in honour of these Levites, as otherwise it would appear to the reader that the Kings’ (G’d’s) legion, i.e. the Levites, were treated less respectfully than the commoners.
   Amram and his wife Yocheved were mentioned by name separately, as the tribe of Levi was basically divided into the plain Levites and the descendants of Aaron who were priests. Nachmanides writes further that he is wondering why the Torah first enumerates the families of Levi by counting three separate family heads of the Levites, i.e. Gershon, Kehat and Merari, and then proceeds to also enumerate the next generation when repeating details of their offspring describing them as משפחות, families, [with their appropriate heads, Ed.] although in the case of Merari there were only two sons, Machli and Mushi, how could the Torah speak of משפחת המררי? (Compare Numbers 3,20) The reason the Torah does not speak of Amram’s family, i.e. משפחת העמרמי, is because this family would be subdivided into Aaron the head of the priests, and the ordinary Levites, be they descended from Gershon, Merari, or Kehat, excluding Aaron son of Amram. The Torah at this juncture does not mention that Aaron was the priest, out of respect for Moses The same holds true for the report of the genealogy of the tribe of Levi in Numbers 3,17, where Aaron’s office as High Priest is not mentioned. [Seeing that Aaron as the priest is listed there in verse 32, this editor does not see the comparison as valid. Ed.] The reason why the family of Yitzhar is described under the heading of Korach, (verse 58) is that originally at the time of the first census Yitzhor had other sons alive, i.e. Zichri and Nefog, and both of these sons had their own sons by now. By the time of the present census the only surviving sons of Yitzhor were the sons of Korach, concerning whom the Torah had testified that they did not die in the uprising. (26,11) As a result, the family of Yitzhar henceforth was known as the descendants of Korach.
   I do not believe (Nachmanides writing) there was a valid reason why Yitzhar’s name should be expunged among his descendants; however they did this after the revolt of Korach in honour of Korach’s sons who had had the courage to defy their father and to remain loyal to both G’d and Moses, an example for future generations, as testified by the Torah itself.
   In the <i>Midrash</i> of Rabbi Moshe Hadarshon on the meaning of the words כי אתם המעט, in Deut 7,7 where the letter ה at the beginning of the word "המעט"  is understood  as a hint at the five of the 70 families that founded the Jewish people and with whom Yaakov descended to Egypt as having died out, this is not correct. He claims that whereas Levi had originally 8 sons, (families) here only five are mentioned. Three of those so-called original eight were only belonging to a different generation, Gershon, Kehat, and Merari.
   I also do not follow why in lieu of Yitzhar, all his descendants should not describe themselves as descended from Korach. On the contrary, we have a principle that the names of wicked people should rot, and Korach most certainly was such a wicked person. Why should his name be commemorated for all time? (The last paragraph is not part of Nachmanides’ commentary on this verse.)
   26,59. אשר ילדה אותה ללוי במצרים, “whom she bore (Levi’s wife) Levi in Egypt.” Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning that all of Yaakov’s children with all their respective children arrived with him in Egypt, so that after that no more children were born to Levi after Yocheved, we must assume that Yocheved was deliberately born at such a late date. [Nachmanides already explained that Moses had to be born late in terms of the date G’d had set for the redemption, as if he had been born earlier G’d’s timetable for the Exodus would have been upset. Compare Nachmanides on Genesis 46,15. Ed.]
   
   26, 63.  אלה פקודי משה ואלעזר, “These are the ones counted by Moses and Eleazar.” The Torah now reverted to the Israelites that had been counted, not the Levites, for among the former the wording of “none of the ones counted here were included in the men counted by Moses and Aaron.” The reason is that the decree that the males over 20 that had been counted in the desert of Sinai had to die in the desert had not applied to the Levites. The Torah had stated that of the earlier generation only Calev and Joshua had been exempt. If the Levites had been included in the decree, how come that Pinchas and Eleazar had survived?
   
   26,64. ובאלה לא היה איש מפקודי משה ואהרן, “and among those counted now there had not been a single one who had been counted by Moses and Aaron.” Even though Joshua and Calev were still survivors of the original census, they were not included in the present census as only men between the ages of 20 and 60 were counted, and both Calev and Joshua were far older by then. However, when the Torah states that no man except Joshua and Calev had survived from the original census they had been mentioned because they had been included in the original census.
   
   27,3. והוא לא היה בתוך העדה הנועדים על ה', “and he had not been among the assembly that had assembled against <i>Hashem,</i> etc.’” The daughters of Tzelofchod had to state publicly that their father had not been a member of the rebels with Korach who had at any rate forfeited their claim to ancestral land in the land of Israel, they had to mention that their father had died on account of another sin.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text, the reason that these girls mentioned that their father had not been a member of the gang of rebels with Korach was that they thought that Moses must surely hate anyone who had been connected with that group, as they had targeted him personally in their uprising and incitement of the people against him. They were therefore afraid of not getting a fair hearing from him. They also had to hint that their father had not died during the plague G’d had sent on several occasions in which groups of Israelites had been killed. This is why they had to mention that he had died as a result of a sin committed as an individual, not as part of a group.
   
   כי בחטאו מת, “but he died as the direct result of his personal sin.” They meant that he had died in the desert and therefore could not cross the Jordan and take possession of his ancestral heritage.
   Rabbi Yehudah Halevi, the famous poet, comments that the word בחטאו is to be understood as belonging to the words ובנים לא היו לו, meaning that part of his punishment was that he was not granted male offspring. Many people attribute the fact that they have been denied certain normal blessings in life to the fact that they had been guilty of some sin, as a result of which G’d denied them these blessings.
   
   27,11. והיתה לבני ישראל לחוקת משפט, “This shall be for the Children of Israel as a decree of justice.” This will be a law from now on not only for the people that were about to enter the Holy Land.
   
   27,12. עלה אל הר העברים, “ascend Mount Avarim, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the true name of the mountain was Nebo, as has been spelled out in Deut. 32,49 and elsewhere. The reason it has been referred to here by a different name, one that reflects its precise location, is that it is near the place where the river Jordan would be crossed by the Israelites. It is approximately directly opposite the ancient city of Jericho. The word עלה!, an imperative, was not meant to be complied with immediately, otherwise how could Moses have waited until after the 12000 men engaged in the punitive expedition against Midian had returned from there before ascending that mountain?. The reason why this command is reported here is that the Torah wanted to tell us that when Moses would ascend that mountain he would be shown the various locations where the different tribes would settle, and he would, at least, have the satisfaction of having seen all this with his own eyes.
   
   27,18. קח לך את יהושע בן נון, “take to yourself Joshua son of Nun;” this too was a reference to the day on which Moses was to die. The Torah concludes with reporting that Moses displayed no reluctance in carrying out these orders, on the contrary, he asked G’d to appoint a suitable successor who would take his place when the time came.
   
   27,19. וצוית אותו לעיניהם, “you will command him before their eyes;” R<i>ashi</i> comments that Moses presented the Israelites to Joshua as a nation that sorely tried any of its leaders, a people most difficult to govern, their having assumed that Moses would tolerate their difficult behaviour as a matter of course. [He wanted Joshua to know what kind of a burden he would assume by becoming leader. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> comment is not correct, as it would not be good manners for Moses to make such statements in public at that time. On the contrary, instead of being effective, psychologically speaking, such a comment by Moses at a time such as this would have a counterproductive effect and the people would become even more difficult. Accordingly, Nachmanides understands the words וצוית אותו לעיניהם as G’d’s instruction to Moses to impress upon Joshua, that now that he would assume such an awesome responsibility he must become very sensitive to the needs of the people, to their sense of dignity, etc. At the same time, he must know that the final responsibility rested on him when major decisions had to be made and he must be firm and fearless. When the people would hear how Moses had publicly impressed upon Joshua the qualities that a leader must display at all times, they in turn would feel confident that a man so instructed by the incomparable Moses would indeed do everything to live up to the task entrusted to him. Moses acted precisely in this manner, as we know from verses 22 and 23.
   According to my personal opinion (Nachmanides speaking) the plain meaning of the text is that the appointment of Joshua as Moses’ successor had to be made in public, in the presence of all the people so that it could not be challenged later on, or so that it could not be viewed as an high handed act by Moses. Nachmanides quotes several examples from Scripture where the expression ויצוהו על is used to describe the appointing of someone as a prominent leader with wide ranging powers.
   
   28, 2. צו את בני ישראל, “command the Children of Israel, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> comments that in spite of the fact that a similar instruction had already been issued in Exodus 29,38, the instructions there were limited in validity to the seven days during which the Tabernacle was being consecrated. The legislation commencing in our verse is for all times when sacrifices can be brought.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi</i> is not correct, as in Exodus 29,42 the Torah had added the word תמיד לדורותיכם, which means that the legislation is of unlimited duration. We must therefore understand the legislation as follows: After the manner in which the land of Israel would be shared out among the various tribes had been explained, i.e. לאלה תחלק הארץ, (26,53) the Torah concluded the whole subject of the sacrificial offerings, seeing that while in the desert the offerings known as מוספים had not been presented at all, and there had also not been any libation offerings, נסכים in the desert. Now that the people were on the threshold of entering the Holy Land, the Torah had to restate some of these laws in the manner in which they would apply once the people were on their own land. This applied also to the offerings whose details were not introduced under the heading of כי תבואו אל הארץ, “when you will come to the land, etc.” The latter introduction had only been used in connection with the libation offerings in Numbers chapter 15.
   
   את קרבני לחמי, “My offering, My food; etc.” In the <i>Sifri</i> the word קרבני, “My offering,” is understood as referring to the blood of the offering that gets on the altar, whereas the word לחמי, literally “My bread,” is understood as applying to the meat parts burned up on the altar. The words לאשי, literally “to My fires,” are understood there as applying to the meal-offering, the parts the priest closes his fist over as well as the frankincense. The expression ריח ניחוח, literally “sweet fragrance,” is applied to the spoonfuls of incense presented with the showbreads each Sabbath. The תשמרו –in the same verse- means that no animal is to be offered on the altar unless it had previously been observed for a number of days and it was found to be unblemished. It also means that during the procedure of the slaughter, etc., delegates of the other tribes of the Israelites, Levites, as well as priests should be nearby. The word תשמרו which appears here as well as in Exodus 12,6, where the first communal offering, the Passover, has been described as being checked out during 4 days, is to tell us that any sacrificial animal must be examined during no less than four days before it is offered on the altar.
   
   28,7. שכר, “intoxicating liquid.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word as excluding newly made wine that has not yet become alcoholic, the liquid not yet having fermented.  Nachmanides queries that since we know that such wine if it had been offered is not disqualified retroactively, we can see that the requirement was only a cautionary decree by the Rabbis, this could not be the meaning of the word here. He concludes that therefore the meaning is that watered down wine is not acceptable.
   Nachmanides writes further that the Torah mentions the amount of fine flour to be used as part of the daily meal-offering accompanying the daily burnt offering, and it also mentions the amount of wine used in the libation, both in the daily offerings and on the corresponding offerings on the New Moon. Similar measurements for the libations are, however, not mentioned in connection with the corresponding offering on the Sabbath and all the other festivals. The reason maybe that although these measurements are mentioned in the section dealing with the libations (Numbers 15,4-12) in connection with the meal-offerings and libations for the bull, ram, and sheep when these are free-willed offerings such as different categories of vows and individual offerings on the festivals, we find different measurements (double) in the meal offering accompanying the <i>Omer, or that on Shavuot</i> the meal-offering also comprises 10 loaves of leavened bread.  Similarly, these standard measurements are varied in connection with the קרבן תודה, people who have to present thanksgiving offerings. Basically, seeing that the libations do not vary in measurements, allowing for the size of four-legged animal that they accompany, they, i.e. their measures have been written first in conjunction with the daily communal offerings known as תמיד. They do not have to be mentioned again as they are not subject to variations in their measures at all. The size of the מנחה on the first day of Tabernacles has been mentioned (29,14) something that did not need to be repeated on the subsequent days of that festival other than a brief note such as “and their meal offerings and libations in accordance with the law.” The משפט, “law,” referred to is the size of the libation on the first day of that festival. This still leaves us with the question of why there was a need to specify the size of the libation on the New Moon more so than on any other days in the calendar. Perhaps one can explain this by saying that seeing the legislation of the offerings on that day introduces the concept of the so-called מוספים, “additional” communal offerings, the Torah saw fit to also give details of the accompanying libation of each mammal being presented.
   
   28,11. ובראשי חדשיכם, “and on your New Moons, etc.” Some commentators understand this verse as applying to the New Moon of the month of <i>Nissan,</i> seeing that the New Moon of that month has been described asראשון הוא לכם לחדשי השנה, “it is the first New Moon for you of the moons of the year.” (Exodus 12,2) This would explain why the Torah concludes (verse 14) our paragraph with זאת עולת חדש בחדשו לחדשי השנה, ”this is the burnt offering of each New Moon on the successive moons of the year.”
   
   28,12. ושלושה עשרונים...לפר, “three-tenths ephah of fine flour for the meal-offering with a bull.” The measurement specified here was for each bull,; similarly, the measurement for the flour for the meal-offering accompanying the sheep or ram was for each of the respective animals. This is derived from the repetition of the word עשרון, עשרון. Not only that, but the addition of the words לשבעת הכבשים, “for the seven sheep” in verses 21 and 29 make it plain that the measurements given were not for the whole offering but for each animal that was part of that offering. The reason why the hint is given with the sheep is that there were so many sheep that were being offered on the altar. The Torah did not bother to spell out the details of each libation/meal offering separately for each animal as there were no fewer than a total of 196 such animal offerings on the seven days of Tabernacle alone. [Not including the Sabbath. Ed.]
   
   28,16. ובחודש הראשון בארבעה עשר יום לחודש, “And in the first month on the fourteenth of the month, a Passover for the Lord.” This was a special warning to present the Passover, (each householder, as rule) it was mentioned here once more in conjunction with the other offerings of the festival of unleavened bread. The Torah abbreviated here by only mentioning the name of that offering as all its details had already been spelled out in chapter 12 of the Book of Exodus.
   
   29, 6. מלבד עולת החודש ומנחתה, “not including the New Moon offering and its accompanying meal-offering.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah mentions only the עולה, burnt-offering of the New Moon by name, as well as its meal-offering, without mentioning the sin-offering. When summing up the offerings on the Day of Atonement, (verse 11) the Torah proceeds in a reverse fashion by mentioning by name the sin offering while omitting specific reference to the burnt-offering of that day. The reason, most likely, is that it was clear that the burnt offering commanded to be offered on that date was in addition to the daily burnt-offering, תמיד, seeing the legislation for both had been given on the same day. The two could not be confused with one another as one consisted of two bulls plus a ram, whereas the other consisted of a single bull plus a ram. [Plus seven sheep. Ed.] (Day of Atonement) Seeing that the sin-offerings on both days were identical, it was possible to err. One could think that on a single day no two sin-offerings (public) could or would be offered. In order to prevent us from making such an error, the Torah wrote מלבד חטאת הכפורים, “apart from the sin offering  (exclusive) to the Day of Atonement.” The distinction of that sin offering (compare Leviticus 16,15) was that its blood was sprinkled on the golden altar. This sin offering, the flesh of which was completely burned up, atoned for sins committed by violating the sanctity of the Temple, etc. The sin offering of the day of the New Moon, in common with that of the other festivals, was offered on the major altar outside the Sanctuary, and seeing that both legislations were revealed to the people on the same day, it was clear that they could not be identical. There was also no need to especially mention the sin-offering as part of the additional sacrifices on <i>Shavuot</i> as it is clear that all the animal sacrifices mentioned there were only supplementary to the two loaves of the new wheat harvest, the major מנחה, gift offering, consisting of grain-based ingredients. On the first of the seventh month, i.e. <i>Rosh Hashanah,</i> seeing that the day is both the beginning of a new year and a new month, one could easily have thought that no additional sin-offering was required, seeing that every New Moon a publicly funded sin offering is offered; the Torah therefore had to spell out that one sin-offering belonged to the ritual of the New Year, and another to that of the New Moon.
   
   30,1. ויאמר משה אל בני ישראל, “Moses said to the Children of Israel, etc.” <i>Rashi,</i> basing himself on Rabbi Yishmael in the <i>Sifri,</i> justifies this verse by stating that whereas up until now the Torah had reported the words of G’d to Israel, the legislation introduced about vows could prove confusing as the pronoun endings in the words לבד מנדריכם, “except for your vows, etc.” in verse 29,39 could have been misunderstood in that Moses did not teach the legislation about the offerings on the festivals until each festival was about to occur. By making an interval before the legislation about vows in chapter thirty, it becomes clear that what was written before had already been revealed to the people by Moses.
   Nachmanides comments that he does not understand what <i>Rashi</i> had in mind. He quotes Leviticus 21,24 where at the conclusion of the chapter dealing with physical blemishes which disqualify a priest from offering sacrifices in the Temple, there is a similar verse to that we find here although one could not possibly justify that verse by the type of the reader’s confusion cited by Rabbi Yishmael in the <i>Sifri</i>, the subject at the beginning of chapter 22 being one that is totally different from that just concluded. Moreover, at the end of Leviticus, when Moses had concluded the legislation about the festivals, [excluding the sacrificial service on those days, Ed.] the Torah also inserts a verse signaling this conclusion when writing וידבר משה את מועדי ה' אל בני ישראל, “Moses informed the Children of Israel of the festivals of <i>Hashem”</i> (Leviticus 23,44). The subject matter commencing with chapter 24 there also does not allow for any confusion with what preceded it, and yet the Torah saw fit to insert an apparently superfluous verse.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, we have to understand that although in the most recently concluded chapter the role of Aaron and his sons, [the role of the priests, generally, Ed,] had not been spelled out, as opposed to the legislation about the festivals in the requisite chapters in Leviticus, and the words of Moses are reported as addressed “only” to “the Children of Israel,” this must not be misunderstood. Once the Children of Israel would take up residence in the Holy Land, some of them hundreds of kilometers from Jerusalem, they might think that the whole subject of sacrificial service on the festivals is one reserved for the priests. By stressing that Moses addressed the Children of Israel, ignoring the priests as people who are different, the Torah reminded the people at large that all of them had a vital role to play in making these festivals meaningful, the duty for the males to make a pilgrimage being only one part of this. Not only this, Moses did not even repeat the term מועדי ה'', “<i>Hashem’s</i> festivals,” which had been used so prominently in the relevant chapters in Leviticus. All of this was designed to impress the people that the legislation was relevant in the highest degree to the entire nation, to all its members.
   As to the <i>Sifri,</i> i.e. the <i>Midrash</i> of Rabbi Yishmael quoted by <i>Rashi,</i> the meaning of the word להפסיק, to establish a break in continuity, is that contrary to the principle of establishing conceptual linkages, based on two subjects in the Torah being written one adjoining the other, here we are not to apply the principle of דורשים סמוכים, of trying to make <i>halachic</i> parallels between such subjects.
   Personally, (Nachmanides speaking) what Rabbi Yishmael had in mind was that if the Torah had concluded the previous section with the line אלה תעשו לה' במועדיכם, (29,39) and had immediately commenced with וידבר משה אל ראשי המטות זה הדבר וגו', “Moses spoke to the heads of the various tribes: this is the thing that <i>Hashem</i> has commanded, etc.,” we would have construed the next chapter as being a continuation of the previous chapter, and would have assumed that the entire legislation about the public offerings to be presented in the Temple on the various festivals had been relayed by Moses to the heads of the tribes, for them in turn to relay it to the individual members of each tribe, instead of our knowing that the entire legislation had been communicated by Moses directly to the whole people.
   Parshat  Mattot
   
   30,2. וידבר משה אל ראשי המטות, Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes, etc.” Nachmanides writes that seeing previously the Torah had written: “excepting your various offerings in fulfillment of vows, etc.,” (29,39), and those vows had involved only vows made to G’d, not personal vows made to oneself as in the chapter commencing here, the Torah now reminds the people that any utterance made by a human being in the form of a vow or oath, (or even without such a specific formulation) he must honour. [There is no such concept as “this is between me and myself, no one else’s concern.” Ed.] 
   Other commentators see in the fact that the following legislation was addressed in the first instance to the heads of the tribes, i.e. judicial heads, a hint that if someone refuses to honour vows he has made or oaths he has sworn, he is being punished physically until he recants his refusal and agrees to honour the vow in question.
   Nachmanides writes further that seeing that contrary to common practice, this chapter has not been prefaced by the introductory line “G’d spoke to Moses telling him to say to the Israelites,” or something similar, the Torah makes up for this omission at the end of the chapter (verse 17) by stating that “these are the statutes that G’d had commanded Moses, etc.”
   ראשי המטות לבני ישראל, “the heads of the tribes of Israel.” These were the ones who replaced the first generation of such princes, carriers of the various banners, who had included such illustrious figures as Nachshon ben Aminadav, who had courageously entered the sea of Reeds before it had been split.
   It is possible that the men referred to here were the ones mentioned in the chapter dealing with the distribution of the parcels of land in the as yet non-existent State of Israel, (Numbers 34,17-28). Alternately, we may be speaking of different men, seeing that in Numbers 34 the Torah speaks about something that would come to pass later, after Moses had left the scene. Or, the men mentioned in chapter 34 were all alive and well 14 years after Joshua took over and was in a position to make the allocation of most of these lands.
   The reason why the Torah here uses the unusual formulation of ראשי המטות instead of saying: ”to all the Children of Israel,” is simply that there was no need for all of the Israelites to be taught rules applying to a narrow aspect of the relationship between a wife and her husband or a father with a daughter below twelve and a half years old. The vows discussed here are only those that result in interference with the father’s, or husband’s quality of life, עינוי נפש.
   Perhaps there was a need at this time to withhold these laws from them so that they would not begin to become negligent concerning the whole subject of vows, knowing that their husbands were able to rescue them from a foolish vow. At any rate, the spiritual leaders of the people could be entrusted with this legislation without it being filtered through the High Priest and the seventy elders first.
   Mention of the individual leaders of the tribes is also an oblique hint on which the sages later on may have based themselves, when allowing an individual who possesses the necessary expertise to annul such vow, without recourse to a lay court of at least three people. It is a fact that the Torah nowhere spells out a procedure for annulling vows generally, other than the specific vows mentioned here which are subject to annulment only by the father or husband, and only within 24 hours of their becoming aware of them. The whole legislation of annulling vows and how and by whom is הלכה למשה מסיני, a law handed down orally since the time of Moses, something that cannot be arrived at by the use of our logic in interpreting the written Torah. Our sages, in referring to this, describe it as hanging by a thread as thin as a hair on our heads.” (Compare <i>Chagigah</i> 10) Another expression used there is that this entire legislation, its various rules are “flying in thin air.” The “hint” we mentioned, consists of the Torah writing that the party making the vow לא יחל את דברו, “he must not profane his word,” instead of the Torah having written לא יעבור על דברו, “he must not violate his verbal undertaking.” This enabled the sages to save the applicant from violating his vow if he could find an opening, פתח, primarily by establishing that when making the vow the person who made it did not foresee certain circumstances which, if he had foreseen them, he never would have made such a vow in the first place. Seeing that this is so, the Torah did not reveal this legislation to the people at large, else too many people would become irresponsible and make vows lightheartedly.
   
   30,3. איש כי ידור נדר לה', “If a man makes a vow to <i>Hashem,”</i> he vows to himself to honour <i>Hashem.</i> The reason we understand it in this fashion is that the Torah, otherwise, should have written בה'”, i.e. “in the name of <i>Hashem</i>,” or “invoking <i>Hashem’s</i> name.” Elsewhere, that is the prefix used in such cases as for instance in Genesis 21,23 השבעה לי באלוקים, “swear to me in the name of the Lord.”
   
   30,6. וה' יסלח לה כי הניא אביה אותה, “and <i>Hashem</i> will forgive her for her father had restrained her.” The message of this verse is that G’d will forgive her only any violation committed after her father had restrained her. If the girl in question had pre-empted her father’s objection and violated her vow already, she will not be forgiven. The reason is that the father’s authority does not extend to revoking a vow retroactively, that is a privilege the Torah gave only to judges.
   
   30,14. כל נדר וכל שבועת איסר לענות נפש, “any vow or any prohibition by oath, the purpose of which is to diminish one’s quality of life, etc.” This verse tells us that the husband has no power to rescind a vow by his wife unless it impinges on his quality of life; for instance, if his wife vowed not to partake of certain foodstuffs forever, and the change in her diet has definitively negative effect on her health, something that it is in her husband’s interest to preserve. The same applies to matters that affect the interpersonal relationship between husband and wife, such as the wife vowing not to use any cosmetics, something that will make her unattractive in the eyes of her husband. Anything that is within the province of a husband to rescind is also within the province of a father to rescind. The Torah equated father and husband by writing בין איש לאשתו ובין אב לבתו, “between a man and his wife or between a father and his daughter.”
   30,16. ונשא את עונה, ”and he shall bear her iniquity.” If someone, -in this case the husband- causes someone else to commit a sin, the latter person is burdened with that guilt. In this instance, the husband, by rescinding his wife’s vow after the time limit for this privilege had expired, thereby deceived his wife into believing that her vow had been cancelled. If she then violates the terms of her vow, it is the husband who bears the iniquity.
   
   31,2. נקום נקמת בני ישראל מאת המדינים, “Take vengeance for the Children of Israel against the Midianites.” Actually, it would have been appropriate for Moses to take this vengeance on this people who hated <i>Hashem</i>, but in view of Pinchas having been the one who commenced the reversal of the damage Midian had done to the Jewish people, Moses wanted him also to be the one who completed the <i>mitzvah.</i> (Compare verse 6)
   
   31,6. וישלח אותם משה אלף למטה, “Moses sent them on the way, one thousand men from each tribe.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why Moses did not send out the whole army of Israel, even though the Midianites were a numerous people, seeing that they had five kings governing them and they lived in well fortified cities, he could not do so, because too many of the people had become victims of the seduction and as such were hardly qualified to endanger themselves in war and become an easy target for Satan to attack. Moses therefore decided to select few men, but men whose integrity had stood the challenge of seduction, men who were truly righteous. These men were known as righteous people, each within his tribe.
   Strangely, Moses reversed what G’d had said to him, i.e. to avenge the wrong done to Israel, and he instructed the soldiers to avenge the wrong done to G’d’s image. He did not issue any specific instructions concerning how to avenge that wrong. He took it for granted that these soldiers would not allow any living creature to remain alive, just as Samuel later on commanded that the Amalekites all be killed men women and children as well as all their livestock. Or, at least, he thought, they would be treated like the 7 Canaanite nations of whom G’d had instructed not to allow a single soul to survive. When Moses found out that these soldiers had allowed the women and children to survive, and that they brought home an immense amount of booty, he became very angry, especially that women who had already lost their virginity had been allowed to survive, as these types of women were the ones who had seduced the Israelites. He was less upset about the children being allowed to survive, and he did not mind the booty the soldiers brought home.
   It is further possible to assume that Moses was commanded to harass the Midianites in order to take the vengeance of the Israelites, and he dispatched only relatively few men, intending to smite only the cities of the Perisite (one of the Canaanite tribes) planning to destroy every tree, to seal off all the wells, as was the custom by ordinary invaders. Seeing that it is <i>Hashem</i> Who, -in the last analysis, conducts the fortunes of war,- delivered the cities into their hands as well as their kings, Moses certainly could not be angry at any of this. The only thing he was angry at was that the very category of women who had been the seductresses had been kept alive to become slaves in Jewish homes. His demand for male “innocent” children to be killed was part of the element of “vengeance” which G’d had commanded to be taken.
   
   31,14. ויקצוף על פקודי החיל, “He was angry at the commanders of the troops.” He did not display anger at Pinchas seeing that <i>Hashem</i> Himself had granted him the covenant of peace.
   
   31,19. ואתם חנו מחוץ למחנה...אתם ושביכם, ”as for you, encamp outside the camp, etc.,   you and your captives.” Also the captives were required to purify their garments that might have been in contact with the people slain during that campaign [after they were dead, of course. Ed.] All the clothing or vessels made of cloth or hide that were in their possession was subject to the same <i>halachic</i> restrictions as if they had belonged to Israelites in the first place. This was in order that these possessions in turn should not be capable of contaminating things belonging to the Israelites.
   This verse enables us to answer the question raised by everybody, why, after the wars against Sichon and Og when an immense amount of loot was captured, did Moses not already command these procedures of purification that the loot had to undergo. Granted that seeing those nations had been part of the seven Canaanite nations, concerning which in the wars against them even pig’s meat had become permitted, there was no need to purify their pots if even the contents of these pots had been permitted. (Compare ואכלת את שלל אויביך, “you may eat the loot captured from your enemies” Deut. 20,14). The Midianites not being Canaanites, the relaxation of these rules of ritual contamination did not apply to them. 
   Yet another answer to the question raised above, technical in nature, is that when such captured vessels have not been used for over 24 hours, any residue of food remaining in them is presumed to have become repulsive and certainly would not enhance the taste of anything cooked or baked in them now. Therefore, anyone eating from such vessels would not derive any benefit from the forbidden ingredients, the principal reason why these are forbidden. In this instance, the survivors who had been taken prisoners, had still been using their vessels on the way to where the Israelites were encamped, so that the fact that the remnants of food therein had already made the vessels repulsive did not apply. This is also why the Torah did not have to warn that anyone touching a dead body had become ritually contaminated and required seven days of remaining outside the camp of the Levites while undergoing purification rites. This law was well known, but seeing that this legislation was applied for the first time to gentiles, (captives) the Torah reiterated the laws [so that the gentiles would not feel discriminated against? Ed.] Seeing that only 2% of the people had been involved in the campaign it was important to issue the warning that they must not come into contact with their families until after they had completed the purification rites. The reason why these restrictions were not announced in the wars against Sichon and Og, was that when most or all the people have become ritually contaminated many laws of ritual contamination do not apply. [How can you exile most of the population from their homes for a week? Ed.]  Seeing that in this instance only 2% of the arms-bearing men took part, things were different.
   
   31,21. ויאמר אלעזר הכהן אל אנשי הצבא, “Eleazar the High Priest said to the soldiers, etc.“ Moses, personally, conveyed the previous paragraph to the respective commanders concerning the ritual contamination of the people involved. Eleazar addressed the entire people who were all directly involved seeing that all received their respective shares of the loot and had to know how to purify the various vessels or garments. The only loot the commanders of 1000 troops each had taken for themselves were costly garments.
   
   31,23. תעבירו באש וטהר, “you shall pass through the fire and it will become ritually pure.” Nachmanides writes that no vessel that had been in direct contact with a dead body, or an animal’s carcass, would become purified simply by passing through fire, as the Torah recognizes only immersion in a ritual bath as the way in which such vessels can become purified. As a result, we must understand what is written here concerning making the vessel red hot, i.e. “passing through fire” as referring only to purification from the type of impurity caused by the pores of the vessels in question having absorbed some of the forbidden food that had been cooked or fried in it.
   
   וכל אשר לא יבא באש תעבירו במים, “and everything that during its normal use would not directly be exposed to fire, you shall pass through water.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that this refers to immersion in a ritual bath. The reason that this is sufficient is that the forbidden particles of food that concern us had not been absorbed at all by the walls of the vessel in question.
   Nachmanides questions this point, as in his opinion the term מעביר, “making something pass through,” is not associated with a ritual bath at all. When the Torah speaks about a ritual bath, the term used is ובא במים וטהר, “when it is immersed in water it will be purified.” Furthermore, even vessels that are used only cold require to be purified from their contamination by something in addition to a ritual bath. Besides, the requirement of immersing oneself in a ritual bath, is derived by our sages from a different verse, אך במי נדה יתחטא, “however, it must be purified with the water of sprinkling.”
   We must therefore understand the words תעבירו במים to mean that the vessels under discussion must be thoroughly cleaned in water, rubbed, scrubbed, etc., to remove residual forbidden particles. This is the appropriate process of cleansing, parallel to making vessels used on the fire red-hot, so that the residual forbidden particles are destroyed. This is parallel to the manner in which we clean different categories of utensils before Passover to ensure that no vestige of <i>chametz</i> still is attached to them. Those that are normally used on the fire have to undergo a cleansing process at least equal to their normal usage, whereas those that are not used on the fire have to undergo brief immersion in boiling water or if they are too big must have boiling water poured over them. Once the vessels that had served idolaters have undergone the preparatory steps described, they are all equal in that they still require immersion in a ritual bath.
   
   31,28.  והרמות מכס לה' “you are to impose a levy (tax) for <i>Hashem.”</i> Nachmanides writes that the reason for this levy is that the loot under discussion was secured from the vengeance due to <i>Hashem. W</i>hen similar or even larger quantities of loot were secured as a result of the wars with Sichon and Og, <i>Hashem,</i> i.e. the priests and Levites His representatives, did not receive any share of it at all, as the priests and Levites by definition had been excluded from sharing in the lands of the Canaanite nations. They had not been excluded from loot from any other people or tribes.
   
   31,30. מן הבקר ומן החמורים ומן הצאן מכל הבהמה, “from the cattle, from the donkeys, from the flock- from all the livestock.” The system followed by the Torah here is known as פרט וכלל, listing individual items, all of which fit the heading mentioned afterwards.
   Ibn Ezra comments that the expression מכל הבהמה means, for instance, that Eleazar did not take any of the captured camels, as they were few in number. This is why no number was given as to how many such animals had been captured, and the share of the Levites among them was therefore not mentioned either.
   
   31,31. ויעש משה ואלעזר הכהן, “Moses and Eleazar the High Priest did, etc.” the princes are not mentioned here, as opposed to when the people were being counted. (Numbers 1,44) Nachmanides writes that possibly the reason is that the reason for the princes to be present during such a count, (31,13) is to ensure that Eleazar would not appropriate to himself an unfair amount for himself and the Levites. As soon as the princes and the community became aware that this could be perceived as the reason for their presence during the count, they refused to take part, as they trusted Eleazar implicitly and did not want to even give the impression that there was any possible suspicion that he would not share out the spoils fairly. Basically, whenever division of money, etc., is involved one must appoint additional witnesses in order to forestall such suspicions from being voiced. The people considered the High Priest as comparable to an angel whose motives in matters of money are beyond suspicion.
   
   31,36. ותהי המחצה, “the half amounted to, etc.” Nachmanides writes that there was a need to state what appears as obvious to the casual reader of the text. The Torah wanted to point out that since the day the loot was captured, and subsequently counted, and still later distributed, there had been zero shrinkage. None of the animals had died, and none of the silver, gold, etc., had disappeared. The levy was also handed over in accordance with the percentages specified by the Torah.
   31,49. עבדיך נשאו את ראש אנשי המלחמה, “Your servants took a census of the men of war under our command;” they meant that not a single one had fallen, become a casualty during this campaign.
   
   ולא נפקד ממנו איש, “and not a single one of us is missing.” No one has even been injured so that he would be hospitalized, etc.
   
   31,54. ויביאו אותו אל אהל מועד זכרון לבני ישראל, “they brought it to the Tent of Meeting as a remembrance for the Children of Israel.” Nachmanides explains this verse as the Israelites constructing various vessels made from captured gold coins and jewelry, these newly made vessels to be used in the activities connected to the holy service in the Tabernacle. If these vessels would only have been stored in the Temple treasury, the Torah should have written זכרון להם, “as a remembrance for the people who had brought them to the Temple treasury.” The reason that the Torah wrote זכרון לבני ישראל was that by their being used in the Temple service they acted as a remembrance for the whole people.
   
   32,2. ויבואו בני גד ובני ראובן, :”The Children of Gad and the Children of Reuven came, etc. In the preceding verse where the background to the quest of the tribes has been described, the tribe of Reuben is mentioned ahead of the tribe of Gad. Why did the Torah switch the order here? On the one hand, Reuven was the descendant of Yaakov’s major wife Leah, whereas Gad was the son of one of the handmaidens. On the other hand, it was the Children of Gad who had conceived the whole idea of settling on the east bank of the Jordan. Not only that, we know from Yaakov’s blessings in Genesis 49,19 as well as from Moses’ blessing of Gad in Deut. 33,20, that this tribe was militant and fearless. Their members did not consider that their relative isolation on the east bank from the other tribes would pose security problems for them. 
   
   32,19. כי באה נחלתינו אלינו, ”for our inheritance has already come to us.” According to <i>Rashi</i> they meant that they already considered their share on the east bank as a <i>fait accomplit</i>, as an irreversible fact.
   Nachmanides argues that it would be most inappropriate for these tribes to speak in such terms in Moses’ presence, as it had only been promised to them conditionally. What they said was that they did not plan to inherit with the other tribes on the west bank and to thereby reduce the size of the other tribes’ inheritance, seeing that they had already received their allocation on the east bank. They phrased all this as a request, pointing out that since they owned more cattle than the other tribes this would be appropriate as the land on the east bank was admirably suited for grazing cattle.
   
   32,25. ויאמר בני גד ובני ראובן, ”the Children of Gad and the Children of Reuven said, etc.:” The Torah did not use the plural mode ויאמרו, “they said,” as one spokesman for both tribes did the talking.
   
   32,29. אם יעברו...  ונתתם, “if they will cross, etc.,….then you will give.” Nachmanides sees in this verse a clear indication that at this time Moses did not give these two tribes all the land they had requested, except the cities that were required to accommodate their families during the period that their fighting men marched with the main body of the Jewish people. These were the towns that are mentioned here by name. The two tribes fortified those towns before moving with the balance of the people cross the Jordan. The rest of the land on the east bank they left as desolate land. This is why Joshua and the elders told them that if they would fulfill their undertaking to Moses they would also receive the areas not yet distributed (Joshua 1,12-16)
   Ibn Ezra explains on verse 30 that the implied meaning of the verse is that if these two tribes were not going to cross voluntarily with the main body, they would be compelled to do so against their will. As a result of such an eventuality they would receive their ancestral share on the west bank.
   
   32,31. ויענו בני גד ובני ראובן לאמור, וגו, The Children of Gad and 'the Children of Reuven responded by saying:” 
   32,32. נחנו נעבור חלוצים, “we are going to cross as the vanguard.” Nachmanides understands the two tribes as saying to Moses that there was no need to spell out what would happen if they did not cross the Jordan, etc.; not only would they do so but they would be in the forefront of the fighting men. Seeing that Moses’ instructions were G’d’s words, it was unthinkable that they should not accept His command. Note that originally, (verse 25) they had promised to do what Moses would command, and now they rephrase this saying they would do what G’d had commanded.
   
   32,33. ולחצי שבט מנשה, ”and for half the tribe of Menashe;” Nachmanides writes that originally, the members of that tribe had not requested that any of their ancestral share should be on the east bank. When the tribe saw that this whole huge chunk of land had been allocated to only two tribes, and that it was far more than these two tribes could expect to populate adequately so that a call went out for anyone interested to join them in settling that part of the land, some people of the tribe of Menashe expressed their willingness to do so. Possibly, these members of the tribe of Menashe were also herdsmen and owned substantial amounts of sheep and cattle. The meaning of the words ולחצי שבט מנשה  therefore is not to be taken literally, as only two of the families of the tribe of Menashe are reported as living in that area, [eight families are mentioned including Tzelofchod. Ed.] The two families that were interested were that of Machir and that of Gilead. Between them they accounted for far fewer than half the tribe of 52000 fighting men at last count. The land and who it was shared out to, is mentioned only in summary form here, whereas in the Book of Joshua, chapter 13,  more details are provided. 
   
   32,38. ואת נבו ואת בעל מעון מוסבות שם, “and Nebo and  Baal-meon, with altered names;” <i>Rashi</i> says that the names Nebo and Baal-meon were names of pagan deities  and the members of the tribe of Reuven changed the names of these towns.
   Nachmanides raises the question that this is not sufficient reason to inform us of the names of these pagan deities. All the Torah had to write was that the members of the tribe of Reuven rebuilt these towns and changed their names. The names of the idolatries did not need to be revealed. It is the Torah’s custom elsewhere that when cities of pagans were captured to inform us only of the new names given to them by their captors. Furthermore, the words את שמות הערים אשר בנו “the names of the cities which they built,” are completely superfluous, as we already have been told in the first half of the verse that we are speaking of cities rebuilt by the members of the tribe of Reuven. These words therefore cannot refer to the cities of Nebo and Baal-meon.
   I believe therefore, that the names mentioned used to be the names of these towns while they were still part of the land of Moav, before Sichon had captured them from the first King of Moav. The members of the tribe of Reuven continued to call them by these names, as the Torah nowhere says that ויקראו שמות לערים אשר בנו, “they gave names to the cities that they had built.” The Torah only wrote: ויקראו בשמות את שמות הערים, meaning they named the cities they had built by the names they had borne previously. They wanted that these cities would be known as the cities that existed on that site originally. It is also possible that they meant to embarrass the Moabites by showing the world that these formerly Moabite cities now belonged to the Israelites. The meaning of the words ואת שבמה, is that they built that town (from scratch). This was not a town that was rebuilt.
   
   32,40. ויתן משה את הגלעד למכיר בן מנשה, “Moses gave the Gilead to Machir son of Menashe.” The meaning, of course, is that Moses allocated the territory of Gilead to the family of Machir, Machir himself having died long before the Exodus. His offspring had conquered the Gilead and it was customary that the children called themselves by the name of the founder of their family. It is remotely possible that the original Machir had still been alive, seeing that the decree that all the men between twenty and sixty who had been alive at the time of the Exodus would die in the desert would not have applied to, him seeing that he would have been way past 60 at the time of the Exodus.
   
   32,41. ויאיר בן מנשה, “and Yair, son of Menashe, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this man traced himself to the family tree of his mother, seeing that he had taken possession of his ancestral land with that family. In Chronicles I 2,21 it is stated specifically that paternally he was the son of Chetzron, who in turn was a son of Peretz, son of Yehudah. [My version of the Tur, has this as Chetzron, son of Korach, clearly an error. Ed.] His mother was a daughter of Machir son of Menashe, as we have a verse stating: ואחר בא חצרון אל בת מכיר אבי גלעד ותלד לו את שגוב, ושגוב הוליד את יאיר ויהי לו עשרים ושלוש ערים בארץ גלעד, “after that Chetzron slept with (or married) a daughter of Machir, the father of Gilead. She bore for him Seguv, and Seguv fathered Yair, who had twenty three cities in the land of Gilead.”  (Chronicles I 2,22)
   
   
   Parshat  Massey
   
   33,1. אלה מסעי, “these are the journeys, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> comments that the reason the Torah details all the various journeys of the Israelites here is to illustrate the innumerable acts of kindness performed by <i>Hashem</i> for the people. It is a testimony to the fact that in spite of having decreed death in the desert for the generation that had participated in the Exodus, they were not wandering aimlessly for 40 years but were constantly under His benevolent supervision.
   Nachmanides adds a further element and writes that the detailed report here is designed to negate the claim of people who feel that the story of the Israelites surviving for 40 years in a desert devoid of the barest essentials for survival is beyond belief, and these people diminish the experience by claiming that surely the Israelites were only at the edge of the desert all that time and had easy access to regions that were inhabited and civilised. By tracing the movements of the people, such assumptions by latter-day historians, real or so-called, are laid to rest by the Torah. Anyone tracing the route of the Israelites will not find even a hint at ruins of previous human habitation. The miraculous nature of the entire experience every step of the way is preserved in the minds of our people when we read these lines.
   
   33,14. ויחנו ברפדים ולא היה מים לעם לשתות, “They encamped at Refidim, and there was no water for the people to drink.” Nachmanides points out that Moses has not mentioned the miracle of Marah, nor the miracle of the <i>manna</i> that became manifest in the desert of Sin in this review. However, seeing that what happened at Refidim was exceptionally remarkable, the people having literally put G’d to the test, the fact that a miracle involving the provision of drinking water occurred there is at least hinted at. After all, the name of that location was changed to <i>Massah</i> and <i>Merivah</i>, seeing that G’d had been sanctified in the presence of the whole people when water was produced miraculously from a barren rock. The location became famous additionally because near there Amalek attacked the people out of the blue, and they survived that treacherous attack intact, the first time that they had to fight for their lives.
   
   33,41-43.ויסעו מהר ההר ויחנו בצלמות ויסעו מצלמות ויחנו בפונן ויסעו מפונן ויחנו באובות., “They journeyed from Hor Hahar and encamped at Tzalmavet. They journeyed from Tzalmavet and encamped at Punan. They journeyed from Punan and encamped at Ovot. In <i>Parshat Chukat</i> (Numbers 21,10) we did not hear about these places at all, but were only told that when journeying from Ovot that the people became very frustrated at the long detour they had to take. It is not even stated there from which place they set out before arriving at Ovot.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason for the failure to mention Tzalmavet and Punan in <i>Parshat Chukat</i> is that they were located along the detour around the territory of Edom, and the people passed there while full of discontent at this lengthy detour. They spoke out against G’d on that occasion so that He dispatched the snakes, etc., against them. Eventually, Moses constructed the copper snake, and the people carried that snake on a pole all the way until they came to Ovot. That snake was removed only at that time. Seeing that the phenomenon of the copper snake continued during these journeys, the stops in between were not considered as relevant, as nothing in the condition of the people had changed due to their having made camp.
   
   33,53. והורשתם את הארץ וישבתם בה, “you will take possession of the land and dwell thereon.” According to the opinion of Nachmanides this verse is one of the positive commandments in the Torah. This means that if, for some reason, the people would decide to conquer a different land and to settle there, they would be in violation of this positive commandment to settle in the Holy Land. The commandment to take possession of the Holy Land and to settle thereon is deemed so important that the Torah repeats it on several occasions. This is the reason why our sages stated that anyone leaving the Holy Land to take up residence elsewhere is equivalent to having chosen for himself an alien deity. (Ketuvot 110) Our sages deal at length with the subject of a wife who refuses to accompany her husband to the Holy Land<i>,</i> etc. The same debate is conducted if the wife wants to settle in the land of Israel and her husband refuses.
   <i>Rashi</i> does not interpret the words והורשתם את הארץ in the same manner, but sees the whole verse as describing the circumstances that make our settling in the land of Israel possible, i.e. taking possession of it, being undisputed owners. According to <i>Rashi,</i> unless we are in physical possession of that land, our living there will always be of a temporary nature.
   
   33,55. לשכים בעיניכם ולצנינים בצדיכם, “as pins in your eyes and as thorns in your sides.” They will be as thorns in your eyes that prick you and make you blind, as a result of which you will constantly be misled so that you will not be able to learn from your past mistakes and will learn to copy the evil ways of these pagans, as a result of which they will harass you in your own country. Because of your being disloyal to Me, I will expel you from the Holy Land. Ultimately, the land will become “Judenrein,” devoid of any Jews.
   
   34,2. אל הארץ כנען, “to the land of Canaan.” Ibn Ezra explains this phrase, which is unusual, as meaning that the Torah had written אל הארץ, ארץ כנען, “to the land, the land of Canaan.”
   Nachmanides understands this as the Torah saying that the name the land is known by is “Canaan”, just as the name of the Land of Egypt, is “Egypt.” Both the land of Egypt is called מצרים, and the people living there are called מצרים. The construction is similar to Kings I 1,1 אל העיר ירושלים והמלך דוד, where we also would not have expected the letter ה before the word מלך.
   
   34,19. ואלה שמות האנשים: למטה יהודה, וגו', ”and these were the names of the men: representing the tribe of Yehudah was Calev, son of Yefuneh.” Seeing that the tribes of Reuven and Gad already had received their ancestral heritage they were no longer in need of a נשיא , a “leader.” There are different opinions as to why the list of the leaders of the nation when the conquest began begins with Yehudah.on this occasion. One opinion holds that when the lottery took place Yehudah’s parchment came up first. All the tribes listed here had a leader described by the Torah with the title נשיא, except Yehudah, Shimon, and Binyamin. In the case of Yehudah, seeing that Calev was a venerable and well-known personality there was no need to give him a title for his authority to be accepted by the members of his tribe. Shimon did not have a new נשיא, seeing that the last one, Zimri, had disgraced himself so badly. The title held no allure for the members of that tribe as its significance had been debased.  Binyamin actually did have a נשיא in the person of אלידד, whose name has been spelled אלדד in Numbers 11,26 before he had been elevated to the status of prophet. Seeing that a prophet is on a higher spiritual level than a mere “leader,” referring to him here a נשיא would have indicated a demotion. I do not know why the Torah found it necessary to introduce each one of these men as למטה בני פלוני,.... “of the tribe of so and so…” with the exception of the tribe of Yehudah. Both here and in the story of the spies Joseph is mentioned in addition to Menashe, because he had displayed especial fondness of the Holy Land. 
   
   35,4. ומגרשי הערים וגו', “and the open spaces of the cities, etc.”  Nachmanides, explaining the plain meaning of the text, states that the text first commands that there should be an open space of 1000 cubits around the city. This is to be arrived at by measuring 500 cubits extending outwards from all four directions, and describing a square using the line forming the outer perimeter of these four sides. When the Torah speaks later (verse 5) of measuring 2000 cubits in each direction outwards, so that the city core will be in the center of the new perimeters, we wind up with a total of 4.000 000 cubits square in all. When measured from the respective corners to the outer rim of the city core, this area, of course, was far longer than 2000 or 500 cubits from the edge of the city core. [Nachmanides’ calculation of the size of the city including all its outer areas is by far smaller than the area arrived at by either <i>Rashi</i> or Maimonides. Ed.] The entire length of each side is called פאה, “corner,” by the Torah. The first 1000 cubits of “suburbia” were not meant to be used for planting gardens, etc., but were a “green-belt.”
   
   35,8. מאת הרב תרבו ומאת המעט תמעיטו, “from the many (numerous) you shall increase, and from the few (in number) you shall decrease;” Nachmanides, quoting our sages who claim that all the tribes received territorially equal amounts of land, writes that we need to explain what is written here in terms of the number of families per tribe. A family who had received a large allocation of land (within its tribe) would have to cede relatively many cities of refuge from its territory, whereas a family that had received a relatively small parcel of land would not have to cede proportionately as much for the purpose of providing cities of refuge (including the cities of the Levites). This was so in spite of the fact that when these cities are listed by name and the tribal territory they were in, you will find that the tribes did not all contribute equal numbers. (Joshua chapter 21. [According to verse 3 in that chapter the distribution or allocation of these cities may have proceeded upon divine command after consultation with the <i>urim vetumim.</i> Ed.]
   
   35,14. את שלש הערים, “the three cities, etc.”  Nachmanides writes that our sages said that Moses designated three cities of refuge on the east bank of the Jordan, a surprisingly large number in view of the few inhabitants (21/2 tribes), as murder was a more frequent occurrence in that part of the country. Although this seems irrelevant seeing that these cities were meant only for people who inadvertently committed manslaughter, there were many people who deliberately committed murder, making it appear that the act had been committed unintentionally. It had therefore become necessary to have such cities available until the true circumstances of the killing had been established. According to this interpretation the legislation took into consideration circumstances that would arise only in the future.
   Alternately, we could say that up until now the region of Gilead had been known as a region in which murder and manslaughter was a frequent occurrence.
   Personally, I am amazed at these approaches by some commentators, seeing that our sages (<i>Makkot</i> 10) stated that there were a total of 42 cities either being cities of the Levites, which did double duty, or cities of refuge on the west bank, whereas the total on the east bank, including the cities for the Levites amounted to only 6. There is therefore no numerical anomaly in the allocation of these cities. According to the arrangement just described, each tribe had a total of 4 cities that were capable of serving as cities of refuge. 
   Perhaps the fact that there were 3 basic cities of refuge (out of a total of only 6 such cities) in the region of the east bank was a special compliment to Moses for having allocated three such cities already during his lifetime before the west bank or any part of it had even been conquered. The whole arrangement was not unequal once we realise that the cities of the Levites were part of it, so that there were a total of 48 cities that could provide refuge for inadvertent killers.
   Looking at it from the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, it would appear that the area of the east bank which became part of the Jewish state was huge, considering that this territory comprised all the lands that formerly belonged to the two Emorite kings Sichon and Og by comparison to the west bank, land which the Torah went out of its way to describe with impressive detail. The lands of Moav and Ammon were also partially included, as the Emorites had captured them.. If judged by area rather than by population, it was certainly not excessive to allocate 3 out of the 6 cities of refuge to that region.
   
   35,32. ולא תקחו כופר לנוס אל עיר מקלטו, “and you are not to accept ransom from someone who fled to his city of refuge.” The meaning is that the city elders must not accept a bribe to allow the person who should await the death of the High Priest while still in the city of refuge, and let him return to his hometown prematurely. There was no need for the Torah to warn that one must not settle for a ransom instead of the inadvertent killer taking up residence in the city of refuge. He would not fail to do so because he had to be on guard against avengers of the slain person’s family, his גואל הדם. Not only that, failure to make use of the city of refuge exposes the killer to the suspicion that he killed intentionally.
   
   35,33. ולא תחניפו את הארץ, “you shall not pollute the land.” Nachmanides writes that seeing a little while ago (35,29) the Torah wrote והיו אלה לכם לחוקת משפט לדורותיכם, “these shall be for you a decree of justice for your generations,” we might have thought that the legislation of cities of refuge is applied also beyond the boundaries of the land of Israel; to prevent us from making this error the Torah now stresses that its concern with this legislation is that the Holy Land not become polluted, not that the whole globe not become polluted. The yardsticks of conduct and account- ability for failing to maintain the proper standards that the Torah applies to residents in the land of Israel are stricter than those applied to people riding outside that land, seeing that the presence of G’d, i.e. the <i>Shechinah,</i> does not hover over the Diaspora. Lands that are not holy in the first place, but are <i>halachically</i> ritually impure at all times, cannot be polluted by murder committed by man. The residents of the Holy Land are charged with the duty to preserve the holiness of that land.
   The choice of the term חניפה by the Torah here, a term that is usually applied to flattery, which is a form of misrepresentation of the true facts, is deliberate. as treating an intentional murderer as if he had killed accidentally, by accepting monetary compensation, is a form of distorting the facts. Allowing murder, even unintentional killing, [which by the way the Torah does not describe as הורג, “killing,” but chillingly, as רוצח בשגגה “murdering unintentionally,” Ed.] is apt to drive away the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> unless the legislation written here is observed in all its details.
   In the <i>Sifri</i> the expression לא תחניפו את הארץ is understood as a warning to habitual flatterers not to treat the unintentional or intentional killer with flattery, i.e. by accepting a fine from him instead of what the Torah has demanded. The warning is repeated when the Torah writes כי הדם הוא יחניף את הארץ, implying that the guilt of the killer (intentional) must not be downgraded (a form of flattery, misrepresentation) by treating it as if it had only been an unintentional killing. The warning is that if we, the inhabitants of the Holy Land will deceive in this fashion, the land itself will deceive us by withholding its yield after we have toiled with ploughing, seeding, watering, etc.
   
   36, 7 ולא תסוב נחלה, “an inheritance shall not make the rounds.” Our sages state that this decree applied only during the first generation of the settlers to whom the land had been allocated.
   Nachmanides writes that what the verse teaches is that if anyone who qualifies for a share in the land on the day this legislation was published dies before he has a chance to physically take possession of his share of the land, and he left a daughter who is qualified to inherit his share of the land, she is not to marry a member of another tribe, in order that her father’s share will not eventually wind up as part of the holdings of her husband’s tribe. Once the physical distribution of the land had been completed, however, such a daughter is free to marry males from any other tribe. The reason is that by that time her original inheritance being a piece of land belonging to her father’s tribe is a well known fact which prevents a land grab by a member of another tribe. Seeing that at the time this legislation was published the exact date of when the distribution would occur had not been known, the legislation is written as if it applied to the entire generation.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the words ולא תסוב נחלה are not to be understood as providing a rationale for this legislation, i.e. that this legislation is designed to prevent the swapping of ancestral land, but we are dealing here with two separate commandments, each part of the laws of inheritance. 1) Girls inheriting the father’s estate are not to marry outside their tribe. 2) Women, who were daughters of fathers that had no male issue, and were married prior to the publication of this legislation, and who will inherit their father’s share of the land when the time came for distribution, cannot transfer by inheritance or other device their father’s share, but must allow such share upon their death to be inherited by the nearest relatives of their father’s tribe. The immediate application of this legislation was designed to solve the problem of the daughters of Tzelofchod, but they were only the role model for applying this legislation in the future. In other words, in the future this basic condition of ancestral lands remaining non-transferable to other tribes is valid even for women who had already been married when they became heirs to such land. If their sons who were members of their father’s tribe did not belong to the same tribe as their mother’s inheritance, they could not claim this land. 
