   1,1. בראשית. Rabbi Yitzchok said that G’d had no need to begin the Torah prior to chapter 12,2 in Exodus, until the words החודש הזה וגו', “this month will be the first of the months for you, etc.” Nachmanides, in justifying Rabbi Yitzchok’s comment, writes that the story of creation is of great consequence and provides the root for our faith in G’d, and that anyone who does not believe what is written in that chapter does not believe that this present universe is G’d’s creation but believes that the universe preceded G’d in historical terms. He who does so is an outright heretic and has no share in G’d’s Torah at all. Chapter 12 in Exodus contains the first commandment addressed specifically to the Jewish people as a people. [the commandment of circumcision also applies to those of Avraham’s descendants who would not be Jews. Ed.]
   Notwithstanding the latter consideration, seeing that the fact that G’d created the universe is not spelled out anywhere else in the five books of the Torah, it was important to record this vital message at the very beginning. Seeing that the story of creation had been handed down verbally by one generation to the next during the 2448 years which preceded the giving to the people of Israel of the written Torah, Rabbi Yitzchok was correct in saying that inasmuch as people had such a tradition already, the written Torah could have commenced only with chapter 12 in Exodus and the legislative part of the Torah would have been unimpaired.
   G’d considered it imperative to dictate to Moses the sequence of the 6 days (stages) of creation culminating in the creation of man and G’d assigning man to be in charge of the life-supporting part of the universe, i.e. earth. Rabbi Yitzchok’s comment is especially pertinent as the Talmud in <i>Chagigah 11</i> warns those who have acquired knowledge of how earth came into being to conceal such knowledge from the public at large. We could have questioned then why the Torah at that stage saw fit to reveal to one and all what only a chosen few had been aware of? G’d wanted us to know that He was at home on earth in a place called גן עדן, and that but for man having been expelled from there due to his sin he could have remained in constant direct contact with his Creator without the need for any intermediary. It also was necessary to record that after the total corruption of mankind save for a single family, the Creator saved that family and destroyed the surface of the earth during the deluge. These short paragraphs summarizing over 1600 years of the history of mankind, serve as a warning to later generations of what might happen if they too would become guilty of deliberately flouting the Creator’s design collectively. Seeing that the inhabitants of the land of Canaan behaved in a manner most displeasing to G’d, the Torah by giving us a short history of man, explains that the forced removal of the Canaanites from their land, was no more than what they had brought upon themselves by ignoring history.
   Still on the quote by <i>Rashi</i> of what Rabbi Yitzchok said, etc. Notwithstanding the fact that mankind as a whole had received 7 other commandments, the commandment to sanctify the new moon was the first commandment addressed to only a single nation, the Jewish nation. Seeing that at that point the Jewish people still constituted an integral part of mankind as a whole, and they were all subject to these 7 universally applicable commandments, it might have been deemed appropriate to commence the Torah, the Book containing legislation addressed exclusively to that nation only, with the point at which the first of such national commandments was introduced. <i>Rashi</i> explains therefore, that by commencing the Torah at <i>Bereshit bara,</i> the Torah wanted to demonstrate not only that G’d was the Creator, but that He is also the sole and undisputed owner of His universe and may decide which nation is entitled to live on which part of the earth. In other words, if the Jewish people supplanted the Canaanites in the land of Canaan and they were helped by numerous supernatural miracles in doing so, it was clear that their success was G’d’s will, that it was not robbery instigated by Moses and Joshua their leaders.
   There appears to be a contradiction here, seeing that when the Torah describes who lived in the land of Canaan during Avraham’s time, the Torah first refers to the Canaanite living there, (Genesis 13,7) whereas in chapter 14,18 Malki Tzedek, a Semite, is described as King in Jerusalem (שלם). We would have to answer that the only minute part of the land of Canaan not yet taken over by the Canaanites was that city of Jerusalem. Still, seeing that Canaan had been, cursed by his grandfather Noach to be a slave to Noach’s other two sons, how are we to explain the ascendancy of that nation at that time? Moreover, why should the Canaanites have dispossessed the descendants of Shem more than the descendants of Yaphet? The Torah may wish to hint that seeing the Canaanites obtained their homeland by dispossessing the Semites, the people relatively most loyal to G’d already, put a great question mark on their legal and moral right to occupy the choicest land on earth. [the Canaanites, the most morally corrupt nation, took aim at the Semites, the most morally superior. Ed] 
   <i>
   Rashi</i> explains the word בראשית as being in a construct mode, to the verb ברא, “He created,” i.e. the line is to be understood as: “at the beginning of G’d’s creating heaven and earth, the earth was in a state of chaos.” At that point G’d issued the directive: “let there be light.” Accordingly, the only thing G’d created on the first day was “light.” 
   Nachmanides explains the words בראשית ברא אלוקים את השמים ואת הארץ, as meaning that G’d’s first creative activity consisted of His calling into existence out of total non-existence, heaven and earth. This “earth” however, was something so insubstantial, something referred to as <i>tohu vavohu</i>, matter which was ready to assume definitive form and substance at a subsequent stage. This “matter=<i>tohu vavohu</i>, is equivalent to what the ancient Greeks called ”hi<i>ayuli.”</i> The meaning of the word ברא is the creation of something of substance which had never possessed any substance at all, known in philosophy as “ex nihilo.” 
   Subsequent to this act of creating matter out of pure spirit, any other creative activity made use of this basic and original raw material. Such stages of creative activity are described as יצירה, “providing form and substance,” but are never referred to as בריאה, “creation.” The original not quite definitive form and shape of that matter, is referred to in the Torah as בהו, “<i>vohu</i>.” At that stage, heaven and all its components consisted of a single raw material, and earth and all it is comprised of consisted of another single raw material.
   According to <i>Rashi</i> on Kohelet 7,19, the word describes the super terrestrial wisdom with which G’d created the universe, a wisdom that leaves even the wisest of men in utter amazement, תוהא. [transliteration from the ancient Greek. Ed.] Both the raw material used to create heaven and that used to create earth are unique and distinct, and the word ברא refers exclusively to the creation of these two phenomena.. The “names” תהו and בהו given by the Torah to these raw materials are intended to forestall man changing the names in question and renaming them to suit his purpose. The words are composites, i.e. בו הוא parallels Isaiah 34,11 ונטה עליה קו-תהו ואבני בהו, “and He shall measure it with a line of chaos and with weights of emptiness.” The word קו is derived from קוה, hope, i.e. the builder employs the plumb line to check if the results of his efforts justified his hopes and expectations. אבני בהו, refer to the stones which the building consists of. [the foregoing is taken from Nachmanides. Ed.]
   After the Torah reported that initially G’d created heaven and earth, it reverts to the subject of “earth,” explaining that after the initial creative activity producing tangible matter, the phenomenon known as “earth” (in contrast to that known as “heaven”) was in a state of תהו, meaning tangible matter devoid of distinct shape and contours, so that it was best described as בהו, as G’d proceeded to provide it with distinct shape and contours. This meant that what had originally been a single raw material, now became “split” into the four basic raw materials we are all familiar with, i.e. fire, water, earth and atmosphere, air, wind. Ever since that stage of development, whenever we refer to the word הארץ, we mean the phenomenon which is composed of varying proportions of these four raw materials. When the Torah refers to the completion of G’d’s creative activity on the seventh day and describes it as ויכלו השמים והארץ וכל צבאם, it refers to the totality of what is known in our literature as the עולם התחתון, “the lower universe,” the part of the universe inhabited by living bodies. The word חשך describes the element fire, because the original fire is black. Had it been reddish it would have illuminated the night so that the darkness of night would be impossible to observe. The water which is the raw material used to mould the dust of the earth, is referred to by the Torah in our chapter as תהם, This is why the waters of the ocean are referred to as תהומות as in Exodus 15,8 קפאו תהומות בלב-ים, “the normally mobile waves became inert (as if frozen) in the midst of the ocean.” The bedrock of the ocean is referred to as תהום as we know from Isaiah 63,13 מוליכם בתהומות כסוס במדבר, “He guides them through the depths of the sea as one guides a horse through the desert.” In our context here, what we know as “air,” is referred to as רוח It is a well known fact that the combination of these four raw materials comprise what we know as ארץ, the globe we all inhabit. The pillar holding this lower universe together is the globe of earth, surrounded by water on most of its surface surrounded further by the atmosphere we call air or רוח. The fire in turn surrounds this atmosphere. [the heat of the sun emanates from beyond the atmosphere. Ed.]
   What our verse reveals is that this phenomenon described as ארץ, was “dressed up” in a shape, meaning that the element fire surrounded it on the outside, the atmosphere, air, רוח being an element in constant motion interweaving with the other elements. The innermost spot within all these layers is known in the language of our sages as אבן שתיה, the foundation stone of the earth, i.e. the stone which “waters” the entire globe. To sum up, the meaning of the first two verses is: “at the beginning G’d created heaven and He created earth, both out of non-existent matter. When the earth was first created, it was in a chaotic state devoid of form and contours, a mixture of the four basic elements fire, water, earth and wind, none of which had been defined as yet as to their functions. 
   1,3. ויאמר אלוקים יהי אור, “G’d said: ‘let there be light!’ The word ויאמר, i.e. אמירה, is puzzling, seeing there was no one to say anything to. What is meant by the word here is that it was addressed to the existing raw material known as שמים, heaven. The Creator wished to produce something bright, shiny. This came into existence without any effort. When the Torah continues with the words ויהי אור, instead of saying ויהי כן, which is the usual formula, the reason is that the light created at this stage did not endure but was withdrawn after Adam had sinned. The expression ויהי כן is only used in conjunction with phenomena which endured.
   1,4. וירא אלוקים את האור כי טוב, ”G’d saw that the light was good, etc.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> G’d saw that it was not good to employ light and darkness simultaneously, that this created confusion, and as a result He assigned to both light and darkness specific periods in which each would be sovereign. Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, saying that if we were to accept this we would have to posit that G’d did not know that light and darkness functioning simultaneously would be unsatisfactory, and that He learned “from experience.” [This would appear heretical, denying G’d being all knowing, and describing Him as reacting to new circumstances and new insights instead of having allowed for them from the start. Ed.] Nachmanides therefore understands the word אמירה, ויאמר, as meaning: “to convert a potential into an actual.” Accordingly, such statements in the Torah as ויאמר יהי אור, ויאמר יהי רקיע, must be understood as a command to at that time convert something which had existed only as a potential, theoretically, being converted into reality. A new reality becoming enduring is called ראייה, seeing. A well known example of the use of the word ראייה in this sense is the phrase רואה אני את דברי אדמון, which means: “I confirm and consider as correct and binding the words of Admon.” Every statement in the Torah describing G’d as “seeing,” means that the manner in which His instructions had materialized was “good,” i.e. וירא אלוקים כי טוב, means that G’d was satisfied that the new reality would endure. On the sixth day we read of G’d “saying” וירא אלוקים את כל אשר עשה והנה טוב מאד, G’d decided that the entire universe as it presented itself to Him upon completion was fit to endure. When the Torah describes G’d as saying on the first day after the light had become a reality, וירא אלוקים את האור כי טוב, adding the apparently superfluous words את האור, the reason is that without these words the reader would have construed the Torah as describing G’d’s reaction to the creation of שמים וארץ instead of the creation of אור. It would have been incorrect to describe G’d as having already decreed that the universe was to endure before He had completed the whole universe as planned. As long as only the raw materials תהו ובהו, the elements used to create heaven and earth existed, no guarantee existed that they would endure. On the days following, the raw materials needed to form an atmosphere, create solid masses of earth, etc., were created, and thus the permanence of the original “embryo” of a universe was assured. What is described during the second day (stage) of creation was incomplete, and therefore the words וירא אלוקים כי טוב is not found until halfway through the third day when that part of creation had been completed.
   @ויבדל אלוקים בין האור ובין החושך. “G’d separated the light from the darkness.” The word חושך in this verse does not refer to the same חושך as in verse 1. There it had referred to black fire, whereas here it refers to a mere absence of light. This absence of light occurred as G’d had allocated to the light a certain length of time during which it would shine before it would again shine after an interval had elapsed.
   Nachmanides writes that some commentators believe that the light of which our verse speaks had been created by G’d in anticipation of His creating the universe and that it had been held in “reserve” for the moment when it would be required. It had been created in the “West,” meaning immediately before nightfall, so that it had not actually functioned before the darkness referred to in verse one. This would explain the grammar in the line ויהי ערב ויהי בוקר, an indication that the light had preceded night followed by the first morning of .the first day. [seeing that the terms “day” and “night” prior to the time when the sun and moon were placed in the sky is different from the way we understand these words today, speculations on the subject are no more than natural. Ed.]
   1,5. ויקרא אלוקים לאור יום, “G’d named the light “day.” Seeing that the Torah later on tells us that man named all the living creatures, it mentions here that G’d Himself named these phenomena. Ibn Ezra explains the word ויקרא, [a term normally used only when there is someone who can hear the caller, something not the case here, Ed] as meaning that G’d assigned light its properties and night its properties.
   Nachmanides explains the term יום and לילה here as the limitations imposed on both day and night by G’d when He created them, i.e. He defined their properties. The period of light being known as “day,” and the period of night being known as “night.”
   @ויהי ערב ויהי בוקר, “it was evening, it was morning.” According to Ibn Ezra, the beginning of night is called ערב, evening, on account of light and darkness mixing with one another. The beginning of the day, on the other hand, is known as בוקר, morning, the term referring to man now being able to inspect and distinguish different shapes.
   @ים אחד. “one day.” According to <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> the word is chosen to remind us that G’d is unique.
   Nachmanides claims that the reason why the Torah does not write יום ראשון, “a first day,” is because an ordinal number such as “first” can be used only if there already exists a “second.” In this case there was not yet a second day.” Other commentators feel that we are dealing here with an oblique reference to the motion of the planets, the earth describing an orbit once in 24 hours around its axis so that in different locations at different times there is always one location where it becomes morning. The same is true, of course, of there being always a location where it becomes evening. In other words, a day has been completed when every part of the globe has experienced an evening and a morning.
   1,6. יהי רקיע, “let there be a horizon” The raw material we referred to earlier as the one called שמים, heaven, would now be stretched over the expanse of the water.
   @ויעש אלוקים את הרקיע, the term עשייה always denotes the completion of a process, making something fit to perform its purpose without further ado.
   1,7. ויהי כן. “so it came to be.” Nachmanides queries the need of the Torah to write these words. Granted that after the first report in the Torah of G’d giving a directive the Torah had to inform us that G’d’s directive had been carried out; here the Torah had already added after G’d giving the directive that He Himself carried it out to the last detail, עשייה; so why did we need to be told that it indeed came to be? Nachmanides concludes that this is why the <i>Bereshit Rabbah 4,6</i> on this expression writes that concerning this expression Ben Zoma made a great commotion among the scholars. He questioned the entire series of the expression ויהי כן, seeing we have an explicit statement in Psalms 33,6 that the heavens were made completely, in their last detail, at the word of G’d. It is clear that Ben Zoma did not question the words ויעש אלוקים as being strange, but the words ויהי כן. [by the way the <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> does not answer the question there but only at the end of chapter 10. Ed.] The answer given is that G’d’s directive was carried out immediately, without delay, and that He, being G’d, did not have to exert Himself in any manner in order to bring about what He intended. Not only that, but the words ויהי כן include the assurance that as long as heaven will exist, it will exist in the format it was created at that time. [not like earth which has been subject to great upheavals from time to time, not the least of which was the deluge. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra explains that the words ויהי כן should be read as if they referred to what follows, so that we would realize that when the first verse already spoke about a phenomenon known as שמים, the reference as to what is now being named as שמים by G’d.
   Nachmanides adds further that the heavens referred to in these verses are not the planetary system as we know it, but describe part of the <i>merkavah,</i> the celestial regions forming the entourage of the Creator, as in Ezekiel 1,22 ודמות על ראשי החיות רקיע כעין הקרח הנורא נטוי על ראשיהם מלמעלה, “and as for the semblance of the expanse above the heads of the <i>chayot,</i> it resembled awesome ice, spread out above their heads.” The Torah did not write a word about the creation of these creatures which formed part of Ezekiel’s vision, just as it had not reported a word about the creation of the angels or any other disembodied phenomena in the universe. The Torah lumps together all these phenomena as having been created on the second day when the creation of the רקיע, later named שמים, is referred to in only general terms. Basically, these phenomena were all created from the waters, and that is the reason for the repeated use of the term רקיע השמים, the word שמים being a composite, i.e. שם מים, “there is water there.” The planetary system which the Torah describes as G’d placing ברקיע השמים, clearly is not part of the concept רקיע השמים, but consists of inhabitants of that “expanse.”
   Nonetheless, even taking into consideration the words of Nachmanides, we have to add that the word ארץ in the first word of the Torah does indeed refer to the “earth” as we know it, the Torah having used the appellation in anticipation of the globe that became visible on the third day.
   1,9. יקוו המים, “let the waters converge together;” the original תהום was in the original state i.e. cloudy water full of particles of solid matter scattered throughout. At this point G’d decreed for the water to rearrange itself in a manner which would separate the solid particles from it. As a result, the solid particles, earth, would become visible above the water as a distinct phenomenon. The earth would also become dry as a result of being above the water. We are faced here with two apparently contradictory decrees being issued by the Creator. According to our knowledge of the laws of physics, earth, which has a higher specific weight than water, should remain submerged in water, and here G’d commanded earth to become visible, i.e. to “rise” above the waters of the surrounding oceans. At that time both the waters and the earth were assigned their names, i.e. ימים ויבשת, “oceans and dry land.”
   1,10. ויקרא אלוקים ליבשה ארץ. “G’d named the dry land ארץ. The name יבשה is appropriate, seeing that as soon as the water is removed from the dust, [one of the four basic raw materials. Ed.] that is left behind becomes dry.
   @ולמקוה המים קרא ימים, “He named the collection of waters ימים.” The reason why the waters were now described as ימים, oceans, is because the ground at the bottom of the ocean is called ים, as we know from Isaiah 11,9 כמים לים מכסים, “as the waters which cover the ocean.”
   @וירא אלוקים כי טוב, “G’d ‘saw’ that it was good.” A reference to the permanence of the waters covering the bottom of the ocean, a change from the previous condition. [The new condition needed approval by G’d, seeing that nature had carried out His command, as opposed to G’d having done it Himself, as on the second day. (verse 7). Ed.]
   1,11. תדשא הארץ דשא, “let the earth become capable of producing herbs.” Some commentators believe that the word דשא is equivalent to עשב, small thin grass, i.e. grass which has not yet produced seed. The word עשב when used in the Torah would then describe grass that has grown high enough to produce seed capable of reproducing itself.
<i>
   Rashi</i> does not accept this interpretation but believes that the word דשא is a collective term for green vegetation of a primitive nature covering the surface of the earth. Hence, the word דשא does not need an adjective to define it more closely. 
   Nachmanides queries <i>Rashi’s</i> statement, saying that if he were right the word דשא would never appear in the plural mode, whereas our sages speak of combinations of several kinds of .דשאים. Therefore we must accept the view that the word דשא describes grass that has not fully grown. Any plant that has not developed to the stage of reproducing itself, i.e. having produced its own seed, is called דשא. This is also reflected in the word תדשא, a directive to continue to develop eventually into fruit-bearing trees, why else would the Torah not write תוצא הארץ דשא ותוציא עץ פרי, “let the earth produce herbs, and let it produce a fruit-bearing tree?” Clearly, the tree is merely a continuation of a growth process that commenced as דשא. Nachmanides queries further why the Torah does not mention עצי סרק, trees which do not produce edible fruit, saying “why does the Torah not mention non fruit bearing trees and why was the earth commanded to produce only fruit-bearing trees?” He answers that actually the wording of the Torah alerted the sages to say that the so-called עצי סרק also produce fruit; however, after the earth was cursed as a result of the original sin, the fruit of these trees was cursed also and became inedible or poisonous.
   Nachmanides goes on to explain that the verse may be understood in the following sequence: first the earth was commanded to produce primitive plants. Once the earth had been able to comply with this part of G’d’s directive, He directed earth to produce more sophisticated vegetation, such as fruit-bearing trees, the trunks of which were also edible. Nachmanides adds that the reason the Torah did not assign a specific day as being the one on which the earth carried out this directive was that earth will forever continue to produce vegetation. This was not a one-time event, such as the establishment of a horizon, oceans, etc. Moreover, the earth is a permanent phenomenon in this universe regardless of the fact that certain parts of the earth produce vegetation and other parts do not.
   1,12. ועץ עושה פרי, and fruit-bearing trees.” The earth violated the Creator’s commandment as it had been commanded to produce also edible trunks. It was afraid that if its trunk would taste as good as its fruit, both man and beast would eat both trunk and fruit and the species would die out.
   1,14. יהי מאורות, “let there be luminaries;” according to <i>Rashi</i> these luminaries had already been created on the first day but were not made operative, i.e. placed in their respective orbits in the sky until the fourth day. 
   Nachmanides explains that the light which had been created on the first day illuminated the basic universe still in a state of chaos, and on the second day G’d prevented this light from illuminating the earth’s foundation (shining only in the sky, the רקיע), whereas once the dry land, יבשה came into existence on the third day, there was darkness on the face of the earth, until, on the fourth day, G’d created sun and moon, etc This is why the Torah bothered to tell us that these luminaries were intended to provide light in our part of the universe. The word ברקיע indicates that until that time this light had functioned only above the sky. Now it was available also for creatures whose habitat was below the sky.
   The phrasing יהי אורות, which suggests there had not been any such luminaries prior to that day, means only that G’d had decreed already on the first day that the raw material functioning as light in the heavens should henceforth also be the one giving illumination on earth. Now, on the fourth day, the time had come to translate that potential into practice, the larger luminary to shine by day and the smaller one by night.
   1,15. ויעש אלוקים, “G’d made completely, etc.” seeing that the Torah says immediately afterwards that ויתן אותם אלוקים ברקיע השמים, “G’d positioned them in the sky of the heaven”, it is clear that these celestial bodies were not part of the celestial bodies themselves but were separate entities in their own right.
   @את שני המאורות הגדולים, “the two large luminaries;” according to our sages in <i>Chulin 60,</i> both luminaries were originally of equal size, the moon having been downsized. According to the grammarian Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, the meaning of the word גדולים for both luminaries reflects merely the fact that both appear so much larger than the stars.[and need not mean that one was downsized. Ed.]
   1,18. ולמשול ביום ובלילה, “and to have dominion by day and night respectively.” This “dominion” would manifest itself in these luminaries materially influencing changes on earth, such as in the growth of vegetation, climate changes at different times of the year, etc. The sun would govern matters involving heat and dryness, whereas the moon would govern matters involving cold and wet matters (high and low tide of the oceans, as well as the promoting of plant growth in the watery regions.)
   @ולהבדיל בין האור והחושך, ”as well as to separate daylight from darkness.” According to Ibn Ezra, the function of separating between daylight and darkness is one performed by both the sun and the moon. Both sun and moon at daybreak and in the evening, signal by their appearance that the darkness or daylight respectively is about to emerge or disappear.
   Nachmanides understands the words אור and חושך as alternates for “day” and “night.” as this is the name give to light and darkness respectively. We have been told this already in verse 7, when G’d named these phenomena accordingly, having in mind more advanced stages of the development of the universe. Our verse would simply mean that the sun governs by day whereas the moon governs by night.
   1,20. ישרצו המים, “let the waters teem, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that any living creature which is devoid of height is called שרץ, such as the small flying insects which are known as שרץ העוף to describe that though they are capable of flight they are tiny, and are therefore called שרץ העוף. The ants etc., also tiny land-based creatures, are called שרץ הארץ. 
   Nachmanides queries <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, pointing out that the Torah used the same phrasing as a blessing in Genesis 9,7 ואתם פרו ורבו שרצו בארץ ורבו בה, and the grand children of Noach were certainly not midgets or anything like it. In light of this he explains the meaning of the word ישרצו in terms of how such creatures move. He claims that the term שרץ refers to rapid movement, whereas the term רמש refers to the manner in which the bodies of these creatures practically hug the ground they move on. They are restless by nature, hardly ever reposing and remaining still. The expression ישרצו המים then is addressed to the motion of the waters in which these minute creatures make their habitat. Every four-legged flying creature is called שרץ העוף as opposed to two legged birds with wings. The latter are called עוף (as a species without the additional word שרץ). The latter practically only move while flying, as opposed to the small creatures, that frequently walk in a fashion.
   @ועוף יעופף על הארץ, “and the birds flying above the earth.” Seeing that the creatures whose habitat was the water were created on the fifth day, the Torah had to spell out that not only the fish, etc., were created on that day but also the birds, although they do not inhabit the water but fly about above the earth or the water. As to the verse (Genesis 2,19) which details that G’d fashioned the beasts of the field on the 6th day as well as the verse ויצר אלוקים מן האדמה את כל חית השדה ואת כל עוף השמים, which at first glance sounds contradictory, for either G’d created the birds on the fifth day and as originating in water, or He created them on the sixth day, and they originated on the dry land, on אדמה, is explained by our sages in חולין to mean that the birds were made out of material which had accumulated in muddy puddles.
   @נפש חיה, “a disembodied life-force.” fish are part of the water both in body and in spirit, [their blood not being the carrier of their disembodied life-force נפש.] G’d had imbued them with a life-force from the earth (globe) itself as opposed to man whose life force emanated in the celestial regions.
   1,21. ויברא אלוקים את התנינים הגדולים, “G’d created the large sea-monsters.” According to Nachmanides the Torah used the term בריאה for the “creation” of these sea monsters because of their tremendous size, a term normally reserved for creating something out of nothing. The Torah had used the same term when G’d created man, as man is such a superior creature that he cannot be compared to other mammals. The reason why the Torah fails to add the customary ויהי כן, signaling that the phenomenon now created endured, is precisely because in this instance it did not endure.
   According to our sages in <i>Baba Batra</i> 75 G’d killed the female of the pair and salted away its flesh in order to serve it for the righteous at a future time.
   1,22. ויברך אותם אלוקים, “G’d blessed them.” Our sages explain that these creatures were in need of a blessing as they are constantly subject to being hunted. The free-roaming beasts on land also required a blessing, but due to the serpent’s having lured man into sin, G’d withheld such a blessing from the entire species.
   Nachmanides writes that the blessing given to the fish and birds extended also automatically to the mammals created on the sixth day, seeing the common denominator of these creatures was a) they were mobile, b) they could only procreate as a pair (male and female). The plants that were created on the third day were not mobile and not created as separate male and females so that they were less in need of this special blessing that they should be able to multiply. Hence we do not find this blessing at the conclusion of G’d’s activity on the third day.
   1,24. ורמש, according to <i>Rashi</i> this word describes the creatures which creep on the ground. Nachmanides queried this, pointing out that in Genesis 7,21 in connection with the deluge, the Torah writes:ויגוע כל בשר הרומש על הארץ בעוף ובבהמה ובחיה ובכל שרץ השורץ על הארץ וכל האדם. “All flesh that moved on the earth perished, both fowl and cattle and, beast, and every swarming thing that swarms on the earth, and every human.” In view of this he interprets the word רמש as related to the root רמס. When speaking of the four-legged animals, the term refers to their trampling the earth with their feet, whereas when speaking about the small creatures, it means that they hug the earth with their entire bodies while in motion.
   1,26. ויאמר אלוקים נעשה אדם בצלמנו, “G’d said: ‘let us make man in our image.’” The Torah assigned a special paragraph to the creation of man as he is such a superior creature, totally different in nature from all other living creatures. 
   The word נעשה, in the plural, is used because seeing that on the first day of creation G’d was completely alone in the universe when He created something out of nothing, in the meantime all the phenomena which had come into existence since that day would contribute some of their own essence to the body of man. In other words, earth itself had become a partner in G’d’s creative activities and was invited to contribute to the making of the first human being. There is nothing surprising about this, as G’d had already empowered both water and earth on the fifth day and the early part of the sixth day respectively, to generate living creatures of differing capacities. G’d contributed the living soul which did not originate in either the domain of water or earth but in the celestial regions. (Genesis 2,7)
   Our sages explained the expression נעשה as G’d having consulted with other celestial beings before creating man. The reason for this “consultation” was that the angel in charge of running the physical universe on behalf of G’d had now to be consulted or instructed when a human being would emerge from earth, a domain which this angel was entitled to consider as his “backyard.” 
    Rabbi Saadyah gaon understands the plural נעשה as basically a variation of the singular, similar to Balak when he invited Bileam to curse the Jewish people, saying to him אולי אוכל נכה בו, “perhaps I may be able to defeat it.” (the people). (Numbers 22,6) Rabbi Saadyah quotes more examples of plural formulations in reality being singulars dressed up as plurals in order to make them sound more impressive
   @בצלמנו, “ín our image.” A reference to the facial features of man. The word צלם appears in such a context in Daniel 3,19, “וצלם אנפהי אשתנו, and the features of his face were contorted.” The Torah added the word בדמותינו, “in our form,” as the word is related to דומא, the physical contours of creatures or objects, as this word is used to describe phenomena whose external appearances and shapes are similar to one another. The Torah, in this case, draws attention to man and other mammals produced by the earth on the sixth day having much in common in terms of external appearance and raw materials used to produce them. The plural refers to the spiritual similarity of man to disembodied celestial beings on the one hand, and his physical resemblance to purely terrestrial beings on the other. The reason why the Torah added the words בצלם אלוקים ברא אותו, is to emphasise the miraculous properties possessed by a creature such as man.
   @וירדו בדגת הים ובעוף השמים ובבהמה, “and to exercise dominion over the fish in the sea, the fowl in the heavens, and the domestic beasts.” Although at first glance, the free-roaming beasts do not seem to be included, this is not so; the term בהמה here includes all the beasts on earth.
   1,28. ויברך אותם אלוקים, “G’d blessed them.” This is a blessing empowering man to translate his desire to rule the earth into practice, and this is why the words ויאמר להם, “He said to them,” are added as an introduction to the wording of the blessing, an introduction we do not find on the other occasion (1,22) when the words ויברך אלוקים has been used. 
   @ומלאו את הארץ, “and fill the earth, (populate it).” Without man multiplying, his task of ruling the earth would be impossible to carry out. Alternately, the meaning is that man should not congregate on a narrow strip of the earth, but should migrate, different families taking up residence in different parts of the globe. [as G’d decreed when He destroyed the Tower which had been built to prevent man’s dispersal over the globe. Ed.]
   1,29. ואת כל העץ אשר בו פרי עץ, “and every tree which contains fruit of the tree” the Torah permitted the eating of the seeds of grain producing plants such as kernels of wheat etc, and the eating of the fruit of the tree, but not the eating of the trunk itself, just as also the stalks of the herbs were not allowed to be eaten [in order to ensure that the species would not become defunct. Ed.] After the first sin, eating of the stalks of the herbs themselves was permitted, as we read ואכלת את עשב השדה, ”you will eat the grass of the field,” (Genesis 3,18) The eating of meat had not been permitted at all, as the animals due to their mobility have a life force, נפש, which is superior to the “life-force” of plants. This is manifest in their freedom to choose the kind of food they want to eat as well as in their ability to choose where to make their habitat. They are intelligent enough to flee from locations causing them pain, or from death threatening situations. Once the animals became corrupt, as detailed in Genesis 6,12, they forfeited this legal protection from man the predator, and man was given permission to eat meat provided the animal was dead first. After all, the very existence of the animals was for the sake of and convenience of man. Even after this permission to eat the meat of the animals was granted, it was forbidden to eat heir life-force, נפש. (Genesis 9,4) This is basically why slaughtering of the animals prior to eating their flesh was decreed by the Torah for the Jewish people. This is also the meaning of the sages stating that causing pain to animals is a Biblical prohibition. (Nachmanides on our verse)
   1,30. את כל ירק עשב לאכלה, ויהי כן. “every green herb for food; it was so.” I was puzzled why at this point the Torah had to add the line ויהי כן, “it was so, or it remained so.” Seeing that in verse 29 G’d had already given these directives including the word ויאמר, it is obvious that His directive would be carried out .Why does the Torah need to confirm this? The answer is that in this instance no potential became an actual after G’d uttered the directive. G’d had only made sure that the plants in question would be suitable for man when he wanted to eat them. My sainted father the רא'ש, explained to me that the words ויהי כן, in this instance, mean that G’d caused man not to develop a craving for meat which would cause him to indulge in killing animals for food. Nowadays, man is sometimes even imbued with the wish to kill other human beings. Were it not for a natural tendency not to kill even animals, we would all kill one another at the slightest provocation.
   1,31. והנה טוב מאד, and lo, it was very good!” Some commentators say that in view of the presence on earth now of the most superior creature, man, the Torah now describes the entire universe in loftier terms than previously, i.e. instead of merely “good,” it had now become “very good.” In <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> an opinion is expressed that the expression is a reference to death [in our versions <i>gehinom</i>.] The student hearing this was understandably dumbfounded wanting to know how purgatory could be “very good?” The answer was that there can be no existence without .a corresponding loss.
   [If I understand correctly, the concept is that in order to convert anything into something else, such as raw material into a human being, the components so used will be missing elsewhere, in the place they were taken from. Similarly, the creation of life which is of limited duration, creates the automatic concept of death, which occurs when that life expires. “Death” implies that something which exists now has ceased to exist. Ed.]
   Yet another view in that <i>Midrash</i> describes the expression טוב מאד as referring to the evil urge, the יצר הרע. This is equivalent to the מדת פורענות, negative virtue. This is why Onkelos translates the expression as והא תקין לחדא, i.e. that it was established together with the יצר טוב, seeing that evil is a necessary counterpart to the good which could not exist [be perceived as such Ed.] unless there is an alternative.
   2,1. וכל צבאם, and all their hosts” The hosts of the earth, i.e. man and beast, as well as all the vegetation. It includes also the hosts of the heavens, so that we have here an indirect reference to the angels, i.e. that they had also been created during the six days of creation.
   2,2. ויכל אלוקים ביום השביעי, “G’d completed on the seventh day, etc.” Although G’d knows exactly when the sixth day ends and the seventh day commences, to the onlooker it might appear as if the seventh day had already started. According to the plain meaning of the text, the line means that whatever G’d did on the seventh day was the completion of the seven days of creation.
   @ויברך ויקדש, “He blessed and sanctified.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the words ויברך ויקדשrefer to the manna. During the weekdays one <i>omer</i> of manna per person fell from the heavens, and on the Sabbath eve twice the amount, so that the Sabbath was sanctified by no manna descending.
   Rav Saadyah gaon explains that the blessing and sanctity are granted to those who observe the Sabbath in accordance with <i>halachah</i>. 
   Ibn Ezra explains the blessing bestowed on the Sabbath as additional strength granted to the bodies to enable them to procreate and the additional mental and spiritual dimension known as נשמה יתירה, “additional soul,” which Jews enjoy on that day. 
   @ויקדש אותו, “He sanctified it.” This day is not slated for work being performed as are the six working days.
   @אשר ברא אלוקים לעשות, “which G’d had created to be developed further.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning is that work (of a creative nature) originally intended to be carried out only on the seventh day, was moved forward so that G’d performed it already on the sixth day. 
   According to Ibn Ezra the verse tells us that G’d enabled the various creatures, including plants, to be able to procreate and ensure their continued existence on earth
   Nachmanides holds that as of this day G’d desisted from any creative activity which was known as בריאה, i.e. creating matter out of no tangible raw material, יש מאין, “<i>ex nihilo</i>.” The meaning of the additional word לעשות, is that G’d did not even put finishing touches to phenomena He had already created in their primitive state. 
   Nachmanides adds that we should know that the expression ששת ימים does not only refer to the six days of creation in a literal sense, but to the entire projected length of time this universe is to endure, i.e. 6000 years. This is why our sages described the length of a “day” in terms of G’d’s calendar as equivalent to 1000 years of our calendar. During the first two days the universe consisted completely of water. These “days” are an allusion to the 2000 years described by our sages a <i>tohu,</i> a degree of chaos, seeing that nothing had been completed during these two “days.” Seeing that during these 2000 years no one proclaimed the name of the Living G’d, our sages described this era as תהו. The first day during which light had been created is basically the period of close to 1000 years during which Adam lived, It is quite possible that even Enosh did not turn to idolatry until Adam had died. The second day which saw the creation of the heavens, etc. also produced a Noach who, with his sons, was righteous, whereas the rest of mankind was doomed to destruction during that millennium. Mankind was destroyed by water, another sign that this was the dominating influence during that era. 
   The third day, i.e. also the third millennium, saw the emergence of an Avraham who was 48 years of age at the beginning of that millennium. Avraham was the first human being who succeeded in attracting many people to worship G’d as the only deity. He had begun converting people years before G’d told him to leave Charan and to move to what was then the land of Canaan. It was also the millennium during the middle of which Torah was revealed to the Jewish people at Mount Sinai. It is important to remember that with the onset of dusk after sunset the following day has already begun. [Avraham’s being born in the year1952 after the creation of Adam is considered as if he had been born during dusk of the second “day,” a stage preparatory to the third day (millennium).] Observance of the commandments of the Torah is equivalent of “the World having produced its fruit.” The fourth day, (or millennium) during which the sun and moon were created also produced the first Temple which Solomon built in Jerusalem. (72 years into the third millennium). This millennium lasted until 172 years after the destruction of the first Temple. The day the Temple was consecrated was a day of light when heavenly fire descended to consume thousands of sacrifices. The glory of G’d filled the Temple and the heavenly fire was reposing on the altar as does a lion that has eaten his fill. In other words, Israel’s light shone forth at that time as did the sun when placed in orbit for the first time. From that time on Israel’s glory diminished fairly steadily culminating in exile of the people and the subsequent minor rally during which the second Temple was built, a period which can be best compared to the kind of night during which the moon is the only source of light available.
   The fifth day which produced most of the living creatures of the water and the birds of the sky, is symbolized by the fifth millennium, commencing 172 years after the destruction of the second Temple. This was an era to which the verse in Chabakuk 1,14-15 can be compared. The prophet there writes: ותעשה אדם כדגי הים כרמש לא מושל בו. כולה בחכה העלה יגורהו בחרמו ויאספהו במכמרתו עלכן ישמח ויגל. “You have made mankind like the fish of the sea, like creeping things that have no ruler. He has fished them all up with a line, pulled them up in his trawl and gathered them in his net. That is why he rejoices and is glad.” [The prophet complains about the apparent absence of G’d’s providence during this millennium when human beings were treated as if they were fish in the sea with no value to their lives. Ed.] This era did not produce men of caliber who sought the nearness of their Creator. (Isaiah 31,1)
   On the morning of the sixth day the earth produced various land-based mammals, all of this occurring prior to sunrise as alluded to in Psalms 104, 22 תזרח השמש יאספון ואל מעונתם ירבצון, “by the time the sun rises they came home and crouch in their dens.” Following this, man was created in the image of G’d on the sixth day (sixth millennium) Then commenced the period of man’s dominance as described in the subsequent verse in Psalms 104,23יצא אדם לפעלו ולעבודתו עדי ערב, “man then goes to his work, to his labour until the evening.” David describes the sixth millennium during the early part of which the “animals” roam the world more or less unimpeded. These “animals” are humans who do not know their Creator, and therefore are hardly better than animals. After man’s creation, described as part of sunrise, will come the redeemer, scion of the house of David, who has been made in the image of the Lord of whom it has been written: (Daniel 7,13) וארו עםי ענני שמיא כבר אנש אתה הוא ועד עתיק יומיא מטה וקדמוהי הקרבוהי ולה יהיב שלטן ויקר ומלכו, “and behold with the clouds of heaven, one like a man came; he came up to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him before Him. He gave him dominion, glory and kingship, peoples nations and languages.” [although our author is quoting Nachmanides he has left out several sentences, perhaps he did not have the updated text that we have nowadays thanks to Rabbi Chavell.]
   It would seem from the Torah’s terminology which uses the same words to describe two different scenarios, i.e. days and millennia, that at the beginning of the sixth millennium an especially powerful and violent nation will emerge, a nation and religion which will be more monotheistic than previous ones. [reference to Islam. Ed.]
    
   The seventh day is the Sabbath, which in terms of millennia describes the future known as עולם הבא, an idyllic state involving מנוחה rest in a positive sense, something which the sages speak about. Some commentators see in the word לעשות the opposite of עשה, i.e. something G’d had done already, a reference to the spiritually negative forces in the universe, the מזיקים, the potential for which G’d had created. The phenomena have not been equipped with a body, hence the word לעשות describes them in their incomplete state. Still other commentators see in the word לעשות instructions to existing phenomena such as earth, water, etc., [in other words “nature” Ed.] to continue the process as it no longer involved anything basically new. From now on man would be the product of his parents, a reproduction of the ongoing process here called לעשות.
   In the <i>Midrash</i> the wordלעשות is understood to refer to something G’d had deliberately omitted to create at the time, i.e. the רוח צפוני the north wind. This wind would be put to use when it is time to judge the idolaters in the future. G’d will challenge them by saying to them that if there is any substance to their deities, He challenges them to produce the north wind which He had left in reserve for their expertise. If they would prove unable to produce this north wind, they would be convicted of having worshipped totally useless phenomena as deities.
   The reason why the Torah does not conclude with the words ויהי ערב ויהי בוקר יום שביעי, “it was evening and morning the seventh day,” is that the Jewish people would honour the Sabbath by commencing it before the end of the sixth day, thus lending it an extra measure of sanctity.
   2,5. וכל שיח השדה, “and all the greenery of the field, etc.” The vegetation which had begun to sprout forth on the third day had actually not broken through the surface of the soil until the sixth day when Adam prayed for rain to materialize. When the rain materialized all these plants surfaced above the earth.
   Nachmandes, explaining the literal meaning of our verse, the פשט, says that whereas on the third day all the plants 
   mentioned materialized in their mature form, they did not develop as there was no one to tend them. The reason why the vegetation here is not described as שיח האדמה, the vegetation of the earth, but as שיח השדה, is that the word שדה is indicative of something subject to agriculture, ground that is being worked. This had not started until after the first rainfall.
   2,6. ואד יעלה מן הארץ, “vapour would rise from the earth, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> these words refer to the fashioning of man, G’d, so to speak, used the moisture called אד to make a kind of dough of the mixture of earth and these vapours, allowing Him to fashion and mould man in the shape He had intended for him.
   According to the plain meaning of the text it appears that seeing the Torah writes that at that time no rain had yet descended on earth, there was no point to rain descending until man had been created who would till the ground after the rain had fallen. The Torah therefore describes that vapours from the earth could keep the plants alive even in the temporary absence of man to tend to them.
   2,8. ויטע ה' אלוקים גן בעדן מקדם, “The Lord G’d planted a garden in Eden, in the east.” He planted the garden to the east of an area known as Eden.
   Some commentators believe that the country was called “Eden,” as in Kings II 19,12. Onkelos understands the word מקדם as מלקדמין, as of ancient times, which Nachmanides equates with G’d not transplanting the trees in that garden from another location, but making them grow from the very roots, as indicated by the words ויצמח ה' אלוקים, the Lord G’d made grow, etc.” In other words, the directive for these trees to grow was given long before G’d instructed the earth on the third day to produce vegetation. G’d had decreed already at that early stage of creation that this spot would become the site of גן עדן. He had even selected the precise spot for each tree in that garden, personally. The earth had not had any leeway in the matter as it had elsewhere on the globe.
   As to the Torah writing that G’d placed Adam in that garden in order to work it and preserve it, this means that Adam was to sow and make additional rows of trees, etc. If the trees of the original garden had required tending, who would have done this after Adam had been expelled?
   2,9. ועץ החיים בתוך הנן. “and the tree of life in the center of the garden.” The meaning of the words: “the tree of life was in the center of the garden,” is that the location and function of this tree was known. This is why the Torah describes it as “at the center” of the garden and not simply as ”in the garden.” Onkelos also translates the word בתוך as meaning “at the center.” This is also what Chavah answered the serpent when she said: “G’d has said not to eat from the tree in the center of the garden,” without mentioning the name of that tree. Seeing that she had mentioned the location of the tree, it was as if she had identified it by name. Seeing that this was so, it is difficult to understand how both the tree of life and the tree of knowledge were in the center of the garden?
   Nachmanides explains that this is no problem. There was an ערוגה, “furrow,” in the center of the garden and both these trees grew out of this furrow. The entire furrow is described by the Torah as “the center, אמצע, of the garden. [although the Torah never used this word, only בתוך, which does not have to mean precisely the center. Ed.]
   There are still other commentators who state that the tree of life was precisely at the center of the garden, whereas the tree of knowledge surrounded it with its foliage. In this manner both trees were located in the center of the garden, the tree of life in the more narrow sense of the word. This would also explain why G’d was not concerned that man would eat from the fruit of the tree of life immediately before he would eat from the tree of knowledge having already assured himself of eternal life. Seeing that the tree of life was difficult to get at due to it being surrounded by the branches of the tree of knowledge, it did not present a challenge until man had become mortal.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains that the tree of knowledge and the tree of life were one and the same tree. As to the Torah once speaking of the “tree of life,” and once of the “tree of knowledge,” this is no different from our describing a certain person once as very intelligent, and once as being righteous. These two characteristics are not mutually exclusive. The tree in question also possessed several characteristics. This is also plausible when we consider the woman’s answer to the serpent when she said (in the same breath) “from the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat whereas G’d said not to eat from the tree in the centre of the garden.” According to Chavah only a single tree had been placed out of bounds to man. I cannot understand what Rabbi Joseph Kimchi does with verse 23 in chapter 3 where G’d expresses His concern about man now wanting to eat from the tree of life. According to the worthy Rabbi they had already eaten from that tree! 
   2,16. מכל עץ הגן אכל תאכל. “You may eat from all the trees of the garden.” <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 16,6 sees in these words a warning not to eat even a minute amount of live tissue from any animal. This seems hard to understand in view of meat having remained forbidden to man until after the deluge. (Genesis 9,3-4) Rabbeinu Nissim explains that the prohibition to eat meat concerned only the killing of an animal in order to eat its meat. The meat of animals which died of natural causes had not been forbidden at all. Living tissue, even if it had fallen off the animal, was prohibited, however.
   2,17. לא תאכל ממנו, “you must not eat thereof.” A reference to the fruit of the tree, as the trunk itself was inedible and man therefore had not been cautioned against eating it.
   @כי ביום אכלך ממנו מות תמות, “for on the day you eat from it you will surely become mortal.” This is not a warning of immediate death [as it would have been equivalent to the dying out of the human species. Ed.] but a warning not to forfeit eternal life on earth.
   There are some commentators who hold that prior to eating from the fruit of the tree of knowledge even other sins would not have resulted in a death penalty, seeing man would have lacked the knowledge of good and evil which he had only acquired as a result of eating from the fruit of that tree. The meaning of מות תמות then would be that after eating from the tree of knowledge and acquiring the knowledge of good and evil, any subsequent sins were liable to be considered capital sins, with death as their punishment.
   Nachmanides wrote that according to the scientists of his time, man was a mortal creature already before he ate from the tree of knowledge due to the fact that he was composed of a number of different (4) raw materials and all these amalgams ultimately disintegrate. What then was the difference that occurred after Adam ate from the tree? Had he not eaten from the tree, death, when it would eventually occur, would not be as a form of punishment for a sin committed. His death would be of the same category as that of people who knowingly ate תרומה, although not being priests or members of a priest’s household, and similar examples of what are known as מיתה בידי שמים, execution at the hands of heavenly forces. 
   Our sages, ignoring the opinion of scientists, hold that thanks to his divine soul, man would have lived on indefinitely, his soul counteracting the inherent weakness of any creature consisting of four raw materials. His sin neutralized the power of his soul to protect him from death. Actually, the belief in the mortality (eventual metamorphosis) of all phenomena which consist of more than one raw material, is held only by people who lack in true faith and believe that the existence of the universe is not due to G’d’s free will, but was the result of an immutable law of nature, long preceding the existence of any G’d. For true believers who know in their deepest heart that the universe is the result of the will of a totally free Creator, the continued existence of anything this Creator has initiated, does not pose a problem. The only thing that would put an end to the absolute life expectancy of man was the fact that he violated the commandment and ignored the warning of what would follow. 
   It is possible that all the fruit of the various trees of the גן עדן, barring those of the tree of knowledge, were completely assimilated by the human body, as was the manna later on, and therefore did not represent a foreign body, something that undermined man’s health, resulting in his eventual death. Having eaten from the forbidden fruit, Adam once more became –in the words of his Creator- “dust you are, and to dust you must return.”
   2,18. לא טוב היות האדם לבדו, “it is not good for man to remain solitary.” Clearly it had not been G’d’s intention already at the time He created Adam that he should remain single, seeing that all other creatures were created in pairs, male and female specimen. Even trees and herbs contain seed to enable them to “mate” and to reproduce their kind.
   However, it is possible to argue that man was created with two faces and that between them (within a single body) they possessed the ingredients necessary to reproduce so that the second “face” enabled Adam to help him to reproduce. G’d saw, however, that it would be better that man’s עזר, assistant, should stand independently, facing him, so that he could see her having the choice to separate from her or to closely associate with her in accordance with his wishes. This is the meaning of the words: עזר כנגדו.
   @וייצר ה' אלוקים מן האדמה, “the Lord G’d fashioned out of the earth, etc. Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains the word וייצר, as meaning: “He gathered together.” This word appears in a similar meaning as יוצר גובאי where it means gathering. [I have not found the source. Ed.]
   2,20. ולאדם לא מצא עזר כנגדו, ”and for Adam he had not found a suitable helpmate.” Rabbi Joseph Kimchi views Adam as the subject in this verse, i.e. Adam had been unable to find a suitable helpmate for himself. This was because the Lord had not presented him with such a choice, had not introduced a candidate to him. G’d knew that none of the existing creatures would be a suitable helpmate for Adam. The word ולאדם is therefore to be understood as a metaphor, a pronoun, the line meaning: “and for himself, personally, He had not found a suitable helpmate.” We find a similar construction in Genesis 4,23 when Lemech addresses his wives Adah and Tzilah, saying: שמען קולי נשי למך וגו' “listen to what I have to say, oh wives of Lemech.” [who else had he been speaking to that he had to insert his own name? Ed.]
   Nachmanides explains the words וכל אשר יקרא לו נפש חיה הוא שמו, as applying to the subject of a suitable helpmate for himself. <i>Rashi</i> had already stated that the verse is truncated, and the correct sequence should have been וכל נפש חיה אשר יקרא לו האדם הוא שמו, “and whatever name Adam bestowed on any of the living creatures became its permanent name.” Seeing that Adam himself had been described at the very beginning of his existence as נפש חיה, Adam in his quest for a mate, proceeded to screen all the other creatures known as נפש חיה. As soon as he had bestowed the title נפש חיה on any of them, a title which remained permanent, he hoped that such an animal would qualify as his own helpmate, only to find himself disappointed again and again. Also, in recognizing the distinct characteristics of the animals he classified them into groups such as בהמה גסה and בהמה דקה, large cattle and small cattle. The word עזר is used in a wider sense, including the ability to mate with one another and produce offspring. The common denominator of small cattle, such as sheep and goats, is that they are able to mate with one another and produce offspring, whereas the common denominator of large cattle is that they cannot mate with one another successfully.
   Clearly, it had not been within the power of Adam to change the natural characteristics of any of these animals which had been created with their specific tendencies. However, if Adam had found among any of the beasts any that appealed to him in an extraordinary manner, he would have prayed to G’d to adapt the characteristics of such an animal so that it would be suitable as his mate. However, in the event, he found none that even remotely interested him in this regard. We do find that G’d reassigned the functions and appearance of one of Adam’s “ribs” in order to provide him with a more suitable mate. The meaning of the words הוא שמו, is that G’d agreed with the name, i.e. characterization Adam had given to each animal, and He henceforth referred to such creature by the name Adam had given them.
   The truth is that G’d had not wanted to remove a “rib” from Adam until the latter had asked for an as yet non existent creature to become his helpmate, his partner. When, finally, he found such a partner after awakening from his sleep, he named this partner suitably, i.e. אישה as she represented the same components as איש, i.e. himself.
   Some commentators feel that the emphasis in this verse is on the words זאת הפעם, “(only) on this occasion.” Henceforth, woman as well as man would not be direct creations by their Creator, but they would be born by woman, similar to the procreative process common to all mammals. This is another aspect of the wordsאשר ברא אלוקים לעשות, in 2,3 at the end of the report about the creation. Up until then, G’d had practiced the art of בריאה, creation, in the literal sense. Henceforth new phenomena would only be reproductions of existing phenomena, hence לעשות, to complete, to ensure that what had been created originally would not be lost.
   2,24..ודבק באשתו והיו לבשר אחד, “he will cleave to his wife so that they will unite to become one flesh.” This is not a commandment, but means that man will be inherently designed to cleave to his wife for the purpose of founding a family, etc. It does not mean that he has been programmed.
   3,4. ויאמר הנחש אל האשה לא מות תמותון, “the serpent said to the woman: ”you will surely not die.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the serpent had pushed Chavah against the tree first, thus demonstrating to her that touching the tree did not result in any harm to her, contrary to what she had said in the name of G’d. The most common criticism of <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary is that Chavah simply had to reply that seeing the day was not yet over, the fact that she had not died as yet was no proof of anything, and that this was the reason that she had not died as a result of touching the tree. The defenders of <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary are forced to respond that the serpent challenged her by saying that since, according to her own words, she was going to die by the end of the day on account of having touched the tree, she might as well eat of it, seeing she could only die once. The basic objection to <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary is totally invalid, as Chavah had never said a word about dying on that day, but about dying as a result of eating or touching, i.e. immediately. 
   3,6.כי טוב העץ למאכל , “for the tree is good as food.” She had thought originally that the reason why G’d had forbidden the tree was because its fruit was bitter, and the poison of the fruit would result in death to those who ate it. Now she had convinced herself that its fruit was sweet.
   @וכי תאוה לעינים, “and that its appearance caused one to desire it.” We learn that man’s desires are activated by his eyes, by what he sees.
   3,8. וישמעו את קול ה' אלוקים מתהלך בגן, “they heard the voice of the Lord G’d strolling trough the garden.” This is not the only time that we find the word הילוך, walking, associated with קול, a voice. We read in Jeremiah 46,22 קולה כנחש ילך, “She will rustle (sound) away like a snake.”
   Nachmanides understands the word מתהלך as a metaphor for a form of revelation of G’d’s Presence. We have a similar verse in Leviticus 26,12 והתהלכתי בתוככם, “I reveal Myself in your midst,” although in that context it is as a result of Israel obeying all of G’d’s commandments. The meaning of the word לרוח, in the expression לרוח היום, is that prior to a revelation of G’d’s Presence, one of the advance notices is a strong wind such as when Elijah experienced such a revelation at Mount Sinai. (Kings I 19,11) In this instance the wind was not powerful and frightening, but רוח היום of the same force as it was daily when a breeze is blowing. G’d had not intended to frighten Adam and his wife. There are some commentators who understand the line as indicating that Adam and his wife were indeed frightened upon hearing G’d’s voice, and that is why they tried to hide.
   3,10. כי עירום אנכי, “for I am naked.” The fig leaf which they had used to cover themselves only covered their private parts. Although, according to the <i>Midrash,</i> G’d, personally, provided them with no fewer than 24 kinds of ornaments, they had to remove these at the time when they engaged in marital relations.
   3,12. האשה אשר נתת עמדי, “the woman You have given me as my companion, etc.” According to Nachmanides Adam’s excuse was that seeing that G’d had given him Chavah as an עזר, helpmate, everything she would ask or advise him to do would be of benefit and use to him. It had not therefore occurred to him that her advice could be harmful if followed. When G’d punished him, He made plain that Adam’s argument was flawed as how could he ignore G’d’s command and accept a contrary command by one of G’d’s creatures? My sainted father the רא'ש explained that the only reason why Adam could use the excuse he offered was because he had already eaten from the fruit of the tree and had become aware of the difference between good and evil. He accused his wife of having tricked him.
   3,13. מה זאת עשית, “what is this you have done?” How could you have violated My commandment, even though it had not been addressed to you directly but to your husband? Seeing that you are made of his bone, surely you must have realized that My commandment also included you?
   3,16. אל האשה אמר, “to the woman He had said, etc.” G’d did not mention the woman’s eating from the tree as the cause of her punishment as He had done when He announced Adam’s punishment in verse 17. The reason is that she was punished both for the eating and for suggesting that her husband become her partner in crime. The serpent too, had been punished for giving criminal advice to the woman.
   @עצבונך, “your severe discomfort.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this is not physical discomfort, but the mental anguish which is part of raising children. This seems difficult, for if this were the true meaning of the verse, why did the Torah not write the word הרונך, “your pregnancy,” before speaking about raising as yet unborn children? It appears more appropriate therefore to understand the word עצבונך as referring to the monthly discomfort of menstruating, something even women who do not bear children have to contend with.
   @ואל אישך תשוקתך, “and your longing will be for your husband.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets this as the woman’s desire for marital relations with her husband, something that she does not express openly, by words of mouth, but has to wait for passively, seeing that her husband is the initiator, “rules over her.” Nachmanides takes exception to <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, saying that on the contrary, a woman’s natural reticence in these matters is praiseworthy, hardly a punishment.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word תשוקתך as “your obedience,” saying that the wife has to be obedient to the demands of her husband. She requires his permission to carry out plans of her own design, seeing that she is basically under his control.
   It would appear that seeing G’d said to the woman: הרבה ארבה עצבונך והרונך, “I will greatly increase your discomfort, etc.,” including that during pregnancy, that even if the woman takes care to minimize the incidence of marital relations in order to not become pregnant, her natural tendency to engage in marital relations will overcome her unwillingness to become pregnant again and again. In fact her husband, seeing that he rules over her, may force her to submit to having marital relations even against her will.
   3,22. ועתה פן ישלח ידו ולקח גם מעץ החיים, “and now, so that he will not attempt to also take from the tree of life, etc.” Before Adam had eaten from the tree of knowledge and had become mortal, there was no concern that he would eat from that tree, as prior to that sin Adam would not be tempted to do anything against the wishes of His Creator. Besides, he had no need for what that tree had to offer, being himself immortal.
   3,23. וישלחהו, “He expelled him.” According to Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, G’d first sent him outside the boundaries of <i>Gan Eden,</i> and subsequently expelled him by positioning the cherubs to prevent him for regaining access to that garden.
   4,1. והאדם ידע את חוה אשתו, “in the interval Adam had been intimate with his wife Chavah, etc.” When the sages comment that two human beings went to bed and four got up out of that same bed, this refers to what is spelled out in the text. Seeing that the Torah does not specifically mention the female twins born with Kayin and Hevel, the <i>Midrash</i> (<i>Pirkey de Rabbi Eliiezer</i> quoted by Rabbeinu Bachya on Genesis 2,7) also does not mention this. Some commentators understand the words “four descended from that bed,” as referring to Kayin and his twin sister, believing that Hevel had not been born at that time, as the Torah hints when writing ותוסף ללדת את אחיו את הבל, “she again gave birth to Hevel his brother.” (4,2)
   @קניתי איש את ה', “I have acquired a man, with G’d.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word את to mean: “with,” Chavah saying that she had become a partner to G’d.
   Nachmanides comments that Chavah said that this son would be her posthumous possession, (estate) that she would leave behind on this earth when it came time for her to die. He would serve his Creator in lieu of his parents when these would be no longer alive. Alternatively, the meaning of the word את in our verse is similar to ויתהלך חנוך את האלוקים, or in את האלוקים התהלך נח (Genesis 6,9 and Genesis 5,22) “Noach walked with G’d.” She called the one son by a name meaning acquisition, and the second one הבל, as she did not want to spell out her fatalistic outlook of life on earth so that any acquisitions man makes on this earth while alive will prove to have been הבל, in vain, ultimately useless.
   In the whole of the portion known as בראשית prior to the conclusion of the seven days of creation, G’d is referred to only as אלוקים. The four-lettered name of G’d does not appear until verse 4 in chapter 2. From that point on, we also do not only find the four-lettered name of G’d unless accompanied by the name אלוקים. This reflects the statement of our sages that originally G’d had wanted to employ only the attribute of Justice, i.e. אלוקים, when He created His universe. When He realized that the universe would be very short-lived if He insisted on the attribute of Justice, He co-opted the attribute of Mercy, i.e. the four-lettered name of G’d, the tetragram, and He placed it at the beginning of His combined name. When the time came when Chavah described herself as G’d’s partner, He said that from that point on He would employ the attribute of Mercy as His chief attribute in dealing with mankind. This is why from this point on we find only the four-lettered name of G’d (until idolatry was practiced by man. Based on the רא'ש, the author’s father.)
   4,2. ויהי הבל רועה צאן וקין היה עובד אדמה, “and Hevel became a tender of sheep, whereas Kayin became a tiller of the soil.” Ordinarily, we would have expected the Torah to mention Kayin’s vocation first, seeing that he was the first-born. However, seeing that Kayin did not really have a vocation but served the Lord by merely existing, as hinted at by Chavah, who had described him as an acquisition, Hevel’s vocation was mentioned first. When Kayin observed that his brother had chosen a vocation for himself, he too chose a vocation, and became a farmer. Seeing he chose his vocation last, the Torah mentions the vocations of the brothers in that order.
   4,4. והבל הביא גם הוא מבכורות צאנו. “and Hevel had also brought of the choicest of his flocks.” Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, in drawing our attention to the absence of any mention here of first building an altar and presenting the gift to G’d on such an altar, sees this as proof that until Noach after the deluge, the slaughtering of animals even as burnt offerings was not permitted to man.
    וישע ה' אל הבל, “the Lord responded to Hevel, (and his gift). Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains the reason why G’d did not respond to Kayin’s gift as due to the fact that he first ate his fill before giving G’d the share we call <i>bikkurim,</i> the first ripe fruit we produce. Hevel, on the other hand, offered to G’d the very first of the wool his sheep had produced.
   4,5. לא שעה, “He had not responded.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word שעה as meaning “He turned toward,” as in אל ישעו, (Exodus 8,9) “let them not turn toward.” However, in Exodus 5,9 he does not explain it in the same manner. We need to understand the word here as similar to another verse in which it means: “do not turn to other altars.” (Isaiah 17,8)
   4,7. הלא אם תיטיב שאת, “indeed when you will be good there will be a reward (forgiveness).” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of the word שאת is similar to נושא עוון ופשע, “Who forgives sin and deliberate affronts.” (Exodus 34,7)
   According to Ibn Ezra the meaning of the word is “raising,” such as the lifting or raising the face of someone who feels ashamed because he has been rejected and buries his face in his hands so as not to display his shame.
   According to Nachmanides G’d tells Kayin that if he will be good he will even outrank his brother Hevel in G’d’s esteem, seeing that he is the first-born, after all. If, on the other hand, (remainder of our verse) Kayin were not to improve his ways, he would not only experience this humiliation but others would follow and dog him all his life. The reason is that he provided an entrance for the evil urge through his misguided conduct.
   4,8. ויאמר קין, “Kayin said, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> Kayin began to quarrel with Hevel. According to Ibn Ezra Kayin told Hevel all the admonitions G’d had subjected him to. This is why the Torah did not have to repeat what he said to Hevel. Nachmanides explains that the words ויאמר קין אל הבל אחיו, are to be understood as part of the words ויהי בהיותם בשדה, “it was when they were both in the field, etc,” i.e. the second half of our verse. We need to understand the whole sequence as Kayin saying to Hevel: “let’s go out into the field, etc.” His intention was to kill him there in a spot that was not within view of his parents or twin sister. He was under the impression that his parents would not beget any more children. He was also afraid that the human species would be built up by the descendants of Hevel seeing hat only his gift had been accepted by G’d.
   Some commentators believe that the subject of their conversation was to divide up the earth between them, Kayin claiming agriculture as his domain, claiming all arable land as belonging to him, whereas Hevel, being a shepherd, claimed all that was above the ground. Eventually, Kayin used this as a pretext to deny his brother setting foot on his soil, whereas Hevel denied Kayin the right to breathe the air. This led to a fight between them.
   @ויקם קין, “Kayin arose, etc.” According to the <i>Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah</i> 22,7-8) Hevel succeeded in wrestling Kayin to the ground, whereupon Kayin asked him if he planned to kill him, pleading that they were the only two human beings in the world, and would it not be terrible to kill half the human race? Thereupon Hevel had pity on him and released him. At that point Kayin exploited Hevel’s weakness and killed him. Seeing that he did not know where to administer a lethal blow he had to strike him in numerous places until he found the most vulnerable spot in his body. (according to the <i>Midrash,</i> he observed two ravens fighting , one of them standing over the other and killing it and then burying it in the earth. Kayin simply copied the raven)
   4,9. השמר אחי אנכי? “Am I my brother’s keeper?” Kayin remonstrated with G’d that it had been G’d’s duty to protect Hevel, not his.
   4,11. ארור אתה מן האדמה אשר פצתה את פיה, “you are cursed from the earth which opened its mouth, etc.” It is difficult to understand how the earth could be faulted. After all, the earth acts as receptacle for everything which is poured out upon it. The answer given is that in this instance the earth deliberately tried to conceal the deed by swallowing all of Hevel’s blood (and body) so that not a trace of what happened there remained visible. 
   <i>Rashi</i> explains the words ארור אתה מן האדמה, as meaning “you are cursed now even more than the first curse which had been decreed against the earth as a result of your father’s sin when he ate from the tree of knowledge.” [that curse had also been described as ארורה, although <i>Rashi</i> substituted the term קללה. Ed.]
   Nachmanides disagrees with <i>Rashi</i>, saying that this time the earth itself was not cursed as when Kayin’s father had sinned, but in this instance Kayin’s vocation as a farmer was the subject of the curse. Whereas previously he had been a very successful farmer, he would find now that even his best efforts would not be rewarded with the expected success.
   4,13. גדול עוני מנשא, “my sin is too great to be forgiven.” According to Nachmanides this was Kayin’s true and sincere confession. He acknowledged the righteousness of the Creator, admitting that he had deserved the severe punishment decreed upon him. He felt unable to pray, as he did not think that prayers from a sinner such as himself had a chance to evoke G’d’s sympathy. He felt that if he had not qualified for a favourable response to his sacrificial offering before he murdered his brother, he most certainly could not expect that G’d would accept any gift from him now. He was at his wits’ end, seeing that anyone on earth who would find him would be justified in killing him.
   4,15. הרג קין שבעתים יוקם. “whoever kills Kayin will be avenged sevenfold.” According to Nachmanides this means that whoever will kill Kayin will be avenged seven times over, i.e. .he will be punished for his deed as if he had killed seven people. This threat was designed to restrain anyone who would feel like killing Kayin.
   @וישם ה' לקין אות, “G’d placed a mark on Kayin;” the Torah did not write ויתן לו ה' אות, “G’d gave Kayin a mark,” but וישם, a word which describes something permanent. The mark with which G’d provided Kayin would remain visible for an indefinite period of time. Perhaps the meaning is that whenever Kayin, in his many journeys, would face a route unknown to him, the fact that he received no guidance would serve as a warning to him that that route was potentially dangerous for him.
   4,16. וישב בארץ נוד, “he settled in the land of Nod.” Seeing that Kayin had become a true penitent, G’d remitted half of his sentence, the half dealing with his being a constant wanderer on earth, not calling any place “home.” Whereas he had been condemned to be נע ונד, he had now been allowed to establish a permanent residence.
   Nachmanides explains the word נוד in terms of it being a variant of נע ונד, meaning that the region in which Kayin was a wanderer was one called נוד, so that his wanderings did not involve roaming the surface of the globe. 
   @קדמת עדן, “to the east of Eden.” Wherever an easterly direction is mentioned in connection with man, it is related to the location of גן עדן in some manner. When the direction is mentioned with Moses, however, the Torah writes אז יבדיל משה שלש ערים מזרחה שמש, in order to describe an easterly direction (Deuteronomy 4,41, i.e. the word מזרחה describes an easterly direction)
   4,17. ויהי בונה עיר, “he became a builder of a city.” Nachmanides explains that originally Kayin had not entertained the idea of building anything permanent as he was afraid he would both remain childless and a wanderer. After a son had been born for him, he built the city and named it after his son. Seeing that he himself was cursed and his efforts were doomed to failure, he did not name the city after himself but after his son. This would create the impression that his son had built it, and it would have a chance to endure.
   Seeing that the Torah writes the words ויהי בונה עיר, in the present, ongoing tense, instead of writing the words ויבן עיר, “he built a city,” we learn that henceforth Kayin continuously engaged in building cities, habitations for human beings, the backbone of any civilization. He had to keep doing this as whatever he accomplished was short-lived.
   The reason why the Torah bothers to list the descendants of Kayin and their accomplishments although all of them perished in the deluge, is to show for how long G’d’s patience lasts and for how long He gives successive generations a chance to repair the spiritual damage inflicted by their forbears. It is likely that only six generations of Kayin existed before the deluge, although it is possible that the Torah saw no point in mentioning any additional generations as none of its members distinguished themselves in any manner. The reason why the Torah details Lemech’s admonitions to his wives may be because Kayin and his sons already had died before Lemech fathered any children. [whereas the Torah mentions the death of each of the founders of the generations born to Sheth, it does not do so with the descendants of Kayin, indicating that none of these people were missed when they died. Ed.]
   4,23. ויאמר למך לנשיו, “Lemech said to his wives, etc.” Nachmanides concludes from the plain text of our verses that Lemech was a wise and astute individual, well versed in all the vocations requiring not only brawn but also brain. He taught his oldest son how to be a proficient shepherd, allowing for the different nature of different animals, as well as the different kind of feed which they would thrive on. He taught his second son the rudiments of musical composition and how to play certain musical instruments. He taught his third son the art of working with different kinds of metal, including the making of weapons such as swords, spears, daggers, etc. His wives became afraid that he would be punished for introducing warfare into a peaceful society. Seeing that his paternal great-great-grandfather had been a murderer, perpetuating the art of killing would surely be frowned upon by heaven. Thus thought his wives. He told them that he himself had not been guilty of killing as had Kayin, so that G’d would protect him against murder even more so than He had been protecting Kayin for hundreds of years. He made the point that it is not the weapons which kill but the men who abuse the weapons. Man is capable of inflicting death on his fellow man with his bare hands and therefore manufacturing swords was not something that by itself was sinful.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi interprets the speech by Lemech to his wives as provoked by the discord in his household, seeing he had married two wives. Lemech is asking why he should be blamed, מה פשעי, when it was his wives who could not live in harmony with one another. If people like Kayin who had murdered, could live in peace and undisturbed, why should he who had not been guilty of murder have to be the victim of such discord? He warned his wives with sevenfold retribution by G’d Who had promised Kayin that He would personally avenge his life if anyone were to kill him. G’d would bring down great unhappiness on the people making Lemech’s life miserable.
   Other commentators consider Lemech as boasting that he had killed both adults and children merely in order to put the fear of him into the hearts of his wives. In fact, he had not killed. They would become afraid of him and live together peacefully under his roof.
   4,26. אז הוחל לקרא בשם ה', “then some people began to desecrate the Holy Name of the Lord<i>.” Rash’bam</i> interprets this line as people beginning to pray to G’d as their situation on earth had deteriorated so drastically. Other commentators, take the opposite view, saying that our verse describes the beginning of idolatry.
   5,1. זה ספר תולדות אדם, “this is a record of human history.” This is a reference to the various children mentioned in the remainder of the chapter. Beyond this, it is reasonable to consider the entire Torah a record of mankind’s history (up to the end of Moses’ life) and this is the reason why the Torah here did not choose to write אלה תולדות אדם, as it did on other occasions.
   5,3. ויולד בדמותו, בצלמו, “he begat in his likeness and in his image.” It is a well known fact that all the children born to man resemble their parents in large measure. So what did the Torah tell us here that we did not already know? The fact is that first man, not born of woman had been fashioned by G’d and been described by Him as being בצלם אלוקים. We might have thought that this distinction applied only to the first human being, the one who was the direct product of G’d’s handiwork. The Torah tells us here that this distinction was passed on throughout the generations. No mention was made of this distinction when Kayin and Hevel were born, as the Torah did not want to dwell on these two (whose descendants ceased at the time of the deluge) Seeing that Noach and his family were descendants of Sheth, it was important to inform us that their exteriors also reflected their G’dliness. According to the <i>Midrash,</i> the Torah mentions the fact that Adam reproduced in his own image to alert us to the fact that seminal emissions during the one hundred and thirty years before the birth of Sheth had resulted in the formation of שדים ומזיקים, spiritually and physically harmful creatures.
   5,4. ויהיו ימי אדם, “Adam’s lifespan amounted to, etc.” Seeing these early generations lived for so many years when compared to the lifespan of man in times after the deluge, the Torah adopted a method of telling us about their inordinately longs life spans immediately after reporting that these people fathered their first children at an age when most of us nowadays have long been buried already. By choosing the method adopted here, the Torah explains why these people married (relatively speaking) so late and did not start a family sooner. Seeing that original man had been fashioned by the Creator Himself, he had been endowed with a more perfect body, enabling him and the first few generations after him, to live longer than usual lives in spite of death having been decreed for the species as a whole. Due to the gradual spiritual corruption of mankind, their bodies were affected negatively also, so that immediately after the deluge the average life span had already shrunk to less that half of what it had been prior to the deluge. After the dispersal as a result of the building of the Tower, the life expectancy shrank further, not least because suddenly man had to adjust to climactic changes during the year in the locations to which they had been dispersed.
   It would seem that the lifetime of people other than the patriarchs had already shrunk to an average of seventy years, (the immediate offspring of Avraham, Yitzchok and Yaakov excepted) We know this from Moses’ prayer recorded in the Book of Psalms, 90,10, where he describes this number as a “normal.” lifespan. The fact that Pharaoh was dumbfounded when Yaakov told him that he was already 130 years old, seems to support this theory. (Genesis 47,9)
   Maimonides writes that all the people mentioned in the Torah as having attained such longevity were exceptions and that is why their individual life spans have been mentioned. He credits their exceptional longevity to their having been very careful with their diets, foregoing foods which are basically life-shortening. Anyone not mentioned specifically lived a normal lifespan. Nachmanides already questions Maimonides’ opinion, citing the fact that the people mentioned as having lived for so long were not prophets so that G’d should have performed a miracle [I might add that Chanoch, (5,23) whom the Torah described as loyal to G’d, ”walking with Him,” (5,24) lived far fewer years than his not so righteous contemporaries Ed.] Also, why, according to Maimonides, would the נפילים, corrupt individuals, be granted such long lives as the Torah testified that the spies in Moses’ time had encountered?
   6,2. ויראו בני האלוקים,” the ‘sons’ of G’d saw, etc.” The expression בני האלוקים, refers to the elite of the society in those days, the law enforcers and judges. The Torah informs us that the very people charged with maintaining the functioning of an orderly, law abiding society, were the first to take the law into their own hands whenever it suited their purpose. Abuse of power leads to anarchy.
   6,3. בשגם הוא בשר, “seeing that he is part flesh.” According to <i>Rashi</i> G’d said that if man, made partially of soft issue such as flesh, did not bring himself to humble himself in His Presence, how much worse would he be if made of a hard substance or of fire?
   Ibn Ezra claims that G’d said: “My spirit will never prevail within man, on account of this sin (the practice of indiscriminate violence) coupled with the fact that the raw material he is made of, i.e. flesh, which will cause him to die so that only his spirit (soul) will return to Me.” [once his spirit leaves him his flesh will decompose. Ed
   Maimonides explains the meaning of the verse to be that G’d’s spirit will never prevail in man seeing that the fact that he too is made of flesh like all other moving creatures, ensures that he will die just as all creatures die and disintegrate. He therefore does not deserve that G’d’s spirit be at home within him. What Maimonides means is that whereas G’d had given man a divine soul such as He gave to the angels, they had chosen to prefer to emphasise the physical part of themselves, be more like the animals so that they do not deserve the gift G’d had given them.
   6,4. הנפילים היו בארץ, “the Nephilim were on earth at that time.” According to <i>Rashi</i> these creatures had fallen from heaven (in disgrace) and had in turn caused people on earth to fall from their spiritual level to a spiritually still lower level. The name נפילים corresponds to the Hebrew word ענקים, “giants.” At any rate, ordinary people were frightened of these “giants.” 
   Other commentators simply understand the term נפילים as representing human beings who, due to their imposing stature, made everyone fall down before them in a state of fear.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains the word נפילים as meaning גדולים, “great men, giants.” He quotes Job 14,18 ואולם הר נופל יבול as a parallel, i.e. that even the most powerful and great phenomena (such a tall mountains) on earth will ultimately fall, collapse.
   @בני אלוקים, “the elite of mankind.” The male children of the most outstanding members of human society. These young men would look at the daughters of their morally inferior contemporaries and be consumed with lust for them, so that they would rape them and the result would be more such physically alluring females.
   @אשר יבאו, “who would be intimate with them.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the subject are the sons of the בני האלוקים
   Nachmanides explains that Adam and Chavah are here referred to as בני האלוקים, “the children of G’d,” as they had been the direct product of G’d’s creative activity, and they had no physical father. Adam and Chavah in turn, had many sons and daughters as the Torah reports in 5,4. These children of Adam and Chavah were in a class by themselves, seeing that their father had passed on to them a great deal of the genes of the genetically perfect first man on earth.
   It is possible that the first pair of humans and their immediate sons were referred to as בני האלוקים, as they more than any subsequent human reflected what was calledצלם אלוקים at the time when G’d created the first pair of human beings. These people never engaged in idol worship, whereas their offspring already began to see in other powers on earth deities of a kind, albeit surrogates of the Creator. In keeping with this tendency of people to deify powers of nature, their own physical dimensions and strength declined, as a form of punishment. When the human population increased on earth and there began to be competition for good looking female partners, the men of earlier generations, due to their superior prowess, overpowered their more poorly endowed competitors, and they grabbed themselves whatever they chose. Originally, they married such girls even against their will, but eventually their morals deteriorated to such a degree that they raped girls without offering marriage, and generally this did not come to light until the features of the children born from such illegal liaisons did not resemble either of their parents, but showed genetic likeness to the members of the giants.
   The word מעולם, normally understood as meaning “from time immemorial,” is the Torah’s way of hinting that in the future whenever a human being would for some reason be of such outsize dimensions as the giants of former times, people would speak of giants having lived prior to the deluge; the appearance of this phenomenon would trigger memories of the stories which had been handed down from generation about the existence of such a race at one time.
   6,6. וינחם ה' ויתעצב אל לבו, “G’d reconsidered and was saddened right to His heart.” The Torah employs the syntax used by human beings when they regret something they have done. Basically, the Torah writes that the conduct of the humans, their insurrection against the Creator’s basic rules, resulted in their causing G’d’s Holy Spirit to reconsider if they deserved to continue living. 
   6,8. ונח מצא חן, “but Noach had found favour, etc.” <i>Bereshit Rabbah 28,9</i> points out that even Noach, strictly speaking, had not deserved that G’d perform miracles for him to save him, but as he was fortunate in finding favour in G’d’s eyes, [either because he had fathered Shem, and eventually an Avraham was born to that family, or that in accordance with the dictum that the attribute of justice is always tempered with the application of the attribute of mercy, he was the one to whom the attribute of mercy could be applied. The entire statement has as its basis the letter ו in the word ונח, which suggests that actually he too was included in the previous statement נחמתי כי עשיתם, “I am sorry that I have made them” Ed.]
   Parshat Noach
   6,9. אלה תולדות נח, “these are the offspring of Noach.” Some commentators understand the word תולדות as referring to important events in the life of Noach, similar to Genesis 10,1 ואלה תולדת בני נח, or אלה תולדות השמים in Genesis 2,4. The fact that the Torah repeated the words ויולד נח וגו', that Noach begat 3 sons, information we had been told already in Genesis 5,32 is due to the interruption of the Torah’s narrative by telling us that Noach was a righteous man and that this accounted for his and his family being spared during the deluge. Seeing that Noach begat only three sons, as opposed to most of his contemporaries, the Torah wishes to emphasise this point. Even during the 350 years which he lived on after the deluge he sired no more children. These three sons alone were his biological offspring and they were saved because of that (not their own merit).
   @איש צדיק תמים היה, “he was a perfectly righteous man.” The meaning of the expression צדיק תמים is that he was a righteous man among other righteous men, i.e. had been found righteous when coming up for judgment. When a person such as Noach is found righteous, his erstwhile sins, potential causes for punishment, are converted into righteousness. This is the meaning of the verse (Deut. 25,1) והצדיקו את הצדיק והרשיעו את הרשע, “they (the judges) will exonerate the righteous (totally) and condemn the wicked.” In the case of Avraham, of whom G’d said that He knows him to be practicing and teaching צדקה ומשפט, (Genesis 18,18) He bestowed two kinds of praise upon him, צדקה, a practicing צדיק, and משפט, the meting out of משפט by tempering it with mercy, רחמים.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word צדיק as referring to Noach’s deeds, and תמים as referring to his motivation. [his righteousness was not prompted by self-serving considerations. Ed.] 
   When the Torah continues that Noach walked with G’d, ויתהלך נח את האלוקים, this means that he did not even allow himself to be guided by astrology and similar considerations, but followed directly in the paths of G’d to the extent that they had been revealed. He certainly did not practice any form of idolatry.
   Alternatively, the Torah describes Noach here as a prophet, seeing that the formulation אחרי ה' תלכו ואותו תיראו”follow the Lord and remain in awe of Him,” is used by the Torah to describe the prophet who distances himself from idolatry.
   @בדורותיו, “in his generations.” According to <i>Rashi</i> some commentators consider this word a compliment to Noach, whereas others see in it a veiled criticism. [relative righteousness compared to his contemporaries. Ed.]
   Nachmanides explains the word as meaning what any reader would assume, i.e. that during the generations Noach lived he was the only one who was righteous and wholehearted in his relations with his Creator. He explains the line (Genesis 7,1) “כי אותך ראיתי צדיק בדור הזה, “for you I have seen righteous in this generation” in he same vein, i.e. no one else is worth saving from the oncoming deluge. The reason the Torah uses the plural mode for the word בדורותיו is the fact that Noach’s life time spanned several generations during all of which mankind had become successively more corrupt. Do not raise the question that Methuselah who died only few days before the onset of the deluge (according to our sages) was also a righteous man. The Torah did not deny that he was righteous, but only states that there was no other righteous man whom G’d deemed worth saving at the time in question. According to yet other commentators the word בדורותיו refers to the generation preceding the deluge as well as to those following it.
   6,10. את שם, את חם,ואת יפת, “Sem, Cham and Yaphet.” Yaphet was the oldest. We know this because the Torah writes יפת הגדול, (Genesis 10,21) The reason why here the Torah mentions Sem first is because he was the spiritually outstanding one of Noach’s sons, whereas Cham was the spiritually most inferior, and he is mentioned immediately after Sem, as he followed him in the order of their birth. Had the Torah listed them in the order: Sem, Yaphet, Cham, not even one of them would have been mentioned in the order of their births. Yaphet did not possess a special distinction which would have justified changing the order of their names on that account.
   6,12. כי השחית כל בשר, “for all flesh has become corrupt.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the use of the transitive mode השחית, tells us that the animal kingdom copied man and became corrupt also, seeing that man had defied the G’d given laws of nature and substituted a mode of conduct of his own making. This was most manifest in their mating habits including indiscriminate mating with other species.
   Nachmanides writes that according to <i>Rashi</i> the line כי מלאה הארץ חמס מפניהם, “for the earth has become filled with violence on their account,” cannot apply to the animals but only to man. Violence is not a form of corruption when practiced by the beasts. (Genesis 6,13) Alternatively, the verse does apply to both man and beast, and the beasts and birds had learned to become predators after observing the conduct of man.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the wordsכל בשר apply only to human beings, just as they do in verse 17 לשחת כל בשר אשר בו רוח חיים, “to destroy all flesh which possesses the spirit of life (a soul).” When the Torah uses the words כל בשר again in verse 19 where the creatures to be brought into the ark are listed, the expression refers exclusively to members of the animal kingdom.
   6,13. כי מלאה הארץ חמס , “for the earth has become saturated with violence.” The Torah states here that the decree to destroy mankind was not finalized until the anarchy, i.e. indiscriminate violence, had made the establishment of a civilized society a utopian dream. Robbery is a basic commandment of the seven universally applicable prohibitions given to mankind, a commandment which any group of people would have invented for themselves had such laws not been formulated by the Creator Himself and been conveyed by one of His prophets. Non-observance of such basic laws leads to the destruction of mankind.
   @והנני משחיתם את הארץ, “and I am about to destroy them together with the earth.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word את is to be understood as מן from, i.e. “I will destroy them from the face of the earth.”
   According to Ibn Ezra the word משחיתם drags the next word with it, i.e. G’d will destroy the earth together with man [as an earth without man has no purpose. Ed.]
   6,14. עצי גופר, “gopher wood.” A word reminiscent of גפרית, sulphur, a means of destroying by fire, the fate which mankind was guilty of experiencing. Compare the fate of Sodom and Gomorrha which were destroyed by sulphur and fire.
   @מבית ומחוץ בכופר, “overlay it with tar both from the inside and the outside.” According to <i>Rashi</i> כופר is identical with זפת, pitch. The purpose of the pitch was to protect the wooden structure against the waters which would have penetrated and made it disintegrate in a few days. Some commentators understand the word זפת as a generic term for any insulating material which adheres firmly to the surface to which it is applied.
   6,16. צוהר, “a light,” according to some commentators this source of light was a gem stone which refracted whatever light was available in all directions. Others believe that the reference is to some kind of window (transparent material) Our sages question that seeing that the sun and moon did not operate during the duration of the flood, what good would a window have done? The answer provided is that it would enable the people inside the ark to calculate when 12 months would have passed. This is not a satisfactory answer either; however we know that a window had functions other than the admitting of light from the outside, namely it served as a means to dispatch the raven and the dove, as we will learn later on. [disposal of garbage could also be achieved by that means. Ed.]
   6.17. ואני הנני מביא את המבול, as for Me, I am ready to bring on the deluge, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word הנני signals that at this time G’d found Himself in agreement with the angels who had opposed the creation of man to begin with, saying מה אנוש כי תזכרנו, “what is man (the species) that You should concern Yourself with him?” (Psalms 8,5).
   Nachmanides queries such an interpretation, seeing that G’d went to some lengths to ensure that the species was not wiped out, but that Noach and family would survive the deluge. Perhaps <i>Rashi</i> meant to say that G’d agreed with the angels who argued that man was not entitled to forgiveness anymore.
   6,18. והקימותי את בריתי אתך, “but I will maintain My covenant with you.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the covenant was needed to prevent the produce in the ark that was to serve its inhabitants as food from rotting, during the year it would remain inside.
   Ibn Ezra suggests that this was an oath by G’d to Noach that neither he nor members of his family would die while in the ark during the deluge, even though the Torah does not spell it out as a specific promise. We explained this (<i>Tur</i>)) in connection with Deut. 1,22 on the line נשלחה אנשים לפנינו, “let us send some men ahead.” [in that verse too the Torah refrains from spelling out that the request was for spies and not simply scouts. Ed.] The word והקימותי refers to “keeping a promise, an oath.” It is most likely that this is a veiled hint of the rainbow, which will become the symbol of G’d’s oath later on in our portion. The word ברית, meaning “a solemn and mutual undertaking,” is derived from the expression ברו לכם, (Samuel I 17,8) where it means “choose for yourselves.”
   Nachmanides writes, more in line with the plain meaning of the text, that G’d promised Noach that when the moment came for the deluge to commence, he and his family would enter the ark safely, unharmed and the requisite pairs of animals would all show up ready to enter the ark to spend the time within safely. The special significance of the word (concept) ברית is that it is a binding promise not subject to additional clauses which could invalidate it.
   6,19. ומכל החי מכל בשר, “and from all living creatures, all flesh, etc.” Nachmanides writes that it is a well known fact that the beasts are many and that there are innumerable sub-species to be found among them, not only huge creatures such as elephants, but millions of varieties of creepers, insects, etc. The need to bring specimens of each into the ark and to feed them all once they were inside, was a seemingly superhuman task. Clearly, the ark was not large enough to contain them all, except if G’d invoked some miracle. Although G’d could have reduced the size of these creatures for the duration of their stay in the ark, He wanted them to continue to live normally, so as to impress this and subsequent generations with the miracles G’d performed as part of Noach’s survival, so as to inspire later generations to choose the path of repentance once they had become guilty of sins. Furthermore, it is a principle of G’d’s intervention in laws of nature, that miracles are restricted to what could not be accomplished without them. Man is thus encouraged to do whatever he can to survive without relying on G’d’s intervention. by means of miracles.
   6,20. שנים מכל יבואו אליך,”two of each species will come to you, etc.” According to Nachmanides G’d tells Noach that these creatures will present themselves before Noach of their own volition, so that he did not have to go chasing after them in order to save their lives. When the Torah later on reports about the arrival of these beasts, it adds that they all came as a pair, male and female. (7,9) We need to resolve why, in the previous verse, G’d instructed Noach “to bring the beasts to him,” seeing they were going to come of their own volition. The instruction in verse 19 became operative only after the animals had presented themselves before Noach. Now he was to bring them into the ark and to assign to them their respective quarters. Moreover, the animals that were to have their lives saved came of their own volition. But the seven pairs of the pure animals that were to serve as sacrifices after the deluge did not come by themselves, but Noach was instructed to take them and bring them into the ark. (compare 7,2)
   6,22. ויעש נח ככל אשר צוה אותו אלוקים, “Noach carried out all the instructions G’d had given him.” He constructed the ark, collected the food supplies, etc. The reason why the Torah appears to repeat itself in 7,5 where it again mentions that Noach had carried out his instructions, is to make us aware that he did not skip performing any part of G’d’s instructions to him. 
   7,1. ויאמר ה' אל נח, “The Lord said to Noach, etc.” the use of the tetragram indicated to Noach that he was being saved as a manifestation of Gd’s attribute of Mercy, at work on his behalf and that of his offspring.
   @בא אתה וכל ביתך אל התיבה, “enter the ark, you and your whole family.” Seeing that Noach had spent many years building the ark, now that the time for the deluge had drawn near, G’d instructed him to make his home forthwith inside the ark together with his family. Seeing that originally, G’d had described what would happen to him with the words: אתה ובניך ואשתך ונשי בניך אתך, “you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you,” it was made clear now by not listing his wife and children individually, that they were being saved due to Noach’s merit, not due to their own merit. The absence of the word אתך on this occasion makes plain that they were not considered on a moral par with their father/husband or father-in-law. Had they been, the Torah would have written אתכם ראיתי צדיקים, “I have viewed you (pl.) as righteous people, etc.” G’d continued to order him to take the extra “pure” domestic animals and birds, as well as telling him the date on which the deluge would commence.
   7,2. מכל הבהמה הטהורה, “of all the ‘pure domesticated beasts, etc.” Seeing that there had not been any legislation distinguishing between “pure” and “impure” beasts, <i>Rashi</i> understands the word as describing those beasts which would, -after the revelation at Mount Sinai- be characterised as “pure.” This would be a veiled hint that Noach studied the Torah already at his time. [otherwise how would he have known which animals were “pure”? Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that G’d informed him about the specific characteristics of the animals which He had referred to as “pure.” The Torah simply condenses G’d’s instructions.
   Whereas when speaking of the mammals, i.e. בהמה, the Torah describes a pair as איש ואשתו, “man and his wife,” when speaking of the birds which are pure it describes them merely as זכר ונקבה, “male and female.” The reason for this different description is accounted for by the fact that when mammals cross breed or attempt to do so, this is forbidden, i.e. monogamy or its equivalent exists among mammals. Such indiscriminate mating between birds is not forbidden. The Torah refers indirectly to the more intimate relationship between male and female mammals by referring to them as איש ואשתו. 
   @מכל הבהמה הטהורה....שבעה, שבעה, “from all the domesticated pure beasts seven, seven.” This instruction alerted Noach to G’d’s desire that he use them as offerings when he would leave the ark. Had they been required to preserve their respective species, there would not have been any need for seven males and seven females of each category.
   7,8-9מן הבהמה הטהורה ומן הבהמה אשר איננה טהורה....שניים,שניים באו אל נח. “Of the pure domesticated beasts, and of the not pure domesticated beasts, they came to Noach in pairs.” According to <i>Rashi</i> none of these beasts arrived in fewer numbers than 2 each.
   Some commentators understand the expression as referring to 2 pairs of each, applying the same to the pure beasts of which 7 pairs each were brought into the ark.
   According to Nachmanides one pair of each species came of their own volition, whereas Noach added six more pairs of each of the pure species. He had to supply the animals needed as sacrificial offerings by exerting himself.
   @אשר איננה טהורה, “which was not pure.” The reason why here the Torah uses the word איננה to describe something negative, as opposed to the word לא used in verse 8, is that the word refers to a subject that had already been mentioned without being described as impure. [Following <i>Rashi,</i> the author understands the word לא טהורה as applying to beasts which are fit to eat for Jews, such as deer, of which Solomon kept a whole stable for his guests, whereas איננה describes a totally impure animal, one which is forbidden for Jews to eat even as חולין, non-consecrated meat. Ed.]
   You should realize that we have been taught in the first chapter of tractate <i>Pessachim</i> folio 3 that the Torah used eight extra letters in order to avoid describing something as טמא, outright defiled, when the same point could be made by using more refined language such as here, i.e. “not pure,” instead of ”defiled, impure.” The Talmud quotes our verse. One could ask why the Talmud did not quote the earlier verse to make the same point. The reason, presumably, is that in that verse the Torah did not speak about impure animals but about animals which are impure only in respect of their fitness to be offered as a sacrificial offering.
   However, Nachmanides pursues a different approach, claiming that all the “pure animals” were fit as sacrifices, quoting ויקח נח מכל הבהמה הטהורה וגו', “Noach took from all manner of pure animal and bird and offered burnt offerings on the altar.” He adds that for the Israelites later after the revelation at Mount Sinai, only pigeons were fit as sacrifices from among the fowl, and only large cattle and small cattle from among the mammals. Nachmanides continues to explain the third time the Torah dwells on the same subject saying
   @כאשר צוה אותו אלוקים, “as G’d had commanded him,”(7,16) as testifying that just as Noach complied meticulously with G’d’s instructions about entering the ark, etc., he also complied with G’d’s detailed instructions about leaving the ark. This brief reference is directly linked to the other instructions that the Torah detailed in earlier verses. The words והבאים זכר ונקבה at the beginning of verse 16, mean that these animals appeared at the last possible moment before the commencement of the deluge, and that they were welcomed by Noach who had entered the ark by that time. These animals had been driven by a divine inspiration to behave as they did at that time. Our verse is somewhat abbreviated and means: “all those who came to Noach as males and females of all flesh, Noach let into the ark because G’d had so commanded him.” The meaning of the words שניים, שניים in the previous verse is that G’d had commanded these animals to present themselves in pairs, male and female.
   It is possible that the words ויעש נח, as well as ונח בן שש מאות שנה, in verses 5-6 and all the subsequent verses up to 11 בשנת שש מאות שנה לחיי נח, “in the sixth hundredth year of Noach’s life,” do not tell us about a separate action at all, but illustrate that Noach complied in every detail with the instructions which he had receive from G’d. Having reported this, the Torah proceeds to inform us about when precisely the deluge began. [Those who prefer to believe that the calendar at that time did not correspond to our calendar nowadays, are reminded that there would be no point in the Torah telling us about such dates unless we could relate to them from our own experience. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra explains the words ויבא נח ובניו ואשתו ונשי בניו אתו אל התבה, (7,7) as not meaning that they entered the ark at that time, but that all these animals came to Noach’s house on the 10th of the month, [according to our sages (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 3,6) the beginning of the deluge was postponed at the last moment to allow for the seven days’ mourning for Methuselah who died then to have been observed. Ed.] The words מפני המבול would mean that what prompted these animals to come at that time was that they felt that the disaster called deluge was imminent.
   7,17. ויהי המבול ארבעים יום, “The deluge continued for a period of 40 days.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the first day, i.e. the 17th of the second month, does not count as one of the 40 days mentioned here, the reason being that the deluge started during the daylight hours, part of that date, i.e. the night, already having passed. Accordingly, the 40 days mentioned here ended on the 28th day of <i>Kislev</i>. Everybody questions <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary in view of his own commentary later on (8,3) that the words ויחסרו המים מקצה חמישים יום, “at the conclusion of 150 days the waters began to recede,” refers to the first day of Sivan<i>. Rashi</i> proceeds to make the following calculation: “on the 27th of of <i>Kislev</i> the rains ceased. We are left with 3 more days in <i>Kislev,</i> plus 29 days for <i>Tevet,</i> which amount to a total of 32. Adding a total of 118 days for the months of <i>Shevat, Adar, Nissan, and Iyar,</i> brings us to a total of 150. [2 of the last four months are presumed to have 29 days and 2 have 30 days. Ed.] According to this latest calculation by <i>Rashi,</i> the 17th of <i>Marcheshvan</i> forms part of the 150 days!
   7,19. והמים גברו, “and the waters had kept rising and becoming more turbulent;” Verse 18, writing וירבו ויגברו המים, had taught us that when waters increase in volume the Torah describes this in terms of גברו, becoming strong, powerful, turbulent. It is possible, however, to understand the word ויגברו in verse 18 for the word כח also is often referred to as גבורה. In this case the turbulence of the waters uprooted trees, etc.
   @ויסוכו המים, “the waters subsided.” The expression is parallel to the one in Esther 7,10 which describes the king’s anger as subsiding with the words וחמת המלך שככה, the letters ס and ש being interchangeable letters on frequent occasions. Alternatively, the word is parallel to the root סתר as in הסתר, meaning “hiding, a form of receding.” According to סדר עולם, the waters that had come forth from the bowels of the earth during the deluge, now receded back to their habitat within the bowels of the globe.
   8,2. ויכלא הגשם, “the rain ceased.” Here the Torah cannot refer to the rain that descended as part of the deluge, seeing that this rain had stopped already on the 27th of <i>Kislev</i>, after 40 days. The Torah reports here that during this period of over 200 days after the first of <i>Sivan</i> and the family of Noach and the animals leaving the ark, no normal rainfall occurred. The strong prevailing winds at this time prevented any rain clouds from forming and descending. The purpose of the wind was to gradually restore the atmosphere to its traditional dryness.
   8,4. ותנח התבה בחודש השביעי, “the ark came to rest in the seventh month.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this was the month of <i>Sivan,</i> and we would learn from this information that the keel of the ark was submerged in the water by 11 cubits (approx 6.6 meters<i>)</i> 
   Nachmanides confirms that <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation follows <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 33,4. He adds that seeing that <i>Rashi</i> himself frequently takes issue with such M<i>idrashim</i> in light of the dictum that on the one hand there are 70 facets to the written Torah, whereas at the same time we must establish the plain meaning of the text, (a major concern of <i>Rashi),</i> we too may also be permitted to emphasise another aspect of our verse. The difficulty with <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation is that he counts the words “in the seventh month,” as referring to a date, as the seventh month after the original rains had stopped at which time the waters had already begun to recede; how can the Torah immediately afterwards refer to the first of the month of the 601st year of Noach’s life (8,13) where clearly the reference must be to the first month of the calendar year, i.e. the first of <i>Tishrey</i>? How could the Torah switch its terms of reference and confuse its readers?
   Besides, whence do we have proof that the keel of the ark was submerged by 11 cubits? This calculation appears based on <i>Rashi’s</i> assumption that the waters receded at a constant speed of 1 cubit every four days, seeing that the keel of the ark had been reported as above the highest mountain by 15 cubits (7,20). From the 1st of <i>Sivan</i> till the first of <i>Av</i> there are 60 days. If the ark, as reported, ran aground on the17th of the seventh month, and the summits of the highest mountains became visible once more, how could the surface of the earth become dry by the first of <i>Tishrey according to Rashi’s</i> calculation, seeing that many mountains were thousands of cubits high? According to the calculation of <i>Rashi</i> all this took place within 13 days (from the 17th of the seventh month counting from <i>Kislev,</i> as interpreted verse 4) 
   Furthermore, from a mariner’s point of view, a vessel which is more than one third submerged in water (the ark’s total height being 30 cubits), is not really capable of navigating waters, too much of its weight being under the water’s surface.
   In view of the problems of <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, Nachmanides understands that the 150 days which the Torah describes the waters as being turbulent and rising, commence by including the 40 days of rain, so that these days concluded on the 17th of <i>Iyar,</i> seeing that the major flooding took place during the 40 days of incessant rainfall. 73 days after the 17th of I<i>yar</i> on the first of the tenth month, i.e. the first of <i>Av.</i> This was the tenth month after the beginning of the rainfall, the tops of the mountains becoming visible.
   Another approach to the report of the dates in the Torah, and this is the correct approach according to Nachmanides, is that the 150 days certainly commenced with the 17th of the second month (<i>Marcheshvan</i>) the day the deluge began, and ended on the 17th day in Nissan (which is the seventh month after <i>Tishrey,</i> which is the first month of the year.) On this day the ark came to rest on Mount Arrarat, for then G’d made a strong easterly wind blow (verse 1).This wind dried out the surface of the earth.(The wind accelerated the lowering of the water level dramatically.) Until the Exodus from Egypt all of mankind considered the first of <i>Tishrey</i> as New Year. Only immediately prior the Exodus from Egypt did G’d command the Jewish people to henceforth count “their” years from the first of the month of Nissan. [concerning matters which they did not have in common with mankind as a whole, Ed.] Proof that this approach is correct is the fact that the Torah does not mention that the waters decreased by a certain amount on a certain day during a specific month. Such details were reserved for the second stage of the recovery after the waters had peaked, such as when the Torah mentions the date on which the highest mountain peaks once again became visible.
   The sequence in which the various stages occurred was as follows: on the day the rain started falling on earth, the fountains of the earth below also opened and added huge amounts of water which flooded the surface of the earth. The atmosphere became extremely saturated with moisture. The flooding of the earth continued at this level for 150 days. At that point G’d made a strong wind sweep over the earth that accounted for a sudden and substantial drop of the water level on earth as well as a drying of the atmosphere. The water level dropped so much on that day as a result of that wind that the ark landed on top of Mount Arrarat on that same day. Prior to that the ark’s keel had been submerged by 2-3 cubits. 73 days later, on the first of the month of <i>Tamuz,</i> the tenth month of the year, the tops of various mountains became visible. 40 days later, on the tenth of Av, Noach opened the window of the ark for the first time and three weeks later on the first day of <i>Ellul</i> he dispatched the dove for the first time. 40 days later he decided to remove the roof of the ark.
   The meaning of the words (verse 1) “G’d made a wind sweep the earth so that the waters calmed,” is something that occurred simultaneously with the retreat of the subterranean waters into the bowels of the earth. You will note that the Torah speaks of a wind sweeping over the earth, not over the water. 
   8,5. והמים היו הלוך וחסור עד החודש העשירי בעשירי וגו', “and the waters had been in a steady retreat until the tenth month; on the tenth day of that month, etc.” This verse sounds like the kind of verse our sages describe as מסורס, “truncated,” and its meaning is that the waters had kept receding until the time when the tops of the mountains had become visible in the tenth month; the Torah informs us that during these 73 days the level of the water fell by 15 cubits. This contrasts with the first period during which the water level fell, as a result of which there occurred the landing of the ark on top of Mount Arrarat. We do not know how many cubits the water level had fallen then, nor do we know how deeply the ark had sat beneath the surface of the waters. It was of no concern to us.
   Personally, I believe that the fact that the ark was floating was due to the current created by the subterranean wells which had opened up. Had it not been for this, the extreme weight of the ark, caused by both the great number of passengers and the tremendous amount of food stored within it, would have resulted in the ark sitting pretty much in the same spot during all this time. As soon as the current of the subterranean wells subsided, and these waters had returned to their former habitat, and the wind which G’d had sent ceased, the ark, in accordance with the laws of physics, settled more deeply in the water and struck solid rock (foundered) on Mount Arrarat.
   Note that both according to our understanding and according to the understanding of our sages in the <i>Midrash</i>, as well as in accordance with the various commentators who have laboured over our chapter, Arrarat is one of the tallest mountains in the region, and the waters of the deluge covered its peak to a depth of at least 15 cubits. This “axiom” is difficult to comprehend, as according to general agreement Mount Olympus is considerably higher than Mount Arrarat. The Arrarat mountain range is located close to the valley within which Bagdad is situated. [modern cartographers give the height of Mount Olympus as 2917 meters, and that of Arrarat as 5122 meters. Ed.] Perhaps the Torah meant to tell us that prior to the 17th of the seventh month the ark was far more than 15 cubits above the tallest mountain, and that other higher mountain tops had been visible already before then but that by that time the waters had receded so much that even Mount Arrarat, though far lower, was already capable of arresting the movement of the ark. Noach had opened the window of the ark ever since the rains had stopped (after the first 40 days) closing it at will from time to time. 
   After the 73 days when the ark had become stationary, Noach used the window to look out and observe what was happening around him. When he perceived the tops of high mountains all around him, he closed the window and waited for another 40 days before checking on his surroundings again. 40 days later he dispatched the raven. You will note that the Torah did not write “Noach opened the window, etc.,” but merely that this event occurred at the end of a period of 40 days. This is to tell us that the raven was dispatched 40 days after the tops of other mountains had become visible. Noach had hoped that enough time had elapsed to reveal the tops of the trees, (on mountains below the tree line) If correct, he thought to release the birds, as there would be a habitat available for them once more. The raven was released on the first of <i>Tishrey</i> when for the first time חרבה הארץ, the surface of the earth was earth instead of water, although the earth dried out sufficiently only in the second month. At that time (17th of <i>Marcheshvan</i>) Noach and his passengers left the ark at G’d’s command.
   There is a minor difficulty with Nachmanides’ description, in that he perceives the tops of the mountains having become visible before the first of the tenth month, seeing that the Torah writes specifically that these mountain tops became visible on the first of the month. Nachmanides’ saying that these words refer once more to Mount Arrarat is difficult to accept. 
   8,6. ויהי מקץ ארבעים יום ויפתח נח את חלון התבה, “it was at the end of 40 days that Noach opened the window of the ark.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of the line is that this was 40 days after the tops of the mountains had become visible. If that were correct, we are hard pressed to understand why the dove did not find a resting place. Nachmanides writes concerning this that it is not the nature of the birds to seek out resting places in lofty mountains.
   8,7. ויצא יצא ושוב, “it kept coming back;” Noach concluded at that point not to endanger the species of which only one pair was in the ark, and to dispatch birds of the “pure” species of which he had seven pairs each at his disposal.
   8,9. ולא מצאה היונה מנוח, “but the dove did not find a place to rest the ball of its foot on.” Even though one of our sages holds that the deluge left the Land of Israel unaffected, the dove did not descend there on account of the heat. The giant Og took refuge in the vicinity of the ark as the immediate area around the ark was cooler than the atmosphere at large.
   The truth is that –as Nachmanides writes- that even though the deluge did not flood the Holy Land directly and the rains did not fall there, water from the surrounding countries flooded the Holy Land also, seeing that the Holy Land was not enclosed by a water-proof fence which could keep out the waters. The Biblical verse supporting the view that the waters of the deluge did not descend on the Holy Land, only speaks of ארץ מטוהרה לא גושמה ביום זעם, “a land which remained pure and did not experience destructive rain on the day of (G’d’s) anger.” (Ezekiel 22,24) The verse did not mention that no water penetrated the Holy Land during the deluge, only that it did not endure the rain, and that the subterranean wells did not gush forth from underneath it. 
   @והנה עלה זית בפיה, “and here she had torn off an olive leaf with its beak.” According to Nachmanides, the plain meaning of the words indicate that the trees in that region had not been uprooted, the reason being that the deluge was not like a raging river which sweeps everything ahead of it. However, according to <i>Bereshit Rabbah,</i> the wording supports the view that the trees themselves had disintegrated, There is a discussion in the <i>Midrash</i> according to which the dove brought this leaf from the Holy Land, proving to Noach that in that region there had not been a deluge. True, that the waters had flooded the earth also in that region, as we pointed out already, however, seeing that no torrential rain had descended on that region and no hot geysers had gushed forth in that region from below, the trunks of the trees had survived, whereas elsewhere all the trees had been completely destroyed. There is another opinion in the <i>Midrash</i> according to which the dove found the leaf in <i>Gan Eden.</i> 
   Nachmanides questions how, according to the view that the olive leaf came from <i>Gan Eden,</i> did Noach know that the waters outside the ark had subsided? Surely, the waters had never penetrated into <i>Gan Eden</i> in the first place? He answers that possibly the gates of <i>Gan Eden</i> had been shut to prevent the waters from getting inside, and as soon as the waters subsided these gates were reopened.
   @והנה עלה זית טרף בפיה. Our sages explain that the word טרף here means “booty,” as it does many times in the Bible, and that the dove had prayed to find such booty, i.e. it succeeded בפיה, thanks to the pleading with her mouth. Still other commentators understand the word טרף as meaning “torn off,” as in Exodus 22,30 ובשר בשדה טרפה, “flesh of an animal in the field which has been torn apart, etc.” This corresponds to Onkelos who renders the word there as תליש, meaning שבור, broken, damaged, ripped off. [a reference to tissue ripped from a live beast. Ed.] If that were not so, perhaps the dove had simply scooped up a torn leaf that was floating on top of the water.
   8,14. צא מן התבה, “leave the ark!” Noach was not willing to leave the ark without specific instructions from G’d.
   8,19. למשפחותיהם יצאו מן התבה, “they left the ark according to their respective families.” In <i>Sanhedin</i> 108 this is understood as למשפחותיהם ולא הם.This statement is not elaborated on there. [The simplest interpretation is that only those animals capable of reproducing left the ark; any animal which was sterile did not live on after the deluge for any length of time. Some commentators believe that whereas the animals left the ark without awaiting instructions from either Noach or G’d, Noach and family awaited such instructions. Noach demanded a promise from G’d that He would not again bring a flood upon the earth. Still other commentators view the word למשפחותיהם here as a hint that the animals undertook henceforth to mate only with their own species.
   8,21. ויאמר ה' אל לבו, “The Lord said to Himself, etc.” According to Nachmanides this strange formulation simply means that G’d did not reveal His thoughts to anyone at that time. Only when Moses received the Torah, did G’d reveal what His thoughts had been at the time. He had not revealed to Noach what precisely His reaction had been to Noach’s sacrifice, i.e. that on account of it He would not again use the deluge as a means to punish mankind.
   @בעבור האדם, “because of man.” The earth had only been cursed on account of original man. Had Adam not sinned, his descendants, despite their corruption, would not have had to endure a deluge.
   @ולא אוסיף עוד להכות את כל חי, “and I will not again smite all living creatures simultaneously. However, I reserve the right to decree collective punishment on a city or a country.
   9,2. ומוראכם וחתכם יהיה על כל חית הארץ, “and the fear and dread of you will be upon all the animals of the earth.” This was not natural, as the animals for the year they had been provided for by Noach and his family had already gotten used to man as their provider. They had become so familiar with man that to be in awe of him would be a new experience for them.
   9,3. כל רמש אשר הוא חי, “every moving living creature, etc.” This expression includes all creatures other than man.
   9,4. אך בשר בנפשו דמו, Yet the flesh of a living creature possessing a soul, etc.”
   According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of the verse is that any flesh of an animal which is still alive must not be eaten by man. This rule is known in <i>halachah</i> as the prohibition of אבר מן החי. The rule applies not only to the flesh of an animal but also to its blood, so that the interpretation of the word בנפשו means that also its blood must not yet be eaten.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation does not correspond to the plain meaning of the text, whereas the interpretation by the <i>Midrash</i> upon which <i>Rashi</i> bases himself is not <i>halachically</i> accurate, as even the generation of Noach had not been given this commandment, and there is a dispute as to which part applied to them between the majority of the scholars and Rabbi Chaninah ben Gamliel.
   9,5. דמכם לנפשותיכם אדרוש, “(but) I shall demand your (human beings’) blood if it results in loss of your life.” The meaning is: “your blood,” i.e. that which is the essence of your lives, I shall demand an accounting for seeing that the blood is what makes flesh viable. I will demand such an accounting from every mammal a well as bird (who kills a human being). The word חיה in this verse is comprehensive and not restricted to predatory animals. 
   An alternative meaning of the verse could be: “blood which is of the type that is vital, without which death results, I will demand an accounting for, whereas blood in the capillaries which is not vital is not subject to the same kind of capital punishment.” This verse is an allusion to the verse שופך דם האדם באדם דמו יישפך, “Whosoever sheds the blood of man will have his own blood shed by man” (court). (verse 6) This would more clearly spell out that only spilling the life-blood of a human being is subject to the death penalty.
   @מיד כל חיה אדרשנו, “I will demand such account from any living creature.” Nachmanides questions the expression אדרשנו, “I will demand an accounting of,” as not applicable to animals which do not have the intelligence to understand such commandments. How can creatures without intelligence qualify for punishment for not obeying laws? He answers that the shedding of human blood may be an exception, and that this is not in the nature of a punitive reprisal but is a law promulgated by the Creator as a sort of axiom. 
   This is also the meaning of the words סקול יסקל השור, “the offending ox must surely be stoned to death” in Exodus 21,28, where this is not to be construed as a penalty for the owner of the beast, as the same procedure is applicable to an ox that killed a human being even though he may not be owned by a specific person at all, but is a free-roaming animal. The Torah’s command to mankind in general is the same as the Torah’s legislation for the Jewish people later on. The meaning of the words: שופך דם האדם באדם דמו ישפך, is then that anyone, man or beast, which sheds human blood will be put to death by a human tribunal as the violent death of a creature bearing the image of G’d cannot remain unaccounted. In the absence of a court that can put the offending human or animal to death, sentence and execution will be at the hands of heaven.
   It is further possible that the words מיד כל חיה ומיד האדם can allude to this heavenly intervention in avenging the killer, so that the word מיד should be understand as על יד. Perhaps the very fact that the nature of many beasts is to kill, is the reason the Torah warns that such instinct when practiced against humans is perverse.
   The mystical dimension of the subject is that at the time of the creation G’d assigned all the herbs to be food for man; after that the Torah wrote ויהי כן, “it remained so,” i.e. the vegetarian diet of man became the norm. (Genesis 1,28) Now that G’d had permitted man a meat diet provided the animal eaten had been killed first, and it had become the norm that living creatures feed on one another, it became necessary to legislate limits as to who might be killed and who not, and by whom. G’d therefore instilled within the animals a natural awe of man, which would restrain them from attacking and killing him. This is why the Torah commanded אך את דמכם לנפשותיכם אדרוש, to indicate that G’d would not hold an animal responsible for killing and feeding upon other animals. This is the reason why the subject of bloodshed had to be introduced at this juncture, seeing that for the first time killing some of G’d’s creatures for the sake of eating had become permitted. 
   According to the view of our sages (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 56 interpreting the words על האדם), Adam himself had already been warned concerning this. The reason for the prohibition to kill man is the fact that he was created in the image of G’d, as our verse concludes.
   @ואך את דמכם לנפשותיכם אדרוש, ”however, your blood for your (own) lives I will demand (an accounting for)” You must not reason that just as it is permissible for you to kill animals seeing the animals which are alive nowadays have all been kept alive by man (Noach), that a human being who is alive by his own efforts is also in charge of his own body and may decide to kill himself, I will demand an accounting for anyone committing suicide. In the event that you might think that just as I permitted you to kill animals, they have the right to see in you the enemy and they may kill you with impunity, I reassure you by saying that I will demand an accounting for your lives from any creature (if they killed you).
    
   @ואך את דמכם, “however your blood, etc.” It is possible that when King Sha-ul committed suicide by telling his arms bearer to finish him off (Samuel I 31,4) he thought that he committed a meritorious act denying the Philistines the boast that they had killed the anointed one of G’d. This is why the Torah uses the diminutive word אך, when writing this legislation, to tell us that there are situations, such as when Chananyah, Mishael and Azaryah agreed to be thrown into the fiery furnace, that this was not considered suicide but [after consultation with the prophet Ezekiel Ed] an act of sanctifying the name of the Lord.
   .
   Commentators raised the question why we needed a special verse to sanction actions such as those by Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah, as the correctness of their conduct was based on simple logic. By comparing their behaviour with the frogs which invaded Pharaoh’s and the Egyptians’ homes knowing that they were courting their own death by doing so. The answer given is that the analogy with the frogs is not foolproof as the frogs had not been commanded to by Pharaoh or Moses to injure or kill themselves. The word אך on the other hand, is also not sufficient excuse to exempt people such as Chananyah and colleagues, unless we also invoke the logic by comparing them partially with the frogs. The word אך would only teach us that Chananyah and others like him would not be held culpable for such acts of suicide, not that they committed a meritorious deed. This is why we require both the word אך and the example of the frogs to teach us that under the proper circumstances suicide can be a מצוה, meritorious deed. 
   9,6. שופך דם האדם דמו ישפך, “anyone shedding human blood will have his own blood shed by human beings.” Some commentators understand the word באדם in this verse to mean: “on account of the man who had shed his blood.” Now the blood of the original killer has to be shed also.
   9,7.ואתם פרו ורבו ושרצו בארץ, “as to you, be fruitful and multiply and swarm over the earth.” The commandment at this time shows that during their stay in the ark both man and beast had been forbidden to have sexual relations.
   9,8. ויאמר אלוקים אל נח ואל בניו אתו, “G’d said to Noach and to his sons with him.” G’d spoke to Noach’s sons, using their father as His intermediary. The sons had not attained the spiritual level which qualified them to be addressed by G’d in their own right.
   9,12. זאת אות הברית, “this is the sign of the covenant, etc.” Nachmanides writes that at first glance it appears from these words as if prior to the deluge there had never been rainbow visible in the universe, and that at this time G’d created a new phenomenon. However, when you examine the wording of the text more closely you will find that this is not so. G’d speaks about קשתי, “MY (rain)bow,” i.e. this is not a new phenomenon. Had it been something new, the wording would have had to be “I am placing a bow in the clouds, etc.,” instead of “My bow which I have placed among the clouds will henceforth be a sign of the covenant between Me and the earth from now so that every time I behold it I will remember that there is a covenant between Me and all living creatures.” The word קשתי is proof that there had been a rainbow already earlier. If you were to ask what the point is in making out of this rainbow a sign, a symbol, the meaning is not so different from the pile of stones Yaakov and Lavan erected between them in Genesis 31,52. Surely, there had been occasions when people had erected piles of stones. It was on this occasion that a pile of stones had been designated to serve as a specific purpose, as a reminder that two people had made a truce at that location. The Torah simply tells us that as of then the rainbow would serve in a similar capacity, reminding G’d as well as people that there existed a binding agreement between the Creator and His creatures not to bring another deluge on the globe. The term ברית is applicable to any such visual reminder of an agreement that is visible to both the parties who are party to such an agreement. Circumcision is also known as a ברית, as it represents the agreement between G’d and the male descendants of Avraham that there is a special relationship between them, an exclusive relationship. Continuance of this relationship is proved by the continued observance of the rite of circumcision on the part of the creature involved.
   A further reason, purpose to this particular אות, sign, is the fact that the rainbow is not shaped in a manner suggesting that it is anchored in the sky, suggesting that it is something decreed from heaven, from above. [the author compares the rainbow to the bow used by the archer in hunting or in war. Ed.] If the rainbow were to appear in the sky with its two ”feet” at the top this would suggest that it is a dictate from heaven. However it is positioned with its two feet on the ground, suggesting that man is not merely a creature at the whim of the Creator Who is a dictatorial ruler. [I have changed the wording somewhat to convey the author’s idea, I hope. Ed.] When warriors call their opponents to a truce, they also reverse the position in which they hold their bows in order to signal peaceful, conciliatory intentions. Another special feature of the rainbow versus the archer’s bow is that it has no provision for placing arrows at the base of it, i.e. it is the reverse of a war-like instrument.
   Some commentators see in the shape of the rainbow an allusion to the verse in Ezekiel 1,27:ממראה מתניו ולמעלה וממראה מתניו ולמטה ראיתי כמראה אש סביב ראיתי כמראה אש ונוגה לו סביב כמראה הקשת אשר יהיה בענן ביום הגשם, “like the appearance of his loins upward, and from the appearance of his loins downward I saw as if the appearance of fire, like the appearance of which shall be so was the appearance of the brilliance all around. on the cloud of a rainy day. the bow.” 
   9,14. והיה בענני ענן, “it will be whenever I wish to bring darkness and destruction etc.” This proves that Satan goes into high gear whenever disaster is around.
   9,18. וחם אבי כנען, “and Cham the father of Canaan.” According to <i>Rashi</i> seeing that this paragraph describes the matter of Noach becoming drunk, which led to his cursing his grandson Canaan, through his cursing his son Cham, and through him his grandson Canaan, the Torah had to first tell us who this Canaan was, although Noach’s children’s offspring had not yet been discussed.
   Ibn Ezra explains that Cham had seen Noach’s drunkenness and his nudity and had told his brothers of it, whereas during that time Canaan had harmed his grandfather when he was defenseless, something the Torah did not spell out. This had only been alluded to by the words אשר עשה לו בנו הקטן, “what his youngest son (grandson) had done to him.” (verse 24) Seeing that Canaan was the youngest of Noach’s offspring at that time, the wording of the Torah is justified.
   According to Nachmanides, Ibn Ezra departed here from the norms of interpreting the plain meaning of the text and began to invent lies. According to the opinion of Nachmanides, the words “his youngest son,” refer to Cham, Noach’s youngest son, whose oldest son was Canaan. The reason he was mentioned last was that he had been demoted to be a slave to his brothers. The Torah (Noach) by mentioning him last here, stressed the fact that he had been demoted. At the time when Noach’s drunkenness had occurred, Cham had only the one son, and this is why the Torah had to phrase what happened with the words: “Cham, Canaan’s father saw, etc.” When Cham committed the sin against his father, Noach cursed Cham’s offspring by cursing Canaan. Had he cursed Cham instead, saying he would be a lowly servant to his brothers, the curse would have been restricted to Cham personally only; now it applied to all of Cham’s children and offspring throughout the ages. [Seeing that G’d had already blessed all of Noach’s children, Noach could not cancel G’d’s blessing. [This was also why Bileam could not curse Israel, seeing they had been blessed by G’d Himself. Ed.] According to Nachmanides, cursing Cham might have resulted in Cham’s no longer being able to sire children, whereas the one born to him already would not be affected by the curse. [if Cham or Canaan had been guilty of castrating Noach, one view expressed in the <i>Midrash</i>- revenge would have been just this kind of a curse, punishment fitting the crime. Ed.] According to Nachmanides Cham’s sin consisted primarily of publicizing that he had seen his father in a drunken stupor when he had disrobed completely. This constituted publicly making fun of one’s father.
   9,20. איש האדמה, “a man of the soil.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word איש in front of the word האדמה has to be understood like the word איש in Ruth 1,3 איש נעמי, where it means: “Naomi’s husband.” Noach became a “master farmer.” Nachmanides, on the other hand, writes that the expression איש נעמי, describes only a marital status as in איש ואשתו, “man and wife,” and that the meaning of the expression איש האדמה is comparable to אנשי העיר, “the townspeople,” i.e. the people who lived in the town. Noach, instead of becoming an urbanite, building towns as had Kayin, became a dweller on the land, a rurally oriented person. Similarly, when the Torah describes Esau as an איש שדה, the meaning is that he was at home in the outdoors, spent most of his time there, as opposed to his brother Yaakov. (Genesis 25,27) Yet another meaning of the expression איש האדמה would interpret the word איש in the sense of “master of,” “in charge of.” The word is used in that sense with Gideon, who is described by the prophet Samuel as גדעון בן יואש איש ישראל, “Gideon, son of Yoash, a leader, head, of the people of Israel.” (Judges 7,14).
   9,21. ויתגל, “he disrobed completely.” The reflexive mode which also appears as a passive mode on many occasions, suggests that Noach was disrobed by someone else, presumably Cham, who then reported his father’s state of nudity to his brothers.
   @בתוך אהלו, “inside his tent.” The Torah wrote the word אהלה with the feminine suffix, to indicate that he was disrobed in his wife’s tent.
   9,22. ויגד לשני אחיו בחוץ, “he told his two brothers who had remained outside.” The word ויגד suggests that Cham told his brothers about his father’s condition in a playful manner, making fun of their father’s state of undress. When Canaan heard what his father had seen, he went inside and either castrated his grandfather or engaged in sodomy with him, depending on which of the opinions in the <i>Midrash</i> we accept. This is why Noach cursed Canaan, not Cham.
   9,23. ויקח שם ויפת את השמלה, “Shem and Yaphet took the garment, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the positive commandment of the <i>tallit</i> is a compensation for the Jewish people for what their forefather Shem [the Torah wrote ויקח, “he took,” not ויקחו, “they took” <i>Rashi</i>] had done with that <i>simlah</i>, when he used it to cover his father’s nudity. <i>Rashi</i> picks up this thread when he explains that as a compensation for Avraham refusing the king of Sodom’s offer to keep the spoils of war, his descendants were rewarded with both the phylacteries and the commandment of fringes, <i>tzitziyot.</i> (Genesis 14,23) In other words, although it was clear that Shem had acquired the merit of the commandment of <i>tallit</i>, it was not clear to which of his children this commandment would be bestowed until Avraham refused to be enriched by the King of Sodom.
   9,24. וידע את אשר עשה לו בנו הקטן, “he realized what his younger son had done to him.” The Torah has a habit of associating misdemeanors with people who had already previously been guilty of other misdemeanors. In this instance, Cham, who reportedly did not obey the commandment of sexual continence while in the ark, is now accused of a misdemeanor actually perpetrated by his son. The term וידע had first been used in the Torah to describe marital intimacy between Adam and Chavah. (Genesis 4,1) In <i>Pirkey de Rabbi Eliezer</i> the words וירא חם, are understood to describe Cham’s inactivity; although he observed his father in the nude, he did not bother to cover his nudity.
   9,26. ויהי כנען עבד למו, “and Canaan will be a slave to them.” Ibn Ezra explains this to mean that in verse 25 the words עבד עבדים mean that Shem will force Cham to be a servant to G’d and to himself, whereas in verse 26 the words עבד למו refer to Cham being in a state of dependency to him. 
   Nachmanides writes that if that were correct Noach would have cursed his enemies after first having blessed Canaan by declaring him to be a servant of G’d.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> explained that the phrase ברוך ה' אלוקי שם, refers to the time when the Jewish people by their conquest of the land of Canaan would prove that Canaan is the subordinate, the slave.
   Personally, I believe that in verse 25 Noach cursed Canaan to be a slave to all the rest of mankind, and the words עבד עבדים refer to the descendants of Shem, of whom there would be many. Uncles of Canaan would also be called “brothers,” as we know from Lot who was called “brother” by his uncle Avraham on repeated occasions, both by Avraham and by the Torah. (Genesis 13,8; 14,14) Seeing that Canaan would be a slave to his uncles, he would automatically have that status regarding the whole of mankind.
   Noach blessed Shem first to indicate that Shem would be a true servant of the Lord, whereas Canaan would be a servant of Shem’s offspring of whom there would be many.
   It is also possible that the word.למו refers back to the word לאחיו, “to his brothers,” and that Noach continued his blessing to his other two sons granting Yephet large portions of the earth as his domain, and Shem the privilege of being host to the Presence of G’d in the land at his disposal. He declared Canaan as a slave of Shem twice, as a hint Shem would eventually inherit land belonging to the descendants of Canaan, seeing that all the property once owned by a slave becomes the master’s. The reason why this whole paragraph has been recorded in the Torah, was to go on record that Canaan’s sin made him into a slave of the whole of mankind and that it was Avraham who eventually became the owner of what had been meant to be Canaan’s. The reason why the cause of all this has been recorded, i.e. Noach’s state of inebriation, is a warning to all mankind to keep their distance from strong drink, wine in particular, as if even a man of the stature of Noach was victimized by drinking too much of it, how would lesser individuals fare, people who possess far less self control than Noach.
   Some commentators are of the opinion that Noach was obliged to bless Shem after he had cursed Canaan to be a slave so as to indicate that Shem was free and not subservient to anyone else (creature) on earth.
   10,1. ויולדו להם בנים אחר המבול, “children were born for them after the deluge.” Although the fathers and mothers were capable of having children already before the onset of the deluge, G’d had deliberately prevented them from having children in order not to have to destroy their offspring as part of the deluge, and in order not to have to save too many people crowding the ark.
   10,2. בני יפת, “the children of Yephet.” The Torah lists Yephet’s children first as he was the oldest, followed by Cham, as the Torah wanted to list the descendants of Shem in conjunction with those of Avraham who was descended from him in a straight line and whose story follows.
   10,5. מאלה נפרדו איי הגויים, “from these the various nationalities developed as separate ‘islands of peoples.’” According to Nachmanides, especially the descendants of Yephet took up residence in the islands of the Mediterranean sea around the Greek mainland, each one consisting of a distinct and separate nation-state. The blessing given to Yephet envisioned that his descendants would be scattered over a large area, whereas the descendants of Cham lived in close proximity to one another. This is hinted at by the words מאלה נפרדו, “they separated from these.” This is also why the text (verse 19) continues with: ויהי גבול הכנעני מצידון באכה גררה עד עזה, “the boundaries of the territory belonging to the various clans of the Canaanite extended from Tzidon in the north as far south as Gerar until Gaza.” Significantly, the text adds (verse 20)למשפחותם, ללשונותם, בארצותם בגויהם, “according to their respective families, their different dialects, in their respective countries according to their differing nationalities.” The reason that the Torah went to such length to inform us of all these details is to establish the genealogy of Avraham to Noach via his son Shem. ([importance of being a Semite. Ed.] Through this detailed description of the descendants of both Cham and Shem, the title to the land of Israel by the descendants of Avraham, who had inherited the status of master over Cham due to Noach’s curse of his grandson Canaan, had been established for all future times. The Torah provides details of the development of the descendants of Yephet and the breaking up of a united mankind into clans of different languages, different orientations, in order to provide a logical explanation for the fact that mankind which at one time had all spoken the same language had gradually grown apart from one another both ideologically and geographically, so that international friction can be seen as an act of G’d’s kindness, the G’d Who but for His desire to keep His covenant with Noach would have destroyed the generation who had built the tower meaning thereby to challenge G’d’s supremacy in His own world.
   Maimonides, in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim</i> comments on this subject that what the Torah writes in our chapter is proof to the readers that the world did not precede G’d, but that G’d preceded the world. The report of these chapters in the Torah establishes a direct link between Noach and Avraham, as the ages given demonstrate that the survivors of the deluge gave eye witness accounts of these events having indeed taken place. Therefore, Avraham was in a position to command his own descendants to adhere to the laws of G’d. Shem was alive when Avraham was born, and Noach’s grandfather Methuselah had still known Adam personally. Even Yitzchok and Yaakov had still known Shem, a survivor of the ark, personally. Important historical data were handed down by eye-witnesses for an average of 3-4 generations due to the relatively long lifespan these people enjoyed. 
   10,7. ובני כוש סבא וחוילה “and the sons of Cush, Seva and Chavila.” All of thee people named here became founders of different clans which developed into nations. The sons of Raamah developed into two distinct nations, this is why their father’s name was repeated. On the other hand, Nimrod did not develop into being founder of a nation. We know this because the Torah describes his exploits in a different manner in verse 9. We would have expected the Torah to write: ובני כוש נמרד, following the pattern established since the beginning of the chapter. Put did not found a separate nation. This is why his name does not appear again after verse 6. All the ones whose children are not mentioned by name founded nations.
   10,8. הוא החל להיות גבור חיל בארץ, “he became the first hero on earth.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of the verse is that he became the first man who dared oppose G’d after the deluge and to incite man against G’d, although he had been preceded by Enosh doing the same in the antediluvian period. (Seeing that <i>Rashi</i> did not mention Enosh, Nachmanides adds that what is meant by <i>Rashi</i> is that he was the first human being to do so after the deluge.)
   10,9. הוא היה גבור ציד, “he was a ferocious hunter.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets the words גבור ציד to mean that Nimrod was clever in brainwashing people to rebel against the rule of G’d on earth. Ibn Ezra approaches the verse by stressing the plain meaning, saying that Nimrod began to display prowess as a hunter of wild beasts. He adds that the meaning of the words לפני ה' is that he built altars on which he offered some of the animals he had hunted successfully as offerings to G’d. Nachmanides writes that Ibn Ezra’s approach does not appeal to him as Ibn Ezra justifies the actions of a wicked person by what he writes in his commentary. He adds that when our sages described Nimrod as a wicked individual they had reliable traditions to base themselves on. 
   The correct interpretation of our verse (author’s words) is that he was the first individual to assert his power over his fellow human beings, making them subject to his will. He introduced organized warfare, commencing with his capture of Babylon. He followed this up by subjecting Assyria to his rule. When the Torah describes how he extended his rule to Ashur (verse 11) this is noteworthy, as Ashur was one of the descendants of Shem. He proceeded to build fortified cities there. The meaning of the words לפני ה' is meant to draw our attention to the extent of his achievements, something unparalleled by anyone except G’d. The Torah had described such unparalleled actions in similar terms once before when it wrote (Genesis 6,11) ותשחת הארץ לפני האלוקים.
   10,13. ומצרים ילד, “and Mitzrayim sired, etc.” The Torah, though mentioning Mitzrayim’s offspring, fails to mention where Mitzrayim lived, as it had done with the people mentioned previously. (Nachmanides) The reason is that as opposed to the various hardly known islands over which the descendants of Yephet were scattered, and the shifting lands occupied at different times by the Canaanites, Semites, etc., the boundaries of Egypt not only have remained pretty stationary and are well known, but the land itself bears the name of its founder. There was therefore no need to duplicate this information. Furthermore, all the sons of Mitzrayim took up residence within or adjacent to the land of Egypt. (compare Ezekiel 30,4-5 where the prophet lists the names of the brothers of the original Mitzrayim as being in the proximity of the land of Egypt.)
   According to Ibn Ezra all the names mentioned in our verses here are names of countries, nations, each nation having evolved out of a small family. This is the reason why all these names end in the plural mode. As proof for his argument he cites the phrase אשר יצאו משם, which he translated as “from where they had emerged, evolved.” In other words, the founders had come from some other location. The word משם clearly alludes to a location.
   Nachmanides views the כסלוחים as the inhabitants of a city called by that name, a city which was part of the land known as כפתור in which their brothers the כפתורים resided. The כסלוחים had left the land of כפתור, conquering a nation named פלשת, (Palestine). They subsequently changed their name to פלשתים, Philistines. This is what is meant when the Torah spoke about the כפתורים היוצאים מכפתור, “the Cypriots who had originated in Cyprus.” (Deut. 2,23) These people had originally been כסלוחים. 
   10,15. וכנען ילד את צידון בכורו, “and Canaan sired Tzidon his firstborn.” These (following) ten nations (Canaanites) are all the ones that G’d promised Avraham that his descendants would inherit or dispossess. (Genesis 15,19-21) This is all based on the fact that all of Canaan’s descendants had been condemned to be slaves, forever. However, some of them had changed their names by the time Avraham appeared on the scene of history. At this point the Torah called them by the names given to them by their father at the time they were born. Once they had grown up, moved away from home and founded nations their names changed. Perhaps they adopted the name of the country in which they dwelled, just as the Egyptians called themselves <i>Mitzrim,</i> a derivative of the name <i>Mitzrayim,</i> the land they lived in. It is also possible that those sons that did not become founders of separate nations retained the names given to them at birth, whereas the others changed their names, or their descendants changed their names. Tzidon would be a case in point. He is called a Canaanite as he did not develop into a separate nation and adopted the name of his country. When the Torah had clearly described the land of the Philistines as being part of the land of Israel, although the Philistines had descended from Mitzrayim and not from Canaan, this is no counter argument. At the time when G’d described the land of the Philistines as part of the land He would give to his descendants, (Genesis 26,3 where G’d referred in his prophecy to Yitzchok that He had already sworn that land to his father‘s descendants) the Canaanites had already conquered that part of the land from their original owners. It is quite possible that the Israelites did not inherit more than the 5 principalities that had been inhabited by the 5 Philistine cities mentioned in Joshua 13,3. It is important to realize that the land of Canaan, ever since the people on it became a nation, had been slated to become Israel’s. This is the חבל נחלתם of which Moses had spoken already in Deuteronomy 32,8. At the time when G’d scattered the people of the earth, at the time when the tower was destroyed, He allocated that strip of land to the Canaanites on a “temporary” lease. The Canaanites’ function during the hundreds of years before the Israelites conquered that land had been to serve as caretakers on behalf of the Israelites, a task not uncommon for slaves to perform for absentee owners. The Israelites during that period need to be viewed as not yet having come of age to take over their inheritance. [although the author does not mention it, this commentary has been almost literally copied from Nachmanides. Ed.]
   10,21. ולשם יולד גם הוא, ”also for Shem offspring had been born.” The Torah chose this unusual syntax so that we would not think that seeing Shem’s offspring had not been mentioned up until now that he had been childless during the time Canaan had produced all these nations.
   @אבי כל בני עבר, “the founding father of all the “Ivrim.” He was the founder of all the clans settling west of the river Euphrates, the region from which Avraham stemmed.
   @אחי יפת הגדול “the brother of the senior Yephet.” It is the custom of the Torah to relate the younger brother always by comparing him to the oldest, not to the one who had been born immediately after to him. This is why we have the prophetess Miriam described as Aaron’s sister and not as Moses’ sister (Exodus 15,20) The reason why this comparison is mentioned altogether, is to inform us that his distinguished brother was equal to him, and that Shem’s being mentioned last does not suggest that he was less distinguished or worthy of mention. Cham was certainly not more distinguished than Shem. [this too is the commentary by Nachmanides. Ed]
   Personally, I believe that the word הגדול in our verse is an adjective that applies to Shem, [he was the “great one”] i.e. he was senior to Yephet, Cham being the youngest, although he was listed in an order that suggests otherwise. It is the custom of the Torah to apply the adjective to the party or object that serves as the immediately preceding subject.
   11,2. בנסעם מקדם, “when they journeyed from Kedem.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this is a reference to verse 30 in the previous chapter in which mankind had been described as being in הר הקדם. Due to their increasing numbers, they began to look for a location that could comfortably accommodate all of them.
   Nachmanides, on the other hand, considers <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation as flawed, claiming that only the descendants of Shem had resided in the region described as הר הקדם in verse 30. To the question that if so why would the dispersal of mankind be attributed only to the descendants of Shem, this raises the point why the dispersal of mankind is described as caused and applied only to the descendants of Shem and not to those of Yephet and Cham, seeing that the latter even represented the majority of mankind? Furthermore, according to this concept the descendants of Yephet remained in their habitats, and how did they come to populate the islands in the Ionic and Aegean sea? We would have to assume that G’d scattered them all across these islands. Subsequently, they would have formed nation states like the descendants of the other sons of Noach.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the mountain Arrarat was located in the east, and he is correct when he states that Mount Arrarat is situated east of there, and that it makes sense that the people who had lived around there had attempted to flee to the mountains in the Arrarat range to escape the deluge. When Noach descended from the ark it is no more than natural that he should have settled in that region. When his descendants became more numerous, they looked for wider spaces and moved down to the valley. It was the people who had settled in the valley who rebelled against G’d.
   According to the רודפי הפשט, people who are incapable of looking beyond the literal meaning of the text, these people did not intend to rebel against G’d but wanted to insure that they would not become scattered all over the world, unable to find their way back to their homes. These people claim that the fact that the Torah describes their expressed purpose in building the tower, not mentioning anything detrimental about them, is proof that they were quite innocent. If that interpretation were correct, the people of that time must have been complete idiots that they could imagine that a single city and a single tower could be sufficient for all of mankind! Did they imagine that the proliferation of the human race had concluded in their generation?? 
   Anyone familiar with how to interpret what the Torah reveals, understands that the intention of the people building the tower is already revealed by their declared purpose of נעשה לנו שם, “let us make a name for ourselves!” One does not need to read much between the lines to appreciate that the project was a sinful one. If one needed further proof, the very penalty which fitted their crime, i.e. that they were dispersed, proves that they had intended to use their concentration in one location to assert their power vis-à-vis their Creator. Quite possibly, our sages who seize on the expression אשר בנו בני האדם, “which the descendants of Adam had built,” (verse 5) saw in these words a hint that the sin of these people paralleled the sin of disobedience perpetrated by the first human being, Adam. Why else would the Torah have to write the line in verse 5? Who would have thought that the people building the tower were not descendants of Adam? It is worth noting that in the whole episode of the deluge G’d is referred to by His attribute אלוקים, i.e. as someone sitting in judgment, whereas here throughout G’d is referred to as the Attribute of Mercy. The deluge had been decreed because the people at that time had corrupted earth, whereas here, just as in the case of Adam’s sin, the creature-Creator relationship, described by our sages as קצצו בנטיעות, undermining basic religious tenets, was the issue.
   11,11. ויחי שם...ויולד בנים ובנות, “Shem lived, etc., and begat sons and daughters.” No mention is made of these people dying, as the Torah invariably stated with the ten generations preceding Noach. The reason is that the earlier generations died, decomposed and no trace of them was left after the deluge. Seeing that their memory was blotted out on account of there being no visible reminder that they had ever lived, the Torah made mention of their lives and deaths. These later generations were all buried and their burial sites remained intact. Seeing that Noach was the founder of these last ten generations, and he was also partially a member of the first ten generations, his death is mentioned, as with his death a major segment of human history had been concluded. Some commentators believe that seeing the first human being brought death into the world, the Torah not only mentioned Adam’s death but also the death of those who but for his sin might never have died. Generations subsequent to Noach were born into a different kind of universe than Adam had been placed in; therefore there was no need to stress that these people died after having lived the number of years mentioned in the Torah.
   11,28. וימת חרן על פני תרח אביו, “Haran died during the lifetime of his father Terach.” Some commentators hold that until that time children did not die during the lifetime of their fathers except for Peleg (Genesis 11,18). Hence the Torah reported that this was an exception. A similar expression is used in Numbers 3,4 when the appointment of Elazar and Ittamar as priests during the lifetime of their father Aaron is reported. [I do not think the argument is sound, as Lemech, Noach’s father died during the lifetime of his own father Methuselah. Ed. (5,31)]
   @בארץ מולדתו באור כשדים, “in the country of his birth in Ur of the Chaldaeans.” According to Nachmanides these last words refer back only to Haran, whereas Avraham himself was not born in Ur, seeing that his forefathers were descendants of Shem, whereas the Chaldaeans were descended from the descendants of Cham. Compare Genesis 14,13 where Avraham is described as an <i>Ivri</i>, and not as a “<i>Casdi</i>.” We also have clear evidence from Joshua that the forefathers of the Israelites had originally resided on the east bank of the river Euphrates. (Joshua 24,2) If, at the time when Terach took Avraham, and Haran and family leaving Nachor behind, and settled in Charan which is hundreds of miles north east of Shinor the land of the Casdim, how could Eliezer who was bidden to seek out Avraham’s family, have looked for Rivkah in Charan rather than in Ur? The truth is that Terach and family originated in the land of Aram that is east of the Euphrates. (Ur, downstream, was immediately west of the Euphrates) When Bileam commenced his blessing in Numbers 23,7 he described how Balak had brought him all the way from Aram, which he defines as הררי קדם, the range of mountains in the east, hardly identical with the Mesopotamian valley in which Ur was situated.
   The Talmud (<i>Baba Batra</i> 91) reports that Avraham had been jailed for 10 years, 3 of them in a town called כותא. It is common knowledge that this town was in the land of the Casdim (lower Mesopotamia, near Ur) as we have a verse describing the King of Ashur as coming from Babylon and Kuta as well as from Gaza and Chamat.(Kings II 17,30) In these verses the exile of the ten tribes is described. It is clear that Kuta would not have been situated anywhere near the route described in Kings II as taken by the King of Ashur who had taken the ten tribes prisoner, and who was about to repopulate the cities of Samaria with people from elsewhere, so that the land he had captured would not become desolate. Apparently, Kuta was a town in the general region of Aram Naharayim, the town in which Nachor, grandfather of Rebeccah had made his home (compare Genesis 24,10) Kuta was a large city in those days between the land of Israel and the river Tigris. Terach had moved with his older son Avraham from there downstream to the land of the Casdim (Ur) .Haran, his younger son was born in Ur. Whereas Nachor had remained in what is referred to as עבר הנהר, the Torah testifies only concerning Haran that he had been born in Ur Casdim. This information has also been recorded independently in books dating back to ancient times as pointed out by Maimonides in his <i>Moreh.</i> He writes that Avraham who had been born in Kuta had disagreed with the religions of his contemporaries Most of them were sun worshippers. The king incarcerated him for his refusal to toe the theological line deemed politically correct in his time. After many years when the king became afraid that the people might adopt some of the views Avraham had spread, he exiled him to an area bordering on the land of Canaan. This occurred after he had first deprived him of all his earthly belongings. At any rate, the region still belonged to that known as Ur Casdim. Avraham experienced either a manifest miracle, by being saved from the persecution of the king, or at least he experienced what is known as a נס נסתר, a “hidden miracle,” such as a sudden unaccountable change of heart by the king not to sentence him to death and to release him from jail allowing him to emigrate to a country of his choice. Alternately, he might even have thrown him into a furnace from which G’d saved him by direct intervention in his fate. The nations of the world in those days did not record this miracle in their records as it did not suit them to publicize proof which would cause people to question their beliefs. They were not as truth-loving as Pharaoh’s advisers, the magicians who openly admitted that the G’d in heaven had manifested Himself when working the ten plagues. Moreover, even assuming that they had witnessed this miracle, they would not attribute it to Divine intervention by Avraham’s G’d, but would see in this the work of magicians, or invisible forces in nature.
   Do not allow Ibn Ezra to confuse you with his various questions on this subject, especially the fact that the Torah failed to mention such an outstanding miracle as G’d saving Avraham from a fiery furnace. The magicians of Pharaoh, until the third plague, that of the lice and vermin, also thought that Moses was a superior magician rather than an emissary from G’d who could call on G’d to perform miracles. Had the Torah reported on the miracle of Avraham’s survival of that experience in Nmirod’s furnace, it would also have had to devote some space reporting the refusal of the onlookers and especially Nimrod’s theologians, to acknowledge that this had proven the existence of an invisible G’d who was the Creator, and therefore able to control laws of nature.
   It suffices for the believers that the Torah wrote (Genesis 15,7) “I am the Lord Who has taken you out from Ur Casdim to give you this land (Canaan) as an inheritance.” The very expression הוצאתיך, “I have taken you out,” alerts the reader to the fact that the Torah refers to something supernatural, to a miracle. Ever since G’d had saved Avraham miraculously, He had had in mind to commence the process that would lead ultimately to Avraham’s descendants inheriting the land of Canaan. From that day on, both Terach and his son Avraham had intended to get away as far as possible from lands under the control of Nimrod. Their arrival in Charan must be viewed as a way station (halfway house) on the way to the land of Canaan. The advantage of Charan was the fact that they had relatives there, people who spoke their language. As a result, what was intended as a brief stopover became a prolonged stay in Charan. While he was in Charan, G’d commanded Avraham to do what had been in his mind already, namely to emigrate to the land of Canaan. He therefore left his aging father behind in Charan. Whereas Terach died in his birthplace Charan, Avraham took his wife and his nephew Lot to move to Canaan with him. This is what Joshua had in mind when he reminded the people shortly before his death of their origins, and how G’d had taken their forefather Avraham from a region called עבר הנהר, “the far side of the river Euphrates.” (Joshua 24,2-7) The reference to that region was meant to tell the people that this is where Avraham was commanded to begin his pilgrimage. G’d made Avraham traverse the entire length of the land of Canaan
   According to our sages (who say that Nimrod had thrown Avraham into a fiery furnace for his refusal to toe the theological line of his time) the words אור כשדים are to be understood literally, i.e. “the fire of the Chaldaens.” This expression is used in a similar sense in Isaiah 44,16חאח, חמותי, ראיתי אור, “hurrah, I am warm, I can feel the heat.” Terach had not been thrown into the furnace, so he did not need to be saved. The Torah concentrates on the principal personality in that episode, leaving out some details. The principal character was Avraham, hence it was only he to whom G’d referred to when He reminded him of the purpose for which he had been saved.
   Alternately, the reason why that place was namedאור כשדים, was on account of the miracle which had occurred there when Avraham was saved. We have numerous occasions when locations where the Israelites stopped on their journey through the desert were given names based on what had occurred there, such as תבערה, (Numbers 11,3; or קברות התאוה, Numbers 11,34.) The verse in our portion would allude to the fact that when Avraham came out of the furnace the whole family fled from that region. This would be parallel to the use of the wordאורים in Isaiah 24,15 באורים כבדו ה' where it means: “therefore honour the Lord in the lands of the mountains where they light signal fires to communicate news items over long distances.” This would be a veiled reference to communicating the miracle that had happened to Avraham in the fiery furnace of Nimrod. The expression מאורות צפעוני, is a description of the lair of a serpent whose poison is as burning as hot fire. This serpent is also known as שרף, [from שרפה, “burning.” Ed.]
   11,31. ויצאו אתם מאור כשדים, “they departed from there with them.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the plural mode ויצאו, refers to Terach and Avraham, Lot and Sarai, Avraham’s wife. I find his commentary difficult to accept as he represents the major personality in the story, i.e. Avraham, as secondary to the minor player, Terach. This is something most unusual. Furthermore, according to <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation why would Avraham be paired with Terach, for according to <i>Rashi</i> Terach was the principal in the verse, seeing that he had taken Avraham and Lot with him as well as Sarai, and the correct reading should have been: ויצא תרח אתם, “Terach departed with them.”
   Nachmanides writes that seeing that Avraham was a more distinguished person than his father and the other people journeying with them, the Torah employs the plural mode: “they went with them,” seeing that, as the Torah writes, Terach had taken the initiative in emigrating. To the onlookers it appeared as if Avraham had gone along with his father’s decision in the matter. The other members of the entourage continued to travel with Avraham as their leader also after Avraham had left his father behind in Charan. (Genesis 12,4)
   11,32. וימת תרח בחרן, “Terach died in Charan.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Terach still lived for many years, so that we must wonder why the Torah appeared anxious to report his death already at this juncture. <i>Rashi</i> answers that this was so that people would not accuse Avraham of having abandoned his father in his old age. Therefore, the Torah treats Terach in its report as if he had already died.
   Nachmanides is dissatisfied with this explanation, although it follows the opinions handed down in <i>Bereshit Rabbah 39,7.</i>writing that it is perfectly normal for scripture to report on the life of the father, followed by the birth of his son, followed by the report of the father’s death. Having reported the death of the father, scripture resumes the thread by informing us about important aspects of the son’s life. We know that Noach’s life overlapped with the early years of Avraham, and still the Torah had reported his death already in Genesis 9,29.
   It is possible that the reason why the <i>Midrash</i> wrote in the vein quoted by <i>Rashi,</i> was that scripture here departed somewhat from its normal syntax when reporting on Terach. Normally, since Shem, Noach’s son, we have not heard about any of the generations’ leaders dying; the Torah had only reported the fact that they were born and for how many years they had lived, leaving the reader to conclude that at the end of the respective number of years, the person referred to had died. Terach is the first person after Noach whose death the Torah had seen fit to devote a line to. (except the premature death of Haran which was reported in Genesis 11,28) In our verse the Torah resumes speaking about Terach, although this had been interrupted with the report of the premature death of his son Haran. Not only does the Torah report on his death at the age of 205 years, but it even stresses the fact of where he died. In view of this, the sages of the <i>Midrash</i> looked for the reason why the Torah had changed its style here.
   It is also possible that seeing that the Torah had already given us some details about Avraham’s life including the fact that he emigrated from Ur Casdim with his father, intending to proceed to the land of Canaan. The Torah felt constrained to point out that as opposed to Avraham, the son, the father never did reach the land of Canaan but died in Charan.
   As to the comment of the sages in the <i>Midrash</i> that wicked people are already described as dead even while they are physically still alive, the Torah later on informed Avraham the son, that his father had a share in the world to come, seeing that G’d phrased Avraham’s own arrival in that region as “you will join your fathers in peace in a ripe old Age.” (Genesis 15,15) Perhaps G’d hinted to Avraham that his father had become a penitent shortly before his death and that therefore he had not forfeited his share in the world to come. Apparently, this is the way <i>Rashi</i> understood our verse. Alternatively, in accordance with a view expressed in <i>Sanhedrin</i> 104, Terach was rewarded with a share in the hereafter as a gift by G’d to his son Avraham. [according to that view and the view that the events in chapter 15 took place 5 years before Avraham settled in the land of Canaan (according to <i>Rashi’s</i> own calculations<i>),</i> G’d would have informed Avraham at the age of 70 that his father would have a share in the hereafter!. Ed.]
   Parshat Lech Lecha
   12,1.ויאמר ה' אל אברם לך לך, “The Lord said to Avram: “go forth for yourself, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets the words לך as meaning “for your own benefit, and for your own satisfaction.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this verse in this fashion, although he was aware that our sages considered this verse as introducing one of the ten trials G’d subjected Avraham to. Having to move away from his birthplace was considered one of these trials.
   Nachmanides does not interpret the word לך as meaning “for your own benefit,” i.e. the repetition of the words לך לך. He feels that the wording לך לך is not at all unusual, and therefore does not call for a special interpretation at this point. He quotes Song of Songs 2,11 הגשם הלך לו, “the rain has ceased,” as well as the preceding words לכי לך, “go forth,” as examples of the pronoun לך appearing without any ulterior meanings having to be looked for. Other similar examples are (Jeremiah 5,5) אלכה לי אל הגדולים, “so I will go to the wealthy, etc.” However, our sages (long before <i>Rashi)</i> have used this kind of syntax in order to derive additional meanings from it. (Deut. 10,1) ועשית לך ארון עץ, “make yourself a wooden ark; or Numbers 10,2 עשה לך שתי חצוצרות כסף “make for yourself two silver trumpets.” The Talmud <i>Yuma</i> 3 explains the word לך to mean that these trumpets were to be Moses’ personal property, and in fact they were hidden after his death so that no one else could make use of them. In view of the above, there is no reason for Nachmanides to criticize <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation of the word לך in our verse. (seeing that the Tabernacle was not Moses’ personal property, the expression לך used in connection with it would not fit the interpretation <i>Rashi</i> gave it here, whereas the trumpets were specifically not communal property.)
   @מארצך וממולדך ומבית אביך, “from your homeland, your birthplace, and from your father’s house.” The trial became progressively more difficult, as separating from one’s father’s house is more difficult than separating from the land one has been born in.
   @אל הארץ אשר אראך, “to the land which I will show you.” It is an additional hardship to be ordered to undertake a journey the destination of which has not been revealed beforehand. Avraham considered all this as easy, as he was anxious to fulfill G’d’s request out of a feeling of love for Him. <i>Rashi</i> queries that this commandment was not new, seeing that Avraham had already left his homeland a number of years ago when he went to Charan with his father? He therefore explains that we must understand what G’d is reported to have said here to Avraham to make an even more drastic break with his past by leaving his father’s house.
   Ibn Ezra views the basic commandment as having been formulated by G’d already when G’d said to him לך לך מארצך as well as ממולדך ומבית אביך, at a time when he was still in Ur Casdim. G’d had known that Terach, Avraham’s father, would not go beyond Charan. In fact, Terach died 60 years after Avraham had continued his journey to the land of Canaan.
   Nachmanides disagrees, writing that if correct, the paragraph describing the move from Ur Casdim should have portrayed Avraham as the principal, instead of describing Terach as having taken the other family members with him. (11,31) Clearly, at that time Avraham followed his father’s instructions, not G’d’s. No mention had been made of G’d having communicated with Avraham as yet. Furthermore, in the verse from Joshua 24,3 G’d is quoted as having said: “I have taken your father (Avraham) from beyond the river Euphrates.” If Ibn Ezra were correct, Joshua should have quoted: “I have taken your father from Ur Casdim, etc.” Still another proof that Ibn Ezra is not correct can be found in the instructions Avraham issued to his trusted servant Eliezer when he sent him to get a wife for Yitzchok. In Genesis 24,3 Avraham instructs Eliezer to take a wife for Yitzchok from ארצי ומולדתי, “my homeland and the place where I was born.” Eliezer proceeded to travel to Aram Naharyim, not to Ur Casdim in order to discharge his master’s mission. Ibn Ezra is wrong when he interprets the words in that verse as meaning ארצי=חרן and מולדתי as Ur Casdim. How could he say here that this directive was given to Avraham while he was still in Ur Casdim? Avraham had a number of countries that he called “his country” at different times, though he had only one birthplace and one father’s house. The fact is that Charan was both his homeland, his birthplace, and the location of his father’s house.
   @אל הארץ אשר אראך, “to the land which I will show you.” He would be wandering until he would eventually get to the land of Canaan. Having arrived in the land of Canaan, G’d told him (verse 7) that He would give that whole land to his (non existent) descendants. When we had been told earlier (11,31) ויצאו אתם מאור כשדים ללכת ארצה כנען, “They departed together from Ur Casdim to go to the land of Canaan,” this was not a journey designed to settle in that land, as Avraham had not yet known at that time that G’d’s commandment had envisaged the land of Canaan as his ultimate destination. We have proof of this from when he explained to Avimelech (Genesis 20,13) that G’d had made him wander without a specific objective through many locations, so that he had adopted the practice of describing Sarai as his sister in all the locations where they had stopped for a period of time. It is possible that Avraham had known that the land of Canaan was G’d’s inheritance on earth, and that therefore he had been heading in that direction. He had understood that the words “to the land which I will show you” were a hint that he should head towards the land of Canaan.
   12,2. והיה ברכה, “and become a blessing.” You will be the blessing by whom the nations will bless themselves when they quote you as a role model when blessing others and wishing that they should turn out to be like Avraham.
   12,3.ואברכה מברכיך, “I will bless those who will bless you.” The plural ending in the word מברכיך is a hint that there will be more people blessing you than people cursing you. Some commentators say that the verse is a prophecy concerning the priests who will be descended from Avraham and whose task it will be to bless the people.
   @ונברכו בך כל משפחות האדמה, “and all the families on earth will be blessed through you.” Not only Avraham’s direct descendants will be blessed through him, but far wider circles, all the families on earth. Some commentators derive the expression from the causative form of the root ברך, meaning to refine through genetic improvement, מבריך. The term is applied especially to improving the qualities of certain grapes and the wine they produce. In our case it would mean that all the families of the earth would be improved through intermarriage with descendants of Avraham. Avraham having married Hagar, of Egyptian descent and siring a son from her would be a case in point. Later on, he married Keturah who was of the descendants of Yaphet and sired 6 sons from her.
   12,4. ואברם בן חמש שנים ושבעים שנה בצאתו מחרן, “Avraham was 75 years of age when he emigrated from Charan.” The reason why the Torah recorded Avraham’s age at this stage was to show that he left his father in order to obey G’d’s instructions.
   According to the ancient historical text known as סדר עולם, Avraham undertook two emigrations, this being his second. He had gone to the land of Canaan the first time at the age of 70 where G’d had made the promises to him that are recorded in chapter 15. This is based on the Torah saying in Exodus 12,40 that the total period the Israelites spent in Egypt amounted to 430 years. Seeing that in chapter 15 G’d spoke about a period of 400 years during which his descendants were to be either strangers or strangers and slaves in a foreign country, it follows that until the birth of Yitzchok when Avraham was 100 years of age the fulfillment of that prophecy could not have commenced. Seeing that Avraham was in the land of Canaan for a brief period at that time, the countdown for the realization of this prophecy could begin from that time on.
   Furthermore, at the time when Avraham defeated the kings who had taken Lot prisoner he was 74 years of age. This is arrived at by the fact that he was 48 years old at the time when these city-kingdoms were founded and populated. For 12 years the political situation had remained stable with the kings of these cities paying annual taxes to Kedorleomer. Thus Avraham was 60 years old at the time when the city-kingdoms rebelled and refused to continue paying their taxes. 14 years later the four kings, including Kedorleomer, mounted the punitive expedition as a result of which Lot was taken prisoner. This means that Avraham was 74 years at the time. As the Torah reports him as 75 years of age at the time of his emigration in our chapter, he must have been in the land of Canaan previously, a time when G’d made the covenant between the pieces with him, as described in detail in chapter 15. In other words, Avraham departed from Charan twice.
   The difficulty with all this is that we read in the same סדר עולם that during the 5 years preceding his emigration from Charan Avraham had been in Charan. If so, he had been in Charan at the time when the war broke out, not as described in 14,13 in Eloney Mamre (Kiryat Arba nowadays). One can possibly answer this apparent contradiction by justifying the text in סדר עולם that Avraham spent those five years in Charan, and that the words והוא שוכן באלוני ממרא האמורי “he was living at Eloney Mamre,” in 14,13 refer to the פליט, the escapee who had brought him the news that his nephew had been taken prisoner. In order to make this plausible, consider why the Torah bothered to add that in Eloney Mamre there were in addition to Mamre also his brother Aner and Eshkol, all of whom had a mutual defense treaty with Avraham. Surely, the reason is to explain why the escapee brought the news to the three brothers in Eloney Mamre of whom he knew that they were allies of Avraham. These brothers in turn would relay to Avraham what they had heard about the fate of his nephew. In fact, the escapee may have chosen refuge in Eloney Mamre believing that Kedorleomer would not dare harm allies of Avraham. The weakness with this supposed scenario is that the author of סדר עולם lists as the year when Avraham left Charan permanently the same year in which these wars had been fought. If that were so, what difference would it make if Avraham was 70 years of age the first time he left Charan or not. Who needs to know? [furthermore, a more serious flaw in the sequence listed in סדר עולם is the question of when Lot took up residence in Sodom, and when did the falling out with Avraham which led to his being taken captive? Ed.]
   If, as stipulated, Avraham was only 70 years old at the covenant between the pieces which was reported in chapter 15, there is no alternative but to conclude that the Torah’s reports are not chronologically sequential. Another difficulty is found in the opening words of chapter 15: אחר הדברים האלה, “after these events.” If the events in this chapter occurred prior to the events related in either chapter 12 or chapter 14 what do these opening words mean? G’d reassures Avraham, (if we assume that the events of chapter 15 occurred subsequent to the events related in chapter 14) that in spite of his victory over the four kings, a victory due to G’d’s manifest assistance, his merits had not been used up so that he had reason to worry about G’d protecting him in the future.) We would have to say that the wordsאחר הדברים ,האלה, refer to the entire sequence previously related and that only the short paragraph concluding withוהאמין בה' ויחשביה לו צדקה (15,6) are related out of chronological order. That particular conversation between G’d and Avraham had taken place prior to the conquest of Sodom by the four kings.
   12,6. ויעבר אברם בארץ עד מקום שכם, “Avram traversed the country (traveling in a southerly direction) as far as the site of the town of Shechem.” The location is mentioned to tell us that he offered a prayer there concerning the sons of Yaakov, who he foresaw, would encounter many problems associated with that location and who would engage in a war there in order to free their sister Dinah who had been captured and raped. This in spite of the fact that when he had described himself as ערירי, unable to sire offspring, G’d had assured him that he would not only have children but that he would found a great nation. He was concerned that perhaps due to a sin on his part, this promise would be long delayed in being fulfilled.
   Nachmanides writes that all the journeys of Avraham which are recorded here, as well as those of Yitzchok and Yaakov after him, are recorded to serve as illustrations of the principle מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, that the affairs of the patriarchs foreshadow experiences which occurred in the lives of their offspring during the history of the Jews as a people. The decrees announced by the prophets (the “wakeful ones,” according to Daniel 4,14) were based on their interpreting events in the lives of the patriarchs as foreshadowing the fate of their children and children’s children. When the prophets engaged in what appear to be merely symbolic actions [such as Jeremiah 51,63-64 giving instructions to Baruch, his disciple, to tie a stone to the book of Jeremiah after he has finished reading it, and to throw it into the river Euphrates and to say at that moment: “thus shall Babylon sink and never rise again, because of the disaster that I will bring upon it.”] Baruch was instructed to perform this act so as to make G’d’s decree more than just a potential judgment on the Babylonians. By performing a tangible, visible act, the decree was transformed from something merely potential to something actual, though the time for realization had not yet been determined. In a similar manner, all the stories related in detail about the patriarchs serve as the catalyst for eventual repetition in the lives of the Jewish people. We find a similar example in the days of Elisha (Kings II 13,15) who instructed King Joash to get a bow and arrows and to shoot out the window. Having shot an arrow, Elisha proclaimed this gesture to have been a symbol of victory for the people of Israel. He then instructed the king to pick up the arrows he had shot. The King complied. He was then instructed to strike the ground. The King struck the ground three times and stopped. (without having been told to stop) Elisha was very angry at the King and told him that if only he had continued another five or six times, he would have annihilated Aram. As it were, he would defeat the armies of Aram only three times. [Elisha was already sick at the time, close to death, and therefore especially frustrated by the King’s action. Ed.] The Bible does not tell us stories like this merely to embellish the study of our history. These symbolic actions are extremely important in helping certain decrees of G’d which were in the realm of the potential only, to become translated into reality. G’d provided the patriarchs with opportunities to perform such symbolic gestures, which in the course of Jewish history would prove to have been the trigger setting in motion important historic developments. This is the meaning of מעשה אבות סימן לבנים.
   The Torah stated והכנעני אז בארץ, that “the Canaanite was then in control of the land of Canaan,” a banal statement, for why else would the land be described as the land of the Canaanites? There is a far deeper meaning to this statement. Among other meanings, the Torah is on record that Jews had already moved around unopposed in the land of Canaan at a time when the time was not yet ripe for this people to be expelled from that land on account of what the Torah described as עון האמורי, “the sin of the Emorite.” (Genesis 15,16)
   It is also possible that the reason why the Torah saw fit to write the line והכנעני אז בארץ, is to explain why it took Avraham such a long time before he built the first altar dedicated to monotheism. He had been afraid, as the land was owned by the Canaanite and he could not expect that they would take kindly to a stranger publicly challenging their religious convictions. It was only after G’d had appeared to him and given him assurances that he was no longer afraid to do what he had in mind to do already previously. The promise that his children in due course would inherit this land, a promise given in verse 7, encouraged him to become an evangelist on behalf of his G’d.
   Elon (Moreh) (verse 6) is none other than Shechem. (Nablus in our time) The addition of the word מורה appears in connection with this location which is also defined as being opposite Gilgal and Mount Gerizim elsewhere. (compare Deut. 11,30) The meaning of the words ה-אל הנראה אליו, appears to imply that G’d instructed Avraham to build the altar at that location The word מורה, from הוראה, ”instruction,” was appended to the name of the place Elon to remind us that Avraham had received Divine instructions there. The very word אליו “directly to him,” is indicative of the fact that this revelation was of a more advanced nature than any previous communication by G’d to Avraham.
   There are some commentators who feel that the words והכנעני אז בארץ, were meant to stress the loving kindness of G’d towards Avraham in that He protected Avraham every step of the way in spite of the fact that the land was owned by a hostile nation [which had already succeeded in driving the Semites out of most of that land. Ed.] Avraham traversed this land with substantial herds, as if the whole land belonged to him. He was not challenged and not molested.
   12,8. ויקרא בשם ה', “He proclaimed his belief in the Lord of heaven.” Onkelos translates this as Avraham simply offering a prayer there to his G’d. According to the plain meaning of the words Avraham did much more than that. He proclaimed his faith loudly for all the people to hear. We find that his son Yitzchok did something similar (Genesis 21,33). It is noteworthy that we do not find a reference in the Torah to Yaakov doing something similar. The reason is that Yaakov had many sons and that his family itself was a constant reminder to the people around them of their belief in the only G’d, the G’d in heaven, the Creator of mankind.
   12,9. הנגבה, “in a southerly direction.” According to <i>Rashi</i>, he was traveling in the southern part of the country, the area which later on formed the territory of the tribe of Yehudah. Later on, when it came to taking possession of the land, the tribe of Yehudah was also the first to take possession of these areas.
   12,10. ויהי רעב בארץ וירד אברם מצרימה, ”when there was a famine in the land, Avram descended to Egypt.” This too was an example of the principle of מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, that the activities of the patriarchs foreshadowed the activities of their offspring, their descendants. The family of Yaakov also moved to Egypt, and their move too had been triggered by a long famine involving also the land of Canaan. In both instances the motivation was simply survival. When the Egyptians eventually mistreated the Jews, they had not had any excuse to do so, just as Avraham had not given the Egyptians any excuse to abduct his wife. G’d, eventually, avenged the Egyptians’ abuse of the Jewish people just as He had punished Pharaoh for abducting Sarai and forcing her to be his slave [wives did not have civil rights in those days. Ed.] Just as Avraham was showered with silver and gold while in Egypt, his descendants, when leaving Egypt, took with them most of Egypt’s silver and gold. The Jewish experience in Egypt paralleled that of Avraham in even more details when the Egyptians who decreed the death of male Jewish babies also encouraged the survival of the female babies, clearly in order to make slaves of them in one way or another, just as they tried to do with Sarai. Just as Pharaoh expedited the departure from Egypt of Avraham after he had been chastised by G’d, so Pharaoh expelled the Jewish nation at the time of the Exodus.
   Nachmanides writes that Avraham sinned greatly when he moved to Egypt, seeing that he unintentionally subjected his wife to great danger. He should have had trust in G’d that He would save him from the famine. As a result of this lack of faith demonstrated by their forefather, his descendants were enslaved in Egypt at the hands of Pharaoh according to the principle that the penalty is administered at the site where the sin has been committed. (compare Kohelet 3,16)
   Avraham is not considered as having sinned when he described his wife as his sister; on the contrary, this was a meritorious act on his part, as it proves that he was loath to rely on miracles as long as he had not done what was humanly possible to save G’d from having to intervene by upsetting the laws of nature. The reputation of the Egyptians had been such that he had every reason to fear for his life if he had described Sarai as his wife. 
   12,12. והרגו אותי ואותך יחיו, “they will kill me while allowing you to live.” They will let you live thanks to your physical beauty. As a result they will feel that they have to kill me. As to why they would rather kill Avraham instead of simply sleeping with Sarai while her husband was alive, even though all of mankind had been warned not to commit murder, no less a sin than to commit adultery with someone else’s wife, the reason is psychological. Murder is committed only once on the same person, while illegal sexual intercourse and the desire to perform it is an ongoing temptation, one that will recur again and again. It was therefore easier for them to live with the knowledge of having killed than to live with the knowledge that every time they slept with someone’s wife they committed a mortal sin. Furthermore, if they were to rape Sarai while her husband was alive, they might have to face the King after Avraham had complained about his wife being violated. Once Avraham was dead, who would complain?
   Nachmanides writes that he does not understand what Avraham was afraid at this point more than at any time in his life previously. If it was that the Egyptians were black-skinned and more immoral than other tribes, we know that even at Avimelech’s court there was no respect for someone else’s wife if the King desired her sexually. In spite of such fears being reasonable, G’d had commanded Yitzchok not to leave the land of Israel and to proceed to the land (province) of the Philistines to wait out the end of the famine! Perhaps Avraham and Yitzchok were afraid only when they took up residence in a city, as the inhabitants of those cities were in the habit of offering any especially attractive woman to their King. They would kill that woman’s husband so that their King would not be guilty of an adulterous relationship with such a woman. This approach would be supported by what Avraham explained to Avimelech in Genesis 20,13 “when G’d caused me to wander from my father’s house, I said to her, (Sarai) ‘do me this favour: at every place we come to, say about me: ’he is my brother.’” The Torah had not mentioned this stratagem previously, except when for some reason they had to fall back on an agreement which had been practiced already repeatedly. As long as that agreement forestalled any problems, there had been no need to mention it. Yitzchok had not been afraid in his own country and had resorted to a similar stratagem only when forced to move to the land of the Philistines.
   When Avraham explained the planned deception as designed to benefit him personally, i.e. as potentially saving his life, (verse 13) he had in mind the entire period of the famine when he and Sarai would be forced to be strangers in a land unknown to them. He thought that this would be the way by which G’d would enable them to survive the famine which raged at that time, until a time when they could return to the land of Canaan or to flee that region altogether.
   It appears that the plain meaning of the text is that Sarai did not agree to the deception Avraham demanded of her. However, the Egyptians were so depraved that before even giving Sarai a chance to explain her relationship to Avraham they already abducted her, having praised her beauty to their King. They never bothered to enquire how Avraham was related to her. This is what enabled the King to exclaim afterwards: “how come you have not even told me that this woman is your wife? Why did you say “she is my sister?” The King accused Avraham of having misled both his men and himself by not revealing that Sarai was his wife. He accused Avraham of treacherous conduct after Sarai had already been abducted to his palace. According to Pharaoh, Avraham should have protested Sarai’s abduction from the very first moment instead of describing her as his sister. It was most unseemly for her to deny that he was her husband.
   12,13. אמרי נא אחותי את, “Please say that you are my sister.” The word נא is an expression of an entreaty. Avraham justified the use of the white lie as he saw himself in immediate danger of being murdered. He realized that by lying he would become the beneficiary of that lie also financially.
   @למען ייטב לי בעבורך, “in order that I will benefit on your account (and survive).” Seeing that you have to say that you are not my wife, do it in a way that will confer benefits upon me as a direct result of your situation. By saying that you are my sister they will heap gifts upon me to secure my acquiescence.
   12,15. ויראו אותה שרי פרעה, “When the ministers of Pharaoh saw her, etc.” When the local Egyptians saw this beautiful woman they said that she is suitable for highly placed ministers, etc. But even when they brought her to such ministers they were afraid to touch her themselves, preferring to bring her to the King, having decided that she was suitable only for the King himself.
   12,16. ולאברם היטיב בעבורה, “He conferred benefits on Avram on her account.” Even though Avraham did not want to accept gifts from the King of Sodom (later on), here he was forced to accept the gifts or they would have realized that he was Sarai’s husband.
   12,17. וינגע ה' את פרעה, “The Lord smote Pharaoh with plagues, etc.” It is difficult to understand why G’d punished Pharaoh for a crime committed inadvertently. He had not been warned not to take Sarai as a wife, as had been the case with Avimelech. Some commentators are of the opinion that Pharaoh did indeed sin intentionally as G’d had informed him that Sarai was Avram’s wife. The fact that Pharaoh reacted by saying to Avraham: “here is your wife, take her and leave,” is proof that someone had informed him. Clearly, this had been G’d, although He may not have spelled it out in these words.
   According to Nachmanides when these plagues struck Pharaoh and his household suddenly, he wondered what G’d had done to him and why; he asked Sarai if she could account for this and she told him the reason. Thereupon Pharaoh called in Avraham and accused him without being specific, as he was not sure that the plagues were indeed related to this matter. Alternatively, as our sages explained this, the plague consisted of Pharaoh suddenly becoming impotent so that it dawned on him that this could be related to the fact that the woman in question was someone’s wife. He accused Avraham only tentatively, questioning him, afraid to accuse him explicitly. Had Avraham said: “she is my sister,” he would not have said to him: take your wife and go.” Avraham remained silent throughout, as he was far too afraid. Pharaoh interpreted his silence as an admission, this is why he added: “take tour wife and depart!” 
   12,19. ואקח אותה לי לאשה, “so that I took her to be my wife.” He meant that Sarai was intended to be his queen, as opposed to her being merely a concubine. He used this phraseology in order to induce Avraham to reveal whether she was indeed his wife or not. 
   @הנה אשתך קח ולך, “here is your wife, take her and leave” They did not part on cordial terms as in the case of Avimelech, who allowed Avraham to settle anywhere he chose in his country. (Genesis 20,15) The Egyptians knew no sexual restraints and Pharaoh was afraid if Avraham stayed there he might be exposed to further dangers on account of his wife.
   12,20. וישלחו אותו ואת אשתו ואת כל אשר לו, “they escorted him and his wife and all his belongings.” Even though Avraham had treated them badly they did not take back the gifts they had given to him.”
   13,7. ויהי ריב, “A quarrel had broken out, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the quarrel had its origin in Lot’s shepherds allowing their herds to graze in pastures belonging to others, whereas Avraham objected, respecting private property of the Canaanites.
   Nachmanides writes that they were actually not grazing in fields owned by others seeing G’d had already promised the entire country to Avraham and his descendants. Seeing that Lot was not an heir of Avraham, his sheep were not entitled to graze anywhere without express permission of the owners. The plain explanation of our verse is that the quarrel originated due to what has been written in verses 5 and 6 that due to the extensive flocks and herds of both Avraham and Lot, there was not enough grazing land (land not privately owned) so that the shepherds felt obliged to allow their flocks to eat whatever they could find. This is the reason why the Torah records that at that time the Canaanite and the Perisite were dwelling in the land, i.e. they owned it. There was no land which was <i>hefker,</i> ownerless. 
   13,14. וה' אמר אל אברם אחרי הפרד לוט מעמו, “and G’d had spoken (again) to Avram after Lot had separated from him.” According to <i>Rashi</i> G’d had stopped communicating with Avraham while the latter kept company with the wicked Lot. The difficulty with this commentary is that we read in verse 7 that G’d appeared to Avraham and spoke to him (while he was in the company of Lot, [whom he had taken along without having been instructed to. Ed.])
   13,17. קום התהלך בארץ, “arise and walk freely throughout the land, etc.” This is not a command; G’d merely told Avraham to feel free to travel anywhere in the land as He would protect him against any danger.
   Alternatively, it is possible to see in these words an instruction to traverse the entire land in order to establish a claim to ownership of that country. In any event, this advice or instruction did not have to be carried out immediately. Nonetheless, Avraham immediately began to carry out this advice/instruction for while we find him in the easterly part of the country at this stage, the Torah reports that he moved south to the region of Hebron (verse 18). Somewhat later, after the destruction of Sodom, he moved to the region controlled by the Philistines (20,1). According to the plain meaning of the text, wherever Avraham pitched his tent, (virgin land) he established property rights and was recognized as its owner.
   @כי לך, “for to you, etc.” You are to establish your claim to this land already now, in your lifetime, whereas your descendants will claim it as in inalienable inheritance.
   Some commentators see in the words קום התהלך בארץ which G’d said to Avraham a criticism for Avraham voluntarily having agreed to share the land with Lot when he offered him the choice of selecting areas to his right or to his left, as if he were saying that he did not need such a vast inheritance for himself alone, seeing that he did not even have a son to bequeath it to. G’d told him that he would indeed spread out to the north, south, east and west, as his descendants would be so numerous. If Avraham were to ask why he needed all this, G’d added that his descendants would be so numerous that they would defy attempts to count them all. Still another explanation of the words כעפר הארץ, “as the dust of the earth” is that just as ordinary people use dust to step on, to thresh around in, so kingdoms will (at times) use your descendants as something to be threshed (to extract their full value from?).
   14,1. ויהי בימי אמרפל, “It was in the days of Amrafel, etc.” Although Kedorleomer was the heavyweight among these Kings as we know from verses 4 and 9 in which he is always mentioned as the major figure, the other Kings being his subordinates, “the Kings who were with him,” in this instance Amrafel, is mentioned first, perhaps because he was senior in years,
   This war too may be viewed as מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, that events in which our forefathers were involved served as a preview of what would happen in the lives of their descendants. Four Kingdoms would emerge in human history, each one of whom would enslave Avraham’s descendants at one time or another. In the end, Avraham;s descendants would prevail over all of them and they would be forced to make full restitution of everything they had ever robbed the Jewish people of. In our chapter, the first King would correspond to the King of Babylon, Nevuchadnezzar, seeing that he was the King of Shinor, the same general area. King Aryoch would be a prototype of the Kingdom of the Medes who supplanted the Babylonians as the ruling Empire in Mesopotamia and Persia. Elassar may be the name of a city rather than the name of a King. It would describe an important city in that country. Eylom would describe what eventually would become Greece, whereas Tidal may be an early allusion to the eventual Rome. The word גויים reflects that the Roman Empire would consist of many nations all under a single Emperor.
   14,2. מלך בלע, i.e. a king who ruled only over a small city, a city boasting few inhabitants.
   14,7. עין משפט, according to <i>Rashi</i>, the name mentioned here is borrowed from the name of that place in later years. At that time Moses and Aaron would be judged in that location. (מי מריבה).
   Nachmanides expresses his confusion about this commentary, referring to the קדש, which, he claims is identical with קדש ברנע that we know from Numbers 20,2 in the desert of Tzin, where Moses and Aaron failed to speak to the rock. [I will not bother to translate all he writes as it is clearly based on a misunderstanding of the location. Joshua 12,22 as well as 20,7 refers to locations known as Kedesh in the land of Canaan, There were numerous locations known by that name, so that there is nothing strange about <i>Rash’s</i> explanation, though his apparent conclusion that this was the location later on known as מי מריבה is geographically untenable. What may have bothered <i>Rashi</i> is the reference to שדה עמלקי, considering that also Amalek had not been born yet, seeing that he was a grandson of Esau. Ed.]
   I believe (author speaking) that the reason the Torah speaks of שדה העמלקי is that there was an important person called Amalek in that region at the time, and that is the reason why Eliphaz, son of Esau, named his son (from the concubine Timnah after this original Amalek. (Genesis 36,12). Esau certainly ruled that region at one time after having separated from Yaakov.. 
   14,10. ועמק השדים, “and the valley of Siddim, etc.” Some commentators derive the word שדים from סיד, lime, quoting ושדת אותם בשיד, as their proof, where it means to smear the stones with white lime. (Deut. 27,2) Accordingly, the region was full of depressions in which people dug for lime. The lime would be burned afterwards.
   <i>Rashi</i> quotes a <i>Midrash,</i> according to which, most people had refused to believe that Avraham had miraculously survived having been thrown into Nimrod’s furnace. When they witnessed the King of Sodom miraculously surviving falling into a lime pit, they changed their mind and retroactively gave credence to the miracle which had saved Avraham. Nachmanides is amazed at the very <i>Midrash,</i> as he cannot understand why people who failed to believe that a miracle had happened to Avraham should believe that a miracle had happened for the King of Sodom. Why would the G’d of heaven perform a miracle for an idolater such as the King of Sodom? On the contrary, if the King of Sodom could survive his fall into the lime pit, Avraham’s surviving the furnace was now far more plausible, but not in the framework of a miracle. The people who doubted the miracle of the furnace, ascribing it to magic, would most certainly also describe the King of Sodom’s escape as due to magic. It is more likely that seeing the King of Sodom’s escape made even the people who had believed that Avraham escaped by means of a miracle have second thoughts, and they now believed that Avraham had also benefited by magic.
   Another possibility could be that these commentators understand he words ויצא מלך סדום לקראתו in verse 17 to mean that the King of Sodom emerged from that lime pit at the time when Avraham passed by, i.e. that a miracle was performed for him at that time which resulted in his being saved so that he was able to honour Avraham and bless him, or that Avraham on his return from the successful battle wanted to restore their property to the five Kings, and when passing that neighbourhood, [seeing that his battle had been fought far to the north of there, Ed.] the miracle of the King of Sodom’s rescue then occurred by means of his intervention. When people observed that Avraham could perform such a miracle, they became convinced that a man such a Avraham had been saved miraculously from Nimrod’s furnace. It is quite possible that the King of Gomorrha had already died, so that we hear no more about him, or that he had fallen into a different pit, one that Avraham did not pass.
   @ויפלו שמה, “they fell there.” Some commentators understand the word ויפלו as “they fell (dead)”, similar to וישכבו שמה, “they lay down there,” in the sense of lying down to sleep. (Joshua 2,1) Others understand it in the sense of על פני כל אחיו נפל, “he dwelled in full view of his brothers.” (Genesis 25,18) (compare Onkelos) Others understood the word ויפלו in the sense of “they hid,” i.e. deliberately lowered themselves into these pits.
   14,13. ויגד לאברם העברי, “he told the Hebrew Avraham.” Rabbi Joseph Karo explains this as meaning that the reason that Avraham is here described as the עברי, is to counter the answer what good it would do Lot that someone told Avraham of his plight, seeing there were only two Hebrews in the whole land, he and Avraham? By adding that this Hebrew had powerful allies in Oner, Eshkol and Mamre, the situation was not quite as hopeless. Mamre was a well known and powerful personage.
   14,15. ויחלק עליהם לילה ויכם וירדפם, “at night they spilt up and smote them and gave chase, etc.” The <i>Midrash</i> poses the obvious question that one does not chase after the dead, [the word ויכם being understood as “he killed them. Ed.] Therefore the word ויחלק is understood by the <i>Midrash</i> as meaning that the subject in the phrase is G’d, Who reserved part of this night for the miracle of the Exodus, Avraham’s descendants experiencing the killing of the firstborn Egyptians on the anniversary of that night. (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 43,3) The plain meaning of the phrase is that Avraham and his men pursued the fleeing armies by daylight as far as Dan. Seeing that after nightfall it was impossible to see in which direction the soldiers had fled, Avraham divided his men so as to continue to pursue every escape route. He kept smiting them as far north as Chovah, a place not far west from Damascus. The Torah describes this detail so that we will realize that this pursuit continued for many days, as the distance from Chevron (Eloney Mamre) is in excess of 300 km by air. Alternatively, the entire campaign was guided by a number of miracles.
   14,18. ומלכי צדק מלך שלם, “and Malki Tzedek, King of Salem, etc.” he was the King of Jerusalem, as we know from Psalms 76,3 ויהי בשלם סוכו, “His hut (abode) was in Shalem.” According to tradition, the verse is a reference to G’d having His abode in Zion, Jerusalem. As soon as the gentiles had become aware that this was a chosen site, they realized that the Temple would one day be erected there.
   @והוא כהן לאל עליון, “and he was a priest of the Supreme G’d.” This unusual sounding attribute, which almost could make one believe that we have more than one G’d, was selected by the Torah because most nations had priests who were subservient to their kings, who, in turn were addressed as אלוהים, just as the Torah refers to a judge as אלהים. In order to prevent us from thinking that Malki Tzedek was subservient to anyone but the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth, the Torah chose to describe Him in these terms. Also, we learn from here that Avraham would not consider giving tithes to anyone who was not a servant of the Creator. Moreover, the place where Avraham gave the tithe to Malki Tzedek reputedly was the area where the Temple would be built in the future. Avraham’s descendants’ offspring would remove these tithes from the precincts of the Temple.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> derives from this verse that the land of Israel had originally been part of Shem’s heritage, but that the Canaanite had gradually deprived him of much of his heritage by force. He identifies Malki Tzedek as Noach’s son Shem.
   Nachmanides claims that this is not correct, and that the legal boundaries of the heritage of Canaan extended from Sidon in the north, comprising practically all of the land of Israel as we know it, whereas the heritage of Shem was located further to the east. If Noach had indeed allocated the surface of the globe to his several sons, then the return of the land of Israel to the descendants of Avraham, a descendant of Shem, the son of Noach, did not really represent a reallocation of lands which had once legally belonged to the descendants of Cham, the Canaanites. The Canaanites merely acted as safe-keepers of these lands until Avraham had sufficient descendants to populate them. According to our sages who say that Malki Tzedek was identical with Shem, the latter had been on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in order to serve the Lord there, and the local population had accepted him as their priest.
   14,19. קונה שמים וארץ, “owner of heaven and earth.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word קונה here in the sense of עושה, i.e. “Maker of.” He (G’d) had acquired it by dint of having made it. Nachmanides further affirms <i>Rashi’s</i> understanding of the word קונה here, citing Deuteronomy 32,6 הלא הוא אביך קנך הוא עשך ויכוננך, “does He not own you being your father, having made you and established you firmly?” The roots קנה and עשהare used interchangeably in the Torah. Another prominent example of this usage of the word עשה in the sense off an acquisition is found in Genesis 12,5 where Avraham and Sarah are described as taking along ואת הנפש אשר עשו בחרן, where clearly the meaning of the word עשו is not “made,” but they acquired, in the sense that they had convinced the people in question to acknowledge the G’d in heaven, the Creator. Anything that belongs to a person is described as קנינו, “his property,” that which he has made his own. Our sages, when discussing the point at which a found object is acquired, declared that at the moment the finder picks it up it has become his, is his קנין.
   14,20. ויתן לו מעשר מכל, “He gave him a tithe from all of it.” According to Ibn Ezra Avraham gave these items to Malki Tzedek as tithe because the latter was a priest of Almighty G’d, and he did not want to hold on to anything which he felt was belonging to a higher power. Once he had given the tithe, the balance belonged to him rightfully, so that all the property which had once been that of the five Kings, was now returned to them by Avraham as a gift from him, not as something that was theirs legally. According to local law, spoils of war belonged to the victor, so that from that point of view Avraham did not need to return anything to the King of Sodom and his companions. This is also why the Torah reports this tithing before it reports what Avraham said to the King of Sodom concerning the oath he had sworn to the supreme Lord of heaven and earth (verse 23) that he would never allow the King of Sodom to take credit for having enriched himself (at his expense) If it had not been legal to do so, such an oath would be completely irrelevant! As soon as the King of Sodom became aware of the generosity and righteousness of Avraham, he also demanded return of his נפש, his human slaves. The entire sequence illustrates that Avraham and the King of Sodom walked all the way to the Jordan valley back together, during which time the King of Sodom had become better acquainted with Avraham. He had not even dared to ask to have the נפש restored to him until he had learned how generous a man Avraham really was. From a <i>halachic</i> point of you, i.e. that one does not give something to someone else unless it was <i>halachically</i> completely above board, Avraham had to tithe the loot so that when he would give the remainder (back) to the King of Sodom, he gave him something which was beyond question his own. 
   Some commentators feel that if the conversation about who the loot belonged to had occurred only now, what did Avraham’s soldiers eat in the meantime? To forestall such an embarrassing question, the Torah made certain that we know that prior to Avraham tithing everything to Malki Tzedek the latter had provided bread and wine for Avraham’s soldiers so that they did not have to partake of something that their master did not yet consider his to give. Still other commentators see in the words ויתן לו מעשר מכל, a veiled rebuke to Malki Tzedek who, instead of receiving a tithe, gave a tithe to Avraham as penance for having first blessed Avraham instead of first blessing the Lord. These commentators quote as their source the verse in Psalms 110,4 נשבע ה' ולא ינחם אתה כהן לעולם על דברתי מלכי צדק, “the Lord has sworn and will not relent, “You are a priest forever, a rightful king by My decree.” [also an oblique reference that G’d had killed the people slain in that war, not Avraham, who otherwise would have been disqualified as a priest. Alshich.]
 Rabbi Joseph Karo claims that Avraham did not give any tithe to Malki Tzedek, as it is conceptually impossible to give a tithe of something one had never owned, and Avraham had rejected the entire booty so that the King of Sodom could not boast of having made Avraham wealthy. He had already sworn an oath rejecting the entire loot. How could he have violated such an oath? Rabbi Karo also rejects the notion that Malki Tzedek gave a tithe to Avraham. What possible reason could Malki Tzedek have had to give a tithe to Avraham when he had come forth to welcome him with bread and wine? If he gave him a tithe, he would have sold this to him. According to Rabbi Karo this is what happened. The King of Sodom came forth to greet Avraham. When Malki Tzedek arrived he found them dividing the spoils, the King of Sodom asking for the living human beings, and offering Avraham the inert property (and the livestock, presumably). At that point, Avraham swore an oath that he would not accept anything by grace of the King of Sodom, the exception being the expenses he had incurred in feeding his men. Seeing that these men had fought a war in order to save the King of Sodom among others, they were entitled to at least that. Not only that, these men had also saved Sodom’s property, and as such were entitled to a reward. He, Avraham, was not entitled to waive the reward due to Oner, Eshkol, and Mamre. Malki Tzedek then gave Avraham a tithe of what he had received, something that Avraham accepted as being completely legal, as he first and foremost was entitled to that.
   14,22. הרימותי את ידי, “I have raised my right hand in an oath;” this is a standard formula used to describe an oath directed at G’d. In this case, Malki Tzedek was the representative of the Lord.
   14,23. אם מחוט, “if as little as some string;” he referred to the least valuable decorative string (used as jewelry) worn by girls in their hair.
   @ועד שרוך נעל, ”or even as insignificant an item as a shoelace;” in those days these were also decorative, used as a form of jewelry worn around the ankles.
   The meaning of the apparent repetition אם אקה is: “may G’d punish me if I do this.”
   Nachmanides views the entire sentence in the following light. Araham considered the entire loot, now that he had tithed it, as if a gift given to G’d, something now out of bounds to him as anything which acquired <i>terumah</i> status is out of bounds to a commoner.
   14,24.בלעדי רק אשר אכלו הנערים, “Exclude me; except for what the servants have eaten;” but he did not allocate to these servants a share of the loot as he had done for Oner, Eshkol, and Mamre. Some commentators hold that these people helped themselves to their share, not waiting for Avraham to give them anything. It makes more sense to accept that Avraham gave to Oner, Eshkol, and Mamre, who were not present, and on whose behalf Avraham had no right to waive their claim, whereas the people with him had helped themselves to what they considered rightfully as theirs.
   15,1. היה דבר ה' אל אברם במחזה, “G’d’s word came to Avraham in a vision.” According to Nachmanides this wording indicates that Avraham had by now qualified to have a vision in daytime. Until now G’d had communicated with him only in his sleep at night.
   @אנכי מגן לך, “I will act as your shield.” This promise was in response to two things Avraham was afraid of. 1) that the kings whom he had defeated would reorganize and attack him. 2) that he would die before having sired at least one child. G’d reassured him only about one of his fears.
   15,2. מה תתן לי, “what can You give me?” Seeing that You have saved me from the Kings but have not given me assurances regarding my having children. Although You promised me a great reward, what is the meaning of any reward as long as I do not have any children to whom I can pass on this reward? The thought that the “great reward” G’d had promised would refer to another dimension entirely, his life in the hereafter, did not occur to Avraham at that time. The reason it did not occur to him was that he had been convinced that anyone serving the Lord would have a share in the hereafter. He knew that if the lives of the righteous do not seem to be substantially different from that of the wicked, this is a condition which exists only in this terrestrial life. Furthermore, the wording הרבה מאד implies that the reward will not be marred by any punishment in respect of sins committed so that he will be “eating at both tables,” using the expression coined by our sages.
   @ואנכי הולך ערירי, “seeing that I am going childless.” He meant that he would die leaving behind no biological heir. 
   According to Nachmanides he first complained about the meaninglessness of any reward in the absence of that of having children, which meant that he was wandering on the face of the earth without a permanent abode in a land which was not his birthplace. He described the only person that had constant social intercourse with him as being his servant Eliezer who himself was a stranger in those parts, having come there from Damascus, a long way off. After having said this he had added: “here You have not granted me seed as You have promised me,” so that my heir will be this Eliezer. At this stage Avraham did not believe that G’d’s promise meant that he would have children would materialise, so that G’d felt impelled to repeat in a clear manner that he would have physical heirs, genetically his, and that his descendants would be at home in this land, in fact inheriting all of it in due course. [any question about Avraham doubting G’d’s promise is predicated on the assumption that the Torah reports in chronological sequence, so that what we read here occurred after he left his father’s home on his journey to the land of Canaan as his new home. If this vision occurred before he had already moved to the land of Canaan, Avraham’s remonstrating with G’d is quite easy to understand. Ed.] At any rate, righteous people do not believe in themselves, always fearing that some sin on their part will invalidate promises made to them. Although, in the event, only half his lifetime had passed by this time, he considered himself as aging and past the stage where he could sire children easily. He feared a son born too close to his death. Some commentators are convinced that Avraham did not believe G’d’s promises now any more than he had on previous occasions, but that he was afraid that if such an heir would be born only near the end of his father’s life his servant would have to become his heir in practice, at least, until his son would be of age. 
   G’d reassured him on this score, saying that the son who would inherit Avraham would not only be his genetically, but would be adult and take over all that was his.
   15,4. והנה דבר ה', “and here came the word of the Lord, etc.” the word והנה here indicates that G’d’s response to Avraham’s concern was so immediate that He did not even wait until Avraham had voiced all his concerns. 
   15.5. וספור הכוכבים, “and count the stars, etc.” whereas in the previous prophecy Avraham’s offspring had been compared to the dust of the earth, now it was compared to the stars in the heaven. We are dealing with the relative positions of Esau and Yaakov, both descendants of Avraham, one compared to the earthly phenomena, i.e. dust, the other to celestial phenomena, i.e. stars. Whereas the stars are untouchable, beyond harm, dust is something people trample on.
   15,6. והאמין ב' ויחשבה לו צדקה, “he had full faith in the Lord, who accounted it as a righteous deed on his part.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning is that G’d accounted it as a righteous deed on the part of Avraham to trust Him completely.
   Nachmanides queries why trusting G’d should be something deemed especially meritorious. He considers the idea that someone does not trust a promise by G’d when the latter had revealed Himself to him as completely preposterous. Therefore, he considers that what is meant is that Avraham considered it as an outstanding act on G’d’s part to grant him such favour. He considered that G’d granting him physical offspring was an outstanding example of G’d’s kindness to him. Having heard the last words of G’d, Avraham was no longer worried that some sin of his at a future date might invalidate this promise.
   15,7. אני ה' אשר הוצאתיך מאור כשדים לתת לך את הארץ“I am the Lord Who has taken you out of Ur Casdim in order to give you this land as an inheritance.” According to Nachmanides G’d did not tell Avraham anything new concerning the gift of the land of Canaan in this line. What He meant to tell Avraham here was that already at the time when He saved him from the furnace of Nimrod it had been in order to eventually give him the land of Canaan as an inheritance for his children. The fact that G’d had not revealed this to Avraham previously, had made him think that perhaps this promise was conditional, just as he had thought that the promise of having physical offspring was a conditional promise, based on certain expectations of him in the future. This is also why he did not ask for a sign that this promise would be fulfilled, seeing that he thought it depended on additional factors, such as the Canaanites not becoming penitents, for instance, if the promise would come true. (compare Jeremiah 18,7רגע אדבר על גוי ועל ממלכה לנתוש, ולנתץ ולהאביד ושב הגוי ההוא מרעתו אשר דברתי עליו ונחמתי על הרעה אשר חשבתי לעשות לו., “At one moment I may decree that a nation or kingdom shall be uprooted and pulled down and destroyed, but if that nation against which I made the decree turns back from its wickedness I change My mind concerning the punishment I planned to bring upon it.”) Avraham wanted to be sure that here we are not dealing merely with an אות, a sign, but with a promise backed by a covenant, a promise not subject to being revoked due to the person or persons concerned not having proved worthy after the promise was made.”
   Other commentators see in the question במה אדע כי אירשנה “how will I know that I will indeed inherit it?” not a lack of faith, but an enquiry what steps he could take to ensure that there would not be a cause to revoke this promise. After all, Avraham dwelled amongst the very people whom G’d said He would displace in his favour, and it was no more than reasonable that if they should become aware of G’d’s promise to him they would make every effort to thwart the realization of this promise. One of the ways in which they would do this would be to pressure him to enter into a covenant with them asking him to forego realization of G’d’s promise to him. G’d told him that by delaying fulfillment of His promise until the fourth generation He could be sure that it would then qualify for fulfillment. These concerns by Avraham were entirely legitimate. Hence he asked for an assurance that the promise would indeed be ironclad.
   15,9. עגלה משולשת, some commentators believe that the meaning of the expression is “a fat calf,” similar to the expression עגלה שלישיה in Isaiah 15,8. The requirement to select an especially fat specimen did not apply to the other species from which he was to offer a sacrifice. He took only a single animal from each species, and this was the reason G’d commanded him to cut them in half and place each half opposite its counterpart.
   Even according to <i>Rashi</i> who holds that he took 3 specimens of each species, he placed two whole animals opposite one another and divided only the third one in half, placing the halves opposite each other.
   The word עגלה משולשת is an allusion to the three basic categories of animal sacrifice, i.e. עולה, burnt offering, חטאת sin-offering, and שלמים, peace offering. The עולה and חטאת are basically similar different only in name.
   15,10. ויבתר אותם בתוך, “he halved them down the middle.” This was in order to conclude a covenant and to pass between them. The procedure also served as a symbol that in future all animal sacrifices would consist only of either of the species that were now in front of him. The only species of fowl acceptable as a sacrifice on the altar is the dove, either when a תר, or when a גוזל. [the difference has to do with the age of the bird. Ed.] The reason the term גוזל is used at all, is that only very young pigeons qualify as sacrifices, and we know from Deut. 32,11 כנשר יעיר קנו על גוזליו ירחף, “as the eagle that awakens its nest, hovers over her young, etc.” It is clear that גוזל is very young bird. [otherwise it would have already flown from the nest. Ed.] Avraham did not have to be told which species of bird would be acceptable to G’d as a sacrifice. It is also possible that he chose a pigeon as the species of bird in question without any direct or indirect prompting by G’d, and that the Torah respected Avraham’s choice and henceforth whenever one of his descendants brought a bird offering it had to be of that species. There is a hint here that all the animal sacrifices had to be cut up after being slaughtered, the burnt offering into its various parts, [although all of them were burned up. Ed.] and the peace offering in accordance with the parts that were allocated to the priest, rib-cage, right upper leg and cheek-bones, and the sin offering into its constituent parts so that the fat parts were separate for being burned up on the altar.
   @ואת הצפור, “and the bird, etc,” a reference to the pigeon which is part of the generic term צפור.
   @ואת הצפור לא בתר, “but he did not divide up the bird.” The expression בתר instead of הבדיל is a bit unusual, as in the legislation concerning bird offerings the Torah uses the expression לא יבדיל “he must not separate the head from the body completely.’ (Leviticus 1,17)
   15,11.על הפגרים וירד העיט, “the vulture swooped down on the carcasses;” an allusion to the future when the nations of the world would endeavour to do away with the practice of animal sacrifice and the descendants of Avraham would chase them away and would uphold the practice.
   15,12. אימה חשכה גדולה, “a fear and great dread;” an allusion to the four exiles the Jewish people would experience during their history, as our sages explained in detail. 
    Nachmanides says that when G’d concluded the covenant with Avraham to give him the land of Canaan this was meant only as a gift, with the condition attached that the four Kingdoms would at one time or another enslave his descendants and would rule over their land. Such an enslavement was not an unalterable decree but was based on the Jewish people becoming disloyal to the Torah which they had accepted as their law book. Later on, G’d informed Avraham of another type of exile, the one in Egypt which would precede their becoming a nation and accepting the Torah as I have explained.
   15,13. כי גר יהיה זרעך בארץ לא להם ועבדום וענו אותם ארבע מאות שנה, “for your descendants will be strangers in a land which is not theirs, and during that period they (the owners) will enslave them and oppress them for four hundred years.” Nachmanides explains our verse as being truncated, the meaning being that while the offspring of Avraham would be strangers in a foreign land for 400 years, the nature and duration of their enslavement and oppression not having been defined.
   Ibn Ezra understands our verse as a prophecy describing the length of the enslavement but not the length of the status as exiles.
   15,14. וגם את הגוי אשר יעבודו דן אנכי, “but I will also judge the nation to whom they will be enslaved;” according to <i>Rashi</i> this prophecy includes the four exiles of the Jewish people starting with the destruction of the first Temple.
   Nachmanides explains the meaning of our verse as being: “just as I judged your descendants by decreeing exile and bondage for them for having sinned, I will also judge the nation which enslaved them for the violence they have done to this people.
   Personally, I believe that the correct interpretation of the word וגם “and also,” in our verse is: “although I decreed that your descendants would be exiles in a land not their own, I will also judge and punish the nation that has enslaved them and not exonerate them seeing that by what they did they had carried out My decree.” The reason why such treatment is not unfair has already been described in Zecharyah 1,14-16: “Thus said the Lord of Hosts: I am very jealous for Jerusalem-for Zion- and I am very angry with those nations that are at ease; for I was only angry a little, but they overdid the punishment. Assuredly, thus said the Lord, I graciously return to Jerusalem.” What G’d predicted He would do to the destroyers of Jerusalem, He did to Egypt at the end of the exile of the Jewish people in that land. This is precisely what caused Yitro to convert and to say כי בדבר אשר זדו עליהם, “for He fitted the punishment to the crime, punishing them in the manner they had brutalised the Jewish people,” (by drowning them. Exodus 18,11)
   Maimonides (<i>Hilchot Teshuvah</i> chapter<i> 6)</i> writes that the reason why G’d punished the Egyptians and the nations who had oppressed the Jews throughout the centuries is that not any specific Egyptian or Babylonian or Roman had been instructed by G’d to carry out His decree against the Jews. As a result, not one of them had the right to take it upon himself to be G’d’s ”executioner.”
   Nachmanides queries Maimonides’ approach writing that if G’d had appointed a particular person or nation to be His “executioner” in this regard, surely if someone had preceded another person, carrying out G’d’s expressed will, not only would he not have been punished for doing so, but he would have been lauded, been given a reward! 
   I therefore conclude that my own reason was the correct one, namely that they used excess zeal in carrying out G’d’s decree, thereby making it their own. This is the reason Nevuchadnezzar was so severely punished although the prophet Jeremiah had foretold that it would be he who would carry out G’d’s decree. Let us not forget that the Israelites came to Egypt at the express invitation of Pharaoh and that the Egyptians by themselves did not have the slightest excuse for making slaves out of them. How could they ever have claimed to have done so at the behest of G’d? If G’d even punished Nevuchadnezzar who did carry out a specific punishment G’d had decreed to be carried out by him, (though he had not been instructed by G’d directly to do so) then the reason for his punishment must lie in the excess cruelty he applied in carrying out G’d’s purpose. The same applies to individuals who, by G’s judgment, are sentenced to be killed by man during the new year. The killer will not be able to claim exoneration arguing that the individual in question was already legally dead as G’d had decreed that he die a violent death during that year. Seeing that G’d had not instructed the killer to be His messenger, His executioner, he will be considered a simple murderer and be dealt with on that basis. The only exception was Yehu who had been instructed by the prophet, in the name of G’d, to kill the family of Achav (Kings II 10,24)
   15,15.ואתה תבא אל אבותיך בשלום, “but you will die and join your fathers in peace (before all this will happen.)” <i>Rashi</i> says that the meaning is that Avraham will not experience fulfillment of the prophecy or the decree in his lifetime. Nachmanides disagrees, seeing that Avraham has been told specifically that you will be a stranger,” a condition which will be fulfilled the moment Yitzchok was born. The Torah even refers to the fact that when he traveled to the land of the Philistines, ויגר אברהם בארץ פלשתים ימים רבים “Avraham sojourned (was an alien) in the land of the Philistines for many years.” (21,34) It follows that he himself already experienced part of the decree becoming fulfilled. Accordingly, the meaning of our verse is that he would join his forefathers immediately after death without having to experience punishment for any sins committed and not yet forgiven.
   15,16.ודור רביעי ישובו הנה, “but the fourth generation will return to here.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this to mean that after having been in Egypt for three generations the descendants of Avrham would return to the Holy Land. This was true, as when you consider that Yaakov already went into exile in Egypt and consider Yehudah-Peretz-Chetzron-Calev as his descendants in a straight line, Calev did in fact re-enter the land of Canaan and settled there. The problem with this calculation is that Chetzron in common with Yaakov, had traveled from Canaan to the land of Egypt. (Genesis 46,12) Seeing that this is so there were only 2 generations in Egypt. If being an alien in other countries would count, they actually had been in exile for 7 generations according to the calculation. Actually, there is no problem at all. The reason that the calculation begins with Yaakov, although some of his offspring also were exiled with him, is because he was the head of the clan.
   One can also explain the meaning of the words “the fourth generation,” as starting from the people who had been born already in Egypt, i.e. Kehot, son of Levi. He was followed by his son Amram, who was the father of Aaron, who was the father of Eleazar who entered the Holy Land as the High Priest.
   According to Nachmanides, the “fourth generation” mentioned in our verse, refers to the fourth generation of the Emorite, whose sin by that time will have accumulated to a degree which exceeds G’d’s patience and they will be ripe for retribution. This will enable the Jewish people to take over these lands at that time. If they were to repent at that time it would be too late for G’d to change His decree. The reason G’d mentions the “Emorite” instead of “the Canaanite,” was that the Emorite was by far the most powerful and numerous of the Canaanite tribes.
   There are some commentators who claim that father-son and grandson are all considered as one generation, and that we have proof of that from (?) so that three generations are in reality one generation (due to their lives overlapping somewhat). This would mean in our case that Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yaakov are considered as one generation, Yehudah, Peretz and Chetzron as the second generation, followed by Ram, Aminadav, and Nachshon as the third generation. Salmon, who was the fourth generation, belonged to the people who entered the Holy Land.
   15,18. ביום ההוא כרת ה' את אברהם ברית לאמור, וגו, “on that day G’d entered into a covenant with Avraham, saying, etc.'” Nachmanides draws attention to the fact that G’d promised the land of Canaan to Avraham many times over. He proceeds to show that all these repetitions were necessary within the context in which they appear.
   Originally, (12,7) He told Avraham: “I will give the land to your descendants,” without enlarging on the nature and extent of the gift. At that time Avraham walked in the land as far as Shechem, a place then called Elon Moreh. Afterwards, when his merits had increased, (by his activities in the land) He added “raise your eyes and look northward, southward, eastward and westward.” At that time G’d specified that the land would include areas well beyond what he could see in any direction (13,14). As far as G’d saying to Avraham אשר אתה רואה בעיניך, “which you behold with your eyes,” the meaning is not that he would only inherit what he could see with his physical eyes, but this is a spiritual concept referring to the mind’s eye, or that G’d expanded Avraham’s sense of sight at that time so that he could see the whole extent of the land of Israel, just as was shown to Moses before his death. G’d added a special blessing by saying that his descendants would be as numerous as the dust of the earth, and that the gift would remain his descendants’ forever. The third time G’d delineated the borders of the land G’d would give to his descendants (17,5) He also mentioned all the ten Canaanite tribes whose lands would eventually become part of the greater land of Israel. He also concluded the covenant with Avraham as a sign that the promise would not be invalidated due to any sin that might be committed before it had been fulfilled. G’d added further, that in due course He would be the exclusive G’d of Avraham’s descendants. The first time the promise was couched in the future tense, i.e.אתננה , “I will give it,” as He had not yet begun to fulfill any part of the promise. The same was still true on the second occasion G’d promised the land to Avraham’s children who did not exist yet. The covenants both concerning the land and the circumcision, make it plain that even if at some time the conditions of the covenant are broken, this will remain a temporary condition and will not result in annulment of the validity of the terms of the covenants.
   16,2. וישמע אברהם לקול שרי, “Avraham agreed with Sarai’s suggestion.” The Torah does not simply write ויעש כן that Avraham acted in consonance with Sarai’s request, but is writes that Avraham, although very desirous of siring children, would not marry another woman unless Sarai had first approved it, or, as in this case, even suggested it. 
   Even now, in fulfilling Sarai’s suggestion, he did not do so primarily to satisfy his own yearning, but to afford Sarai the satisfaction of being able to raise a child vicariously even though it had been born by her maidservant. It also possible, as our sages have remarked, that due to Sarai’s generosity in worrying that her husband should father a child, although not hers, she herself would be granted the satisfaction to have a child of her own. Sarai used the term לאישה, “as a wife,” to describe the union between Hagar and Avraham, in order to indicate that she did not want to raise a child who was the issue of a concubine. The Torah describes all these details to show the concern of Sarai for Avraham’s social standing.
   16,3. מקץ עשר שנים לשבת אברם בארץ כנען, “at the end of 10 years since Avraham had taken up residence in the land of Canaan.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that this teaches us that the years that Avraham and Sarai lived outside the land of Canaan are not relevant to the rule that when a woman fails to conceive after 10 years of marriage, her husband may or should divorce her and marry someone else. The reason that those years did not count was that while in Charan, G’d had not yet promised Avraham that He would make him into a great nation.
   Nachmanides writes that only in the case of Avraham did those years that he was in Charan or even before not count. For ordinary individuals the rule to divorce a wife after 10 years of marriage without children does apply in the Diaspora also. He continues that the commentators have made additional errors in writing on this subject when they said that the whole <i>halachah</i> requiring a husband to divorce a wife who fails to bear children for ten years does not apply outside the Holy Land. The correct interpretation of what is written on the subject is that if a childless married couple have moved to Israel they are given another ten years before the rule that the husband in order to fulfill the commandment to be fruitful has to either divorce his barren wife or marry another wife in addition. It is hoped that the merit of living in the Holy Land will result in the couple being blessed with children.
   16,6.ותענה שרי, “Sarai made life miserable for her.” Both our matriarch Sarah and her husband were guilty of a sin here. Avraham’s sin was that he did not interfere on behalf of Hagar. As a result, G’d listened to her complaints and granted her a son, whose descendants in turn would oppress the descendants of Avraham and Sarah to this day.
   16,9. שובי אל גברתך והתענו תחת ידיה, “go back to your mistress and submit to her oppression” The angel hinted to her that she would not regain her status as a free woman, and that the descendants of Sarai would rule over her descendants into the distant future.
   16,11. וקראת שמו ישמעאל, “you are to call him Yishmael.” Avraham had not heard of this revelation of an angel to Hagar, but he still named him thus (on his own).” Nachmanides explains that the angel commanded Hagar to call the boy Yishmael. Hagar, however, was afraid to arrogate to herself the right to name the son of her master, so that she revealed to him that she had been given such instructions from the angel.
   16,12. פרא אדם, “a man of the wild.” According to <i>Rashi</i> Yishmael would love the desert to hunt in.
   @ידו בכול, “his hand will be against everyone;” a robber, a highwayman.
   @ויד כל בו, “and everyone’s hand will be against him.” They would hate him and provoke strife with him.
   Nachmanides writes that in the expression פרא אדם the word פרא is in the construct mode to the word אדם, meaning that he will be more like a mule than a human being in character. He will constantly look for someone or something to attack and destroy, whereas people, as a result, would constantly be looking for him to neutralize him. The prediction of the angel was to characterize not so much Yishmael himself but the descendants, the Muslim nations and their method of spreading their religion with the fire and the sword.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word פרא as an alternate for the word חפשי, “free,” in the sense of “unable to submit to anyone’s authority.” The words ועל פני כל אחיו ישכון, Ibn Ezra understands to mean that Yishmael will dwell wherever his brothers, the sons of Keturah will dwell.
   Some commentators understand the term פרא אדם to mean that Yishamel will be a merchant forever in search of merchandise to buy or sell. Indeed we find that most of the Ishmaelites during the period of Yaakov already engaged in long distance trade, traveling in caravans with camels etc. (compare Genesis 37,25-27).
   16,13. הגם הלום ראיתי, “even here I have seen (a divine vision)“ Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains this verse as meaning that “He who sees me is the One Who has appeared to me,” for she was unaware that it was an angel. When the angel took leave of her she did no longer see him, as people who look at departing human beings until they are out of sight normally do. In commenting on this strange phenomenon she said “the one who sees me,” meaning “although I cannot see him.” She did not realize that this was a divine apparition, and that is why she said: “I have even seen him here.”
   17,1. א-ל שדי, “the G’d Shaddai.” The plain meaning is: “a powerful deity.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets the word שדי, as meaning that G’d proclaims Himself as sufficient, די, for any human being, i.e. His supervision, His Providence of the human being’s fate is adequate for anyone. They do not require additional patrons.
   Ibn Ezra, quoting Shemuel Hanaggid, derives the word שדי from שודד, meaning “victorious, conquering the heavens.”
   @התהלך לפני והיה תמים, “serve Me and become perfect.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the words היה תמים as a call to Avraham to successfully pass all the tests G’d would subject him to.
   Ibn Ezra understands these words as a warning that Avraham should not question G’d’s commands by asking why these tasks are required of him.
   Nachmanides explains the word התהלך as similar to the commandment to the Jewish people in Deut. 13,5 אחרי ה' אלוקיך תלכו, i.e. “follow all the instructions of the Lord your G’d.” (after you have been instructed about them) The command התהלך לפני goes beyond this and asks Avraham to anticipate G’d’s commandments and to act in accordance with his understanding of what G’d would later on command him. [it is difficult to imagine a greater compliment to Avraham than our verse here. Ed.]
   @והיה תמים, “and become perfect (in being in step with the wavelength of the Creator)” We find a similar directive addressed to the whole Jewish nation, i.e. each individual separately, in Deut. 18,13 תמים תהיה עם ה' אלוקיך. In that instance, the directive follows the injunction not to employ sorcerers, magicians, etc., but to have perfect, exclusive faith in the Lord, not to consult astrologers about what your future holds in store for you. G’d intimates to Avraham here, and to the people as a whole in Deuteronomy, that He alone holds the reins of our fate in His capable hands. He is capable and willing to do good for us even, if according to our horoscope, we appear to face insurmountable obstacles. This is what our sages meant when they interpreted the words (15,5) ויוצא אותו החוצה, “He took him outside,” to mean that He showed Avraham that there is a historical dimension beyond that indicated by astrology, i.e. הוציא אותו מהאצטגנינות שלו.
   17,3. ויפול אברם על פניו, “Avraham prostrated himself before the Lord.” This was in order to show his readiness to receive prophetic communication from G’d.. In this instance, the commandment to circumcise himself was the physical part of fulfilling the commandment to become “perfect,” unblemished. As soon as he had received the commandment of circumcision he received the prophecy that Sarai, renamed Sarah, would bear him a son. (verses 16, and again 19) Avraham fell on his face once more preparatory to his prayer that Ishmael should be a son worthy of his father. Seeing that nothing is beyond G’d’s power, אלוקי הרוחות, “the Lord of all spirits,” he thought it appropriate to offer this prayer on behalf of Ishmael [who must have displayed signs of not following in his father’s footsteps already at that time. Ed.]
   17,4. אני הנה בריתי אתך, “as far as I am concerned, here is My covenant with you.” The covenant G’d refers to here is the covenant of the circumcision. G’d instructed him to perform the sign of the covenant before Sarah would conceive, so that the baby born from her would also have been conceived in a state of purity and holiness. 
   17,6. ונתתיך לגויים, “I shall make you into nations;” <i>Rashi</i> believes that the plural “nations” refers to the Jewish people on the one hand and to Edom (Rome) on the other. Seeing that Yishmael had already been born, <i>Rashi</i> does not consider this promise/prophecy as applying to the Arab nation.
   Nachmanides considers <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary as flawed, seeing that it is most unlikely that at the time when G’d was preoccupied with the circumcision He should prophesy to Avraham concerning an as yet unborn Esau. After all, Avraham was neither in charge of Esau nor did the duty to circumcise him devolve upon him instead of upon his father Yitzchok (if and when).
   .
    According to Nachmanides both Yishmael and Esau’s descendants are called גויים, whereas the Jewish people are referred to as עם. He quotes Deut. 33,3 אף חובב עמים as proof. There are other verses of the same kind. [however, there are numerous occasions when the Jewish people are referred to as גוי, as in Exodus 33,13, Joshua 3,17, Genesis 25,23, Deut. 4,38 and numerous others. Ed.]
   17,14. וערל זכר, and an uncircumcised male, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> this choice of words was chosen to teach us on which organ the act of circumcision has to be performed.
   According to Ibn Ezra, the part of the body on which circumcision would be performed had been well known, What was not known was the concept of ערלת הלב an uncircumcised heart and lip, as well as the uncircumcised ear. When such terms occur, the word ערלה always is in the construct mode, i.e. ערלת, “the uncircumcised state of, etc.” There was therefore no room for misunderstanding where this circumcision was to be performed. 
   Nachmanides writes that here the Torah explains that the spot where the circumcision is to be performed is on the organ which separates man from woman. According to his view, the word בשר in the expression בשר ערלתכם, clearly relates to “flesh used as a cover,” as distinct from an organ, i.e. an appendage of a fleshy nature covering the organ itself. As there is no other such in the human being, the meaning is clear. You are circumcised when this cover has been removed from the organ in question.
   17,17. ויצחק, “he rejoiced, laughed internally.” Onkelos renders this word as וחדי, “he rejoiced.” He reacted like someone who has been told of an unexpected fortuitous event, something that qualifies for his shouting for joy.
   @הלבן מאה שנה ייולד, “will a child be born to a hundred year old father?” Avraham expressed amazement, but not at the fact that a hundred year old man could sire children. He himself had at least 6 children when much older, and other males fathered children at such an age. His amazement concerned the fact that he would sire a child from a woman with whom he had lived as man and wife for so many decades without having succeeded to impregnate her with his semen. His amazement was reinforced further since he knew that Sarah at 90 had long ago ceased to menstruate.
   17,18. לו ישמעאל יחיה לפניך, “if only Ishmael would live in awe of You.” According to Nachmanides what Avraham meant was that if Ishmael would live and not die prematurely. He had been under the impression up until now that seeing G’d had promised him זרע, seed, in the singular, that he would only have one child. Now that G’d promised him a son by Sarah, he was afraid that this might imply that Ishmael would die. He therefore said to G’d that he wished to accept a blessing of a son by Sarah only if it did not mean that Ishmael would die.
   <i>Rashi</i> views the word לפניך as “in awe of G’d.” Avraham prayed that Ishmael would be a G’d-fearing individual. This interpretation is not tenable, as history shows that contrary to G’d’s promise “I have accepted your prayer concerning Ishmael,” the latter did not live the life of a G’d fearing individual. The meaning of Avraham’s prayer concerning Ishmael must therefore be that his future would be ongoing, that the nation he would found would not die out.
   17,19. אבל שרה אשתך, “but your wife Sarah, etc.” The word אבל in this instance means the same as the word everywhere else, i.e. We find a parallel for this in Kings II 4,14 אבל בן אי לו, “only (except) she has no son.”
   17,26. בעצם היום הזה, “on this very day.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of בעצם היום הזה is: “on the day Avraham completed his 99th year He circumcised himself.” Nachmanides already queried this commentary, saying that seeing we accept the view of Rabbi Eliezer according to which the patriarchs were all born in the month of Tishrey, and this circumcision took place on Passover (the future date of Passover). In that case, <i>Rash’is</i> explanation would mean that the circumcision took place on what was going to be Passover.
   Therefore, Nachmanides understands the wordsבעצם היום הזה to mean that Avraham carried out the command on the same day it was issued. All male members of Avraham’s household were circumcised on that day, including his son Ishmael. The Torah tells us this in detail in order to compliment Avraham on the prompt execution of G’d’s command. Avraham circumcised himself last, as otherwise he would not have had the strength to circumcise his entire household which numbered probably more than a hundred, a considerable portion of whom were grown men.
   According to tradition Avraham observed all the commandments of the Torah, having divined G’d’s intent through his intellect. The question therefore is why he did not observe the rite of circumcision already many years ago, seeing that he knew that this would please the Lord? Some sages answer that this tradition that attributes to Avraham the knowledge of all the commandments which would be featured in the Torah, came to him only after he had circumcised himself. He advanced spiritually by giant steps as a result of having circumcised himself.
   This answer does not appear as likely, as if Avraham was intellectually mature enough at the age of three to recognize that there was a Creator who had created the entire universe, surely he had developed further intellectually in the 96 years intervening between then and the time when he circumcised himself. The more likely reason is that he wanted to wait until he was commanded to do so, as we have a rule that if one performs a commandment because it had been commanded by G’d, this is morally/ethically a higher ranking deed than doing the same thing without having been commanded. In the case of all other commandments Avraham knew that he would be able to perform the same commandment also after he would be commanded to do so. Removal of one’s foreskin is something irreversible, and will not be possible to be repeated again. Hence in this case Avraham waited until G’d issued His command.
   Parshat Vayera
   18,1. וירא אליו ה', “The Lord appeared to him, etc.” According to<i> Rashi,</i> G’d’s purpose in appearing to Avraham at that time was in the nature of a get well visit one makes to the sick. It was the third day after his circumcision, the most painful day. <i>Rashi</i> arrived at that commentary by noting that the Torah does not report G’d as engaging Avraham in a conversation, or giving him any verbal instructions. G’d simply wanted to honour Avraham and wish him well.
   Nachmanides writes that he does not feel comfortable with <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation, but that G’d wanted to demonstrate His appreciation of what Avraham had done and His visit was a kind of reward for this. The phenomenon is similar to what is described by Psalms 17,15 אני בצדק אחזה פניך אשבעה בהקיץ תמונתך, “Then, I, justified, will behold Your face; I am filled with the vision of You.” Yaakov experienced something similar upon his return to the land of Canaan from Lavan when the “angels of G’d came to meet and welcome him.” (Genesis 32,2) In that instance the angels are also not reported as delivering a verbal message to Yaakov. As a result of the very absence of such communication, Yaakov realized that his conduct had been approved by G’d. In this case too, Avraham’s conduct had been approved. Some commentators feel that G’d’s major purpose had been to tell Avraham about what He was going to do to Sodom, but that the arrival of the three angels interrupted the conversation.
   @באלוני ממרא, ”in the grove belonging to Mamre.” This is not to be understood as a reference to the location per se, but the reason Mamre is mentioned here in connection with where G’d appeared to Avraham is that Avraham was granted this revelation in this location on account of having accepted the advice of Mamre to proceed with the circumcision. Other commentators ask whether Avraham really needed advice from Mamre on the subject of fulfilling a commandment by the Lord or not. They answer that the consultation did not concern if Avraham was to circumcise himself, but on which organ he was to perform this circumcision. This does not make sense to me either, as it is foolish to think that Avraham could not correctly interpret the words וערל זכר אשר לא ימול את בשר ערלתו ונכרתה הנפש ההיא, as referring to the male organ of the person referred to. Some commentators believe that seeing that so many other people were circumcised by him at the same time, Avraham wanted the stamp of approval on what he had done by a prominent person in that society. If he could not secure their approval, he in turn might lose his standing in that society.
   Maimonides, addressing the subject, writes that the whole paragraph has to be viewed as being written in the format known as כלל ופרט, a general instruction first, followed by detailed instructions later. The Torah first reports that Avraham was granted a revelation, without specifying the nature of this revelation. The Torah then proceeds that this revelation which had first consisted only of his raising his eyes and seeing the three men approach, afterwards turned out to have been the introduction to a number of messages, such as when Sarah would give birth and that Sodom would be destroyed. According to Maimonides, these three men were not real, but were part of Avraham’s visions on that occasion. [if so, debating Sarah’s denials is an exercise in futility. Ed.]
   Nachmanides contradicts Maimonides’ approach, listing a number of difficulties with such an exegesis. Among other points, he cites the fact that if Avraham is described on numerous occasions when he had visions as prostrating himself in awe of the spectacle occurring, then clearly these were not nocturnal visions in a dream but actual happenings. In this case Avraham was fully awake. He claims that any human being experiencing the appearance of an angel and being addressed by him, is not experiencing prophecy but an overwhelming revelation of divine forces. [the interested reader is referred to Rabbi Chavell’s translation of Nachmanides’ commentary for further study of the subject. Ed.]
   18,3. אל נא תעבור, “please do not just pass by.” According to the commentators who perceive this plea of Avraham as being addressed to divine beings, holy ones, i.e. Avraham asking G’d to wait until he had had finished attending to something he had already started, it is difficult, seeing that we know already that he had run to meet these messengers. What reason would he have to ask G’d to wait, seeing he had already welcomed G’d’s messengers? We would have to answer that he had experienced G’d’s presence departing the moment he had given his attention to the three men (angels) he had seen. When he turned in the direction of his vision again, G’d’s presence returned, and he asked G’d to wait until he had fulfilled his obligation of hosting his guests.
   @אל נא תעבור מעל עבדך, “do not pass your servant by.” He addressed these words to the senior one among them, including his two companions in his remarks. Alternatively, he addressed each one of these individuals separately, asking them to stop by.
   Some commentators believe that he only needed to make this request from one of them, as the other two had come to deliver a message to him (as opposed to dealing with the Sodomites.) They therefore had to stop by his house to deliver their messages.
   18,4. יוקח נא מעט מים ורחצו רגליכם, ”let a little water be brought so that you can wash your feet.” He recognized from their appearance that they were travelers passing by and had no intention to spend the night with him. This is why he only invited them for lunch and for enjoying the shade of the tree. After that, he was willing to allow them to continue on their journey without detaining them further.
   18,5. כן, תעשה כאשר דברת, ”O.K. you may do as you have suggested.” In other words, they agreed to accept just a piece of bread and to rest up under the tree’s shade. They meant that he should not bring them into his house.
   Some commentators understand the words כן תעשה כאשר דברת as an approval and warning to always practice hospitality in this fashion. Still another commentary sees in these words an allusion to the fact that they were in fact angels, and the word תעשה marks the difference between him and them, i.e. you may eat, we, being angels, do not eat.
   18,6. קמח סלת, “flour, the finest.” Coarse flour {made into a sticky mass as the grain it is made from is underdeveloped. The thin, wafer like mass, is used to absorb rising impurities of what is boiling in the pots used by the cooks in the kitchen. Although this is the way it is described in the <i>Mishnah Pessachim</i> 42, [I am not sure how it applies to baked goods such as cake, unless it is placed under the cake to prevent the underside from being burned by the oven. Ed.] Although it was Passover, there was no danger of it becoming leavened, as the heat would prevent this from happening. 
   According to Nachmanides the reason Avraham ordered Sarah to use such a huge quantity of flour for just three men (equivalent of 432 eggs), is that Avraham may have invited numerous dignitaries to share this meal with them.
   According to the plain meaning, three measures of coarse flour yield 1 measure of fine flour after it has been sieved in a fine-meshed sieve.
   18,7. ואל הבקר רץ אברהם, “meanwhile Avraham had run to the cattle (pens)” From the triple description בקר (1), רך (2) וטוב,(3), we learn that he took 3 calves and served each guest a whole tongue with mustard. Why would he serve them 3 tongues? These could be prepared in a hurry, and Avraham did not want to delay his guests for longer than necessary.
   18,8. ויקח חמאה וחלב, “he took butter and milk;” according to our sages the bread was never served, as Sarah had begun menstruating suddenly, so that she had become ritually impure while doing her chores in the kitchen. According to the plain meaning of the text, there was no need to mention the basic ingredients of the meal, the bread. Alternately, the reason the individual components of the meal are listed, is to show the correct order in which to serve such course during a meal.
   18,9. ויאמרו אליו איה שרה אשתך?, They said to him: “where is your wife Sarah?” Although it is not considered proper manners to enquire after the welfare of someone else’s wife even from her own husband, this was an exceptional situation as they did not really enquire after her well being but they only asked where she was at that time.
   The letters <i>aleph, yud</i> and <i>vav</i> in the wordאליו have a dot above them, whereas the letter <i>lamed</i> does not have such a dot. According to Rabbi Shimon ben Eleazar (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 48,15) whenever you encounter more undotted letters in a word than dotted ones, you interpret the word according to the normal spelling. When there are more dotted than undotted letters in the word, we are guided by the dotted letters. In this instance, more letters are dotted than undotted.. According to Rabbi Azaryah, just as the angels asked Avraham where his wife was, they asked Sarah where Avraham was, i.e. איו ”where is he?” The reason is that it would have sufficed to write: “they said ויאמרו איה שרה אשתך, “where is your wife Sarah,” and the reader would have known that they were speaking to Avraham. The extra word אליו alerts us to the fact that they also spoke to someone else. The question raised against this interpretation is that if so it would have sufficed to put a dot only on the letter <i>lamed</i> in the word אליו, as we would then have concentrated on the undotted letters איו and we would have arrived at precisely the same result, saving the dots on two letters. The answer given to this objection is that seeing the letter <i>lamed</i> needed a dot in any case on account of the tone sign, the meaning of the dot would not have been clear.
   18,10. שוב אשוב אליך כעת חיה, “I will surely return to you, at the same time next year;” seeing that he was an angel he knew that he would still be alive at this time in the following year, he could afford to make such a confident-sounding statement. Elisha, though also a prophet, but a human being, did not know if he would be alive a year from a certain day. When he promised the woman in Shunem that she would embrace a son a year from the date he promised her this, did not include himself in his description of the event, and only said כעת חיה את חובקת בן, “at this time year you will embrace a son.” (Kings II 4,16). In spite of all this, there is no written record in the Torah that this angel visited Avraham and Sarah in the year following this conversation. Nachmanides suggests, that the words וה' פקד את שרה וגו', “G’d remembered Sarah as He had said,” in 21,1 includes what the angel had said here.
   Personally, I believe that the true explanation is that the angel was not referring to himself at all, when he said this, but was announcing that at the turn of the year, i.e. at <i>Rosh Hashanah,</i> Sarah would have a son. This would be exactly in line with what Avraham had been told למועד הזה בשנה האחרת “at this time of year next year” (17,21)
   18,11. חדל להיות לשרה אורח כנשים, “Sarah had long stopped menstruating.” Here the Torah refers to the process of menstruation as אורח כנשים, whereas in connection with Rachel the Torah uses the term דרך נשים. The reason is that Rachel being in her prime at the time, experienced the flow of menstrual blood coming directly from her ovaries, whereas in the case of aged Sarah the blood had to find other conduits until it could exit from her body.
   18,12. ותצחק שרה, “Sarah laughed (internally),” This was not like the joyful laughter the Torah reports Avraham as breaking out into in 17,17 upon being told something similar by G’d. Avraham rejoiced because he believed the message, whereas Sarah found the message as beyond belief. The reason that she did not match her husband in believing in this instance was that whereas he had received the message from G’d directly, she had only heard it from a man dressed like an Arab. [even though she laughed soundlessly, so as not to embarrass the messenger. Ed.]
   18,13. ואני זקנתי, “seeing that I have become old.” From this verse we know that it is permissible to utter a white lie if it helps preserve harmonious relations between husband and wife. Actually, Sarah had not described herself as too old, but her husband. The angel changed what she had said in a way that would not embarrass Avraham or insult him.
   Nachmanides holds that the angel had not changed anything at all, as Sarah attributed the unlikelihood of the message becoming true to her state, as she had added that she had long ago stopped menstruating and therefore was unable to conceive. She had added however, that she had suddenly experienced a rejuvenation, אחרי בלותי היתה לי עדנה, something she did not want to reveal to the messenger. Her error was in not saying (or thinking, rather) “I and my husband are too old.” Sarah laughed at both parts of the message. Some commentators believe that Sarah’s laughter was directed only at her husband; seeing that she had experienced rejuvenation, she knew that as far as she was concerned conception had become possible. However, she was not aware of anything similar having happened to her husband.
   18,14. כעת חיה, according to <i>Rashi:</i> ”at this time next year.” This happened on Passover (the date when Passover would occur in the future) Yitzchok, as we know, was born in the following year. <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary poses a problem, as, according to our tradition, (<i>Rosh Hashanah 11)</i> that these angels arrived on <i>Sukkot</i> if they promised that Yitzchok would be born by the next מועד, holiday, this would be Passover, and the baby would be 3 months premature. According to Rabbi Eliezer there that Yitzchok was born on <i>Rosh Hahanah</i> there are other difficulties, such as that if Avraham and Yaakov had both been born in <i>Tishrey,</i> and he was told about the circumcision while 99 years of age, he was 99 at the time he circumcised himself. Avraham would still have been 99 years old at the time he circumcised Yitzchok, something which contradicts Genesis 21,5.
   Furthermore, there is another difficulty with a statement on folio 11 in <i>Rosh Hashanah,</i> where reference is made to the angel having told Sarah that the child would be born in the following year, based on the words למועד אשוב אליך plus the prediction in 17,21. It is not possible that these words, i.e. בשנה האחרת, were said to Avraham on Passover of his 99th year when he was told about the forthcoming need to circumcise himself, whereas the actual circumcision did not occur until six months later in Tishrey, and that only then was he told the words that Yitzchok would be born at the first festival (מועד) thereafter which would then have occurred on the following Passover when Yitzchok would indeed be born. We have a tradition that Avraham carried out the commandment to circumcise himself immediately, and certainly did not let 6 or 7 months elapse before doing what G’d had told him to do. The Torah itself testifies that he circumcised himself on the day he had received the commandment, by describing the date as בעצם היום, on the day he was so commanded (17,26).
   The answer given to all these questions is by Rabbi Shimon ben Avraham. He explains that the angels actually visited Avraham on two separate occasions. The first time they visited him in <i>Nissan</i> and they told him they would return again כעת חיה, The second time they visited him in <i>Tishrey</i> and said to him that in another year, at the same season, Sarah would have a son. It was on the second occasion that Sarah laughed (to herself) seeing that 6 months had already passed since these same men’s first visit, and nothing had changed in her or her husband’s condition. Even with the explanation of Rabbi Shimon ben Avraham there remains the problem of the words אשר תלד לך שרה למועד הזה בשנה האחרת, “whom Sarah will bear for you at this season in the following year.” (17,21) These words were spoken in Tishrey and Yitzchok was born in the year following.
   18,15. ותכחש שרה, “Sarah denied (having laughed derisively)” Nachmanides writes that he cannot get over the fact that a prophetess of the caliber of the matriarch Sarah denied that she had laughed at the prophecy and had not believed the prophecy delivered in the name of the Lord. The only possible answer he could accept was that seeing that these messages were delivered by people in human garb, low ranking individuals at that, this made it difficult for her to credit what they said. Avraham, in his wisdom, discerned who they were when they gave him the message that Sarah would have a son a year hence when one of them would come back. Sarah overheard what these men said without having seen them face to face, or suspecting that they were angels, as they had not introduced themselves as such. [as when these same “men” appeared to Lot later on, on the evening of the same day as “angels. (compare 19,1) This was not like the wife of Manoach to whom the angel appeared in the first place and addressed her face to face, and whose appearance already frightened her almost out of her wits. (Judges 13,3).] It is also possible that Sarah, not having seen these men at all, silently ridiculed the prophecy which she might have considered a blessing by strangers whom her husband had entertained, a situation similar to the one in which G’d is described as ridiculing man’s efforts when these efforts are intended to thwart His will. (Psalms 2,4)
   Nonetheless, G’d reprimanded Sarah by revealing her innermost thoughts, described here as laughter, to her husband. G’d’s complaint against Sarah was that she considered the prophecy as incapable of fulfillment, thereby displaying a lack of faith in G’d and in His powers. Instead of ridiculing the good tidings, she should have reacted by saying: “Amen, may it be G’d’s will.” Avraham challenged her about not having believed the prophecy by saying: “is anything impossible for the Lord,” היפלא מה' דבר?, and she, being afraid of her husband, resorted to denying that she had laughed at the prophecy. Avraham had not realized that what G’d had revealed to him, He had not revealed to Sarah. She was not sure whether Avraham had said the line היפלא מה' דבר because he wanted to flatter his guests who had made the prediction, or because he was displeased with Sarah’s silence instead of her grateful acknowledgment of the good news.
   It is proper to add here that clearly Avraham did not inform Sarah about what G’d had said to him in 17,19-21 when He had informed him that his wife Srarah would indeed bear a son for him, so that what Avraham had now heard from the angel was not news except for the time frame when the birth would take place. Avraham had not informed Sarah as he thought that G’d Himself would inform her, just as He had informed him. It is also possible that having been so preoccupied with the circumcision of his male household members, his son Ishmael, his own circumcision and the days of recuperation, it had slipped his mind to tell Sarah about this relatively minor item in the revelation he had experienced when Sarah’s name had also been changed. The sudden arrival of the angels had taken him by surprise.
   18,17. וה' אמר, “and the Lord had said, etc.” According to Nachmanides G’d had said what follows to His celestial army. It is also possible that the word אמר when applied to G’d and no specific person is being addressed, means that G’d “thought.” G’d’s “thinking” is at least equivalent to man’s “saying” with his mouth.
   18,18. ואברהם היו יהיה, “seeing that Avraham will surely become, etc., etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> as soon as G’d made mention of Avraham, He immediately also blessed him. Nachmanides claims that the true meaning of this phrase is that G’d spoke deferentially about Avraham, saying that in view of the fact that this man would become the founder of such an important nation and kingdoms, and his memory as a dispenser of blessing would never fade from mankind’s consciousness, it was no more than courtesy to inform him of His plans and to record his intercession on behalf of the people of Sodom, so that future generations could not accuse him [as they might have accused Noach who had also been informed of the impending destruction of mankind, without, however raising his voice in prayer. Ed.] of mutely, and cruelly making peace with G’d’s plan without at least inquiring into the circumstances more deeply. Having been on record as praying on behalf of people who had already been condemned, his way of life of combining charity with righteousness, justice, would prove to be an acceptable role model for his descendants, and in fact, for much of mankind as a whole. It was also important to convey to future generations that even an Avraham, with his almost boundless love of mankind, agreed with G’d that there are people who are beyond the pale of redemption.
   18,19. כי ידעתיו, “for I know him intimately.” <i>Rashi</i> follows Onkelos in understanding the word ידעתיו as: “I love him.” G’d is saying that the reason He loves Avraham is because he will command his family and people under his control to observe the ways of the Lord.
   Nachmanides understands the word ידעתיו as a description of Avraham as an individual whom G’d has endowed with greatness in order that he will pass on his lifestyle to his descendants, his lifestyle being that he emulates the ways of the Lord. It is because of this that G’d will make a great nation out of him. That nation in turn will serve the Lord just as their founder had done.
   Another meaning of the word ידעתיו in connection with the preface למען could be parallel to Deut. 5,14 למען ינוח עבדך ואמתך, “in order that your manservant and woman servant shall rest, (abstain from forbidden activities on the Sabbath)” In that instance the word למען substitutes for the prefix ש, i.e. שינוח.
   Personally, I believe that the word has to be understood as ידיעה, true knowledge of someone, like one possesses knowledge of facts. G’d hints that He supervises Avraham (and others) minutely even though we live in the world known as the עולם השפל, “the lower regions of the universe.” Although many people are assigned a role in life and are therefore exposed to what appear as accidents of nature until the day they die and hopefully qualify for residence in the higher regions of the universe, deserving individuals will always attract G’d’s attention and especial protection while on earth. Avraham will be a prime example of such people, and he can inspire them due to what people know about him.
   18,20. ויאמר ה' זעקת סדום, “G’d said: ‘the outcry about Sodom, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra, the line ויפנו משם האנשים“the men turned away from there” in verse 22 of our chapter, describes an event that preceded the conversation between Avraham and G’d introduced here. The whole verse has to be understood thus: After the men, i.e. angels, had taken their leave of Avraham, G’d said to him that the outcry about the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah which had come to His attention was such that, if upon closer examination, these reports would prove to be accurate, that would be the end of these cities. Thereupon Avraham began to pray on behalf of the innocent people in those cities.
   @זעקת סדום ועמורה כי רבה, “the outcry rising from Sodom and Gomorrha is indeed of vast proportions.” According to Ibn Ezra, they either spoke out openly against G’d (the seven universal laws given by G’d to mankind,) or they indulged in violent means to enforce their views. According to Nachmanides, the wordsזעקת סדום וגו' refer to the outcry to G’d of the souls of the victims of such violence (compare Job 35,9: יזעיקו ישועו רבים, ”many oppressed cry out.”)
   18,21. ארדה נא ואראה הכצעקתה הבאה אלי עשו, כלה,”I will descend and investigate if they have indeed done in accordance with the outcry that has come to Me; that would be the end.” If all of them have sinned that will be the end of them, but if only a part of the inhabitants have been guilty of such sins, אדעה, I will take note of this and act accordingly. From Avraham’s intervention at this point it is clear that G’d had left him an opening to plead on behalf of those who had not actively been guilty. Avraham only asked to spare the righteous.
   An additional meaning of the words ארדה נא ואראה sees in the wording a change by G’d from invoking the attribute of Mercy to invoking the attribute of Justice. G’d is saying that if things are as bad as He has heard, the time has come to invoke the attribute of Justice, as a result of which there will be total destruction of these cities. If not, He will take note of this and employ the attribute of Mercy. We find a parallel verse to this in Exodus 2,25 when G’d tells Moses that now that the Jewish people themselves have turned to Him to complain about the outrageous treatment of them by the Egyptians, He will employ the attribute of Justice against them, i.e. וידע אלוקים, G’d’s attribute of Justice had now taken notice.
   After the Torah had revealed to us G’d’s thinking, it reverts to the story involving the three angels who had visited Avraham, and how these angels after having looked down on Sodom (in the deep valley) arrived there, and what happened next. During all this time, Avraham was still standing in the presence of the Lord, pleading for those who might qualify for survival. G’d had made it clear to him that the men who had visited him were His agents and had been dispatched to carry out the decree against these 5 cities.
   18,23. האף תספה צדיק עם רשע?, “are You really going to wipe out the righteous with the wicked?” Avraham meant if G’d would really apply the attribute of Justice also to the people who had not directly aroused His anger as a result of the reports which had come to His attention. חלילה לך מעשות כדבר הזה, “surely You would not do something which would make people conclude that there was no advantage in leading a righteous life if they had to die with the wicked people surrounding them.” Especially, seeing that G’d normally applies His attribute of Mercy when judging people, how could such an attribute be denied the righteous whose very existence is the reason that G’d tempers justice with mercy when judging mankind? This is why the word חלילה, “far be it,” appears twice in our verse.
   18,24. חמשים צדיקים, “fifty righteous people.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the reason why Avraham commenced with the number 50 as meaning one quorum of ten righteous people in each of these five cities, so that 40 would be able to save the inhabitants of four cities, etc. 
   Nachmanides writes that he is perplexed by <i>Rashi’s</i> comment. If indeed 50 righteous people were enough to save 5 cities, why would it be necessary to pray that 40 righteous people should be enough to save four cities, and so on down the line? Another query against <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation is that it appears that He assumes that G’d Himself can be added to 9 righteous people to complete the quorum of a “holy congregation,” why else would he have asked about 45 righteous people? (seeing that the combination of 9 righteous in each city plus the Lord, would provide 5 quorums which would save all five cities) Why would he not have asked about 9 righteous people, who, with the addition of G’d, would at least be able to save one of the cities? 
   Perhaps, what <i>Rashi</i> meant to convey was that a greater number of righteous people could save more than merely a proportionately greater number of cities. This is why Avraham had to enumerate each scenario separately and repeatedly. Actually, when G’d agreed that if He were to find 45 righteous people, i.e. 9 in each town, He would save all 5 cities, Avraham knew that if there were only 36 such people spread equally over four towns G’d would consider Himself the 10th in each group and four cities would be saved. This pattern could in theory be repeated down to 9. The reason Avraham did not have the audacity to ask about a total of only nine righteous men to whom G’d would be added to form the quorum, was that in all the other examples G’d had already indicated that He Himself would complete the quorum.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, (as understood by Nachmanides) Avraham commenced by asking about 50 righteous people in order to establish that he realized that unless there was a quorum of 10 good people per town such a town had no claim on the attribute of Mercy. According to this approach, it did not even occur to Avraham to ask for the saving of the cities piecemeal, he only wanted to establish the minimum number of righteous people that would suffice to annul the decree of the destruction of the five cities.
   According to Ibn Ezra, Avraham did not pray altogether on behalf of these people, had it not been a fact that his nephew Lot lived among them. An unresolved problem is the change for describing destruction, sometimes as לא אשחית, and sometimes לא אעשה, “I will not do it.”
   18,32. לא אשחית בעבור העשרה, “I will not destroy on account of those ten.” He promised Avraham that He would not destroy the towns (or town) if He were to find ten such good people there. He did not add that Avraham should know that there were no ten such people in those cities. The reason G’d did not add these words was that the decree had not yet been finalized so as to become irrevocable. This was the meaning of G’d having said: “I will descend and take a personal look at the situation.” Avraham was left in doubt about the outcome until the following morning when he saw a column of smoke rising from that region. When he saw that, he knew that no ten righteous men had been found there.
   @בתוך העיר, “within the city.” According to Ibn Ezra the condition was that these ten people are visibly G’d-fearing, display their faith in public. We find something analogous described in Jeremiah 5,1 שוטטו בחוצות ירושלים, “roam the streets of Jerusalem!” [in that instance the search would not turn up a single G’d-fearing man. Ed.]
   Nachmanides sees in the expression בתוך העיר that even if the ten men in question were sojourning in Sodom only temporarily, were not citizens, their presence at this time would help save the town from destruction. The words were a veiled reference to people such as Lot.
   19,1. ולוט יושב בשער סדום, “and Lot was sitting in the public square of Sodom.” He distanced himself somewhat from the residential areas of the born and bred Sodomites. Alternately, the Torah writes these words to forestall your asking how he managed to bring the angels to his home without being afraid of being seen. When the angels arrived they found him a good distance away from the local citizenry [it was evening, after all. Ed.] He was therefore confident that he would escape detection when bringing guests to his house.
   19,2. הנה נא אדו-ני, “Look here, sirs;” a courteously phrased request. In other words, “seeing that my house is nearby, please honour me by visiting with me.”
   @והשכמתם והלכתם לדרככם, “you may rise early and continue on your way.” He was not going to detain them until the sun was shining. He hoped thereby to escape the watchful eyes of the Sodomites also in the morning. He was not worried that they would notice them at night, or, that they would consider these men as passing through without stopping in the town.
   19,3. ויפצר בם מאד, “he urged them very strongly.” They had first refused, in order to increase his merit if he kept insisting to host them.
   19,5. ונדעה אותם, “so that we can become intimate with them.” They meant to indulge in homosexual relations with these strangers. According to the plain meaning of the text, they wanted to examine if these men were spies.
   @הנה לי שתי בנות, “I have two daughters;“ whom I am willing for you to be intimate with.
   @אשר לא ידעו איש, “who have never yet been intimate with a man.” Actually, he should have phrased it as: ”with whom no man has as yet been intimate.” This was the phrase used in Genesis 24,16 (Rivkah) ואיש לא ידעה, “no man had been intimate with her.” The reason why he chose the phrasing he did was to hint (subconsciously) that eventually they would take the initiative in sleeping with a man, their own father. (Genesis 19,31-36) 
   @אוציאה נא אתהן, “I will bring them outside.” While the Torah credits Lot with the extent to which he went to protect his guests from the local mob, we also hear about his moral depravity, i.e. that a father uses his own daughters as bargaining chips to trade one abomination for another. Clearly, casual sex, without the sanctifying element of marriage, was a minor misdemeanour in his eyes. Lot had been under the impression that his guests were men of flesh and blood. As soon as he became aware of their true identities, and that the reason they had come was to destroy the city on the one hand, and to save him at the same time, he did whatever the angels asked him to do.
   19,9. ויפצרו באיש בלוט מאד, “they coaxed the man Lot urgently;” Nachmanides claims that the word ויפצרו, [i.e. the root פצר, Ed.] only occurs as having a positive meaning, i.e. an attempt to calm someone down, to reconcile one’s differences with a person. When Lot proved impervious to the Sodomites’ attempts to compromise with him, they set about breaking down his door. Alternatively, seeing that Lot stood firm in front of the door and they did not want to harm him personally, they told him to get out of heir way, גש הלאה, i.e. that he should go elsewhere.
   19,12. עוד מי לך פה, חתן ובניך ובנותך, “who else belonging to your family is here; a son-in-law, your sons or your unmarried daughters?” According to <i>Rashi</i>, the word עוד means “apart from your wife who qualifies for being saved because she is part of you.” Although Lot did not have sons, only daughters, the angels asked in the manner ordinary people ask such a question, mentioning both sons and daughters.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word בנים as a question if Lot had sons-in-law who were as dear to him as sons would have been.
   Nachmanides presumes that it was quite likely that he had grown up sons who were married, however Lot spoke to his sons-in-law first as he was not sure they would heed his advice to flee. Concerning his sons, he was pretty sure they would heed him if he asked them to leave town immediately. When his sons-in-law laughed at him and time was being wasted in the meantime, dawn rose and there was no more time left, or he too would have been killed.
   19,13. כי משחיתים אנחנו את המקום הזה, “for we are about to destroy this place.” Nachmanides comments that surely there are many nations whose citizens are evil, wicked, etc., and nothing even remotely as drastic seems to happen to them. What happened to the people of Sodom was linked to their being located in the Holy Land, a land that has less tolerance for wickedness than any other place on earth. In the course of history it has spat out many peoples who have made their home in that land because those peoples never adjusted their lifestyles to the higher standards for human behaviour which are standard requirement for a successful residence in that land over a period of time.
   19,16. ויחזיקו האנשים בידו, “the men took hold of his hand, etc.” The plural mode of ויחזיקו is puzzling, seeing that only one of the angels had been charged with saving Lot, the other having been assigned the duty to bring about the destruction. Perhaps the involvement of the second angel in saving Lot was inevitable seeing that he was unable to commence with his task until Lot was clear of the city. In other words, saving Lot was part of the process of the destruction of Sodom. Interestingly, the Torah reverts to the use of the singular mode for the angel’s activities as soon as Lot was clear of the city. Compare verse 17 כהוציאם, ”when he had taken them out.” Seeing that Lot himself was not so clear about which angel had which function to perform, [they had said: “we are about to destroy,’ Ed.] he addressed the two angels in the plural mode when asking not to be made to climb the mountain to get himself into safety. Compare אליהם in verse 18, and “<i>adonay</i>” instead of “<i>adoni</i>.” On the other hand, seeing that one angel had proven to be the one who had saved him, he reverted to use of the singular mode when saying ותגדל חסדך, “your (sing.) kindness has been great.” (verse 19). Seeing that originally the angels had used the plural mode about their task, i.e. הנני משחיתים, the angel whose task it was to carry out the destruction, now responds to Lot saying that he could not begin his real task until Lot had reached safety.
   @ויחזיקו האנשים, according to Ibn Ezra these words prove that Lot had become immobilized from fright and that the angels had to help him to get moving. Nachmanides explains the verse as similar to Exodus 12,33 when the Egyptians urging the Israelites to get out of Egypt without delay, are described by the words ותחזק מצרים על העם למהר לשלחם. No doubt, the Egyptians did not literally take the Israelites by their hands and escorted them to the border.
   @בחמלת ה' עליו, “out of G’d’s pity on him.” Not because he had merits that would have entitled him to be saved. Alternately, the use of the word חמלה, “pity,” is to justify the angels grabbing him by the hand before G’d’s pity had expired and he would become a victim together with his townspeople.
   19,17. אל תבט אחריך “do not look behind you!” So that you will not lose momentum in your flight and the destruction would catch up with you.
   19,26. ותבט אשתו מאחריו, “His wife looked behind him.” According to Ibn Ezra, the suffix in the word מאחריו refers to Lot. <i>Rashi</i> claims that the suffix refers to her having ignored the angel’s command. In <i>Pirkey de Rabbi Eliezer</i> it is said that the angels said to both Lot, his wife and daughters, not to look behind, as the Presence of the Lord raining sulphur and fire on the Sodomites was descending on earth immediately behind them. Lot’s wife Iddit, who was concerned about the fate of her married daughters, ignored the instructions, and, as a result, was turned into a pillar of salt. According to this version, the masculine suffix in the word מאחריו would refer to the שכינה, the manifestation of G’d’s presence.
   @ותהי נציב מלח. “she turned into a pillar of salt.” Nachmanides (on verse 17) explains that mere looking at polluted air containing all kinds of harmful ingredients transfers such harmful images to the brain and thence to the rest of the body. The effect is liable to be lethal. [The Talmud claims that if one sees the reflection of a rabid dog in the surface of waters of, say a lake, the effect is also liable to be deadly. Ed.] Nachmanides speculates that the angel causing all this destruction had taken up position between the earth and the sky. An effective medication may be to isolate oneself so that one is no longer exposed to the harmful influences either visually or through inhaling them. This would explain what happened to the wife of Lot by attributing it to natural causes, rather than assuming that G’d performed a miracle in order to kill her.
   My sainted father, the רא'ש, was troubled about the timing of the death of Lot’s wife. From the plain meaning of the text it appears that the rain of fire and sulphur did not commence until Lot had safely reached the small town of Tzoar. This is also borne out by the description of the events in <i>Pirkey de Rabbi Eliezer</i> chapter 25. If the destruction did not commence until Lot was in Tzoar, why would his wife be punished more severely than the people in Sodom? Rabbi Ysrael answered my father by letter that there is no doubt that the destruction did not commence until Lot had reached Tzoar, and that his wife had lagged behind so that the sulphur and fire struck her. The Torah only revealed to us the reason why she had lagged behind; she was always trailing behind her husband, and the suffix מאחוריו describes that she was at all times behind him. The reason why she kept lagging behind was that she constantly looked backwards hoping that her daughters would join her. This also explains the angel saying: ”do not look behind you.” If correct, this means that he did not forbid her the looking behind per se, but warned her that her lagging behind due to her looking behind was liable to turn her into a victim of the destructive forces overtaking Sodom and that valley. If Nachmanides’ explanation were correct, i.e. that looking at the air behind her were to cause her lethal consequences, the angel should have said: “do not look behind you so that the harmful substances will not cling to you.” The fact that the angel added the words “do not stand still in the entire valley,” proves conclusively that time was of the essence, not what he or she would see when turning around. Lot followed the instructions of the angel, whereas his wife did not, with fatal results to her. The Torah reveals that Lot’s wife died as a result of disregarding the angel’s instructions. If not for this, she would have been saved, just as her unmarried daughters were saved. The whole story may have been related by the Torah to explain what prompted Lot’s daughters to sleep with him, i.e. the death of his wife.
   19,29. בהפוך את הערים אשר ישב בהן לוט, “when He overturned the cities wherein Lot had dwelled.” The meaning is as if the Torah had written: “in one of which Lot had dwelled.”
   19,30. כי ירא לשבת בצוער, “for he was afraid to dwell permanently in Tzoar. According to <i>Rashi</i> he was afraid to live in a town so close to Sodom.
   Nachmanides disagrees, writing that his fear was based on the fact that the decree of destruction had included Tzoar, though the timing had been amended. He felt that the angel would not extend the grace period much longer. This is also why the daughters were convinced that there would be no other men left on earth as possible marriage partners for them. (compare 31)
   Some say that Lot’s daughters definitely did not think that what had happened in Sodom had been worldwide. They only thought that there would not be any men willing to marry them, seeing they had been part of the condemned population of Sodom. They assumed that such men would feel they had been genetically harmed so that they could not bear healthy children, if at all. As a result, they would die without children unless they would be impregnated by their father.
   19,32. לכה נשקה את אבינו יין, “let us give our father wine to drink preparatory to sleeping with him.” Even though, <i>halachically</i> speaking, it was permissible for a father to have sexual relations with his daughter, so that there was no legal impediment to their father marrying them, it had become a universally accepted norm after the deluge that fathers would not touch their daughters, sexually. The matter is discussed in <i>Horiyot</i>, where deviates were described as being guilty of committing an abomination. 
   19,33. ותקרא שמו מואב, “she named him Moav, (by my father.)” A most inappropriate name for a child, tainting him for the future. She was punished by the Torah for naming her son thus, by the Torah only forbidding the Israelites to oppress the Moabites and Ammonites and to wage war against them, but enslaving them was not forbidden. Even so, the sages say that the older daughter who initiated sleeping with her father a single night before her sister was rewarded by G’d in that from her issue Ruth joined the Jewish people, whereas Naamah from Ammon who became the wife of Rechavam, son of Solomon, did not join the Jewish people until four generations later. Still, this did not exonerate her from the shame of naming her son in such a way. (<i>Bereshit Rabbah 51,10, and Midrash Hagadol on Genesis 19,34.)</i>
   20,2. ויאמר אברהם אל שרה אשתו אחותי היא, “Avraham said concerning his wife Sarah that she was his sister.” This was not like in Egypt. In Egypt he had not misrepresented his relationship until after the Egyptians had praised Sarah’s beauty to Pharaoh, and he had been aware that the Egyptians did not respect marital relations when it conflicted with their lust. Here in the land of the Philistines, Avimelech and his servants were civilized, and observed the Noachide laws, as a rule. Still, Avraham was suspicious, and that is why he himself told everyone that Sarah was his sister.
   20,12. וגם אמנה אחותי בת אבי היא אך לא בת אמי. “and she is indeed my sister, daughter of my father, though she is not the daughter of my mother.” Nachmanides writes that he does not know the point of Avraham’s apology if indeed Sarah was his half-sister and his wife at one and the same time, and when the people from the palace came to take her to the palace he revealed that she was also his sister in order to deceive them about the relationship. He had thereby caused them to commit a sin if he had not previously revealed that Sarah was his wife. It makes no difference whether this claim was true or false, as he had caused them to sin the moment he claimed that Sarah was his sister.
   Perhaps Avraham felt the need to respond to Avimelech’s accusation: “what did you see so terrible in this place that you felt the need to be devious and to bring guilt upon us?” He felt the need to justify himself vis-à-vis Avimelech personally, who had steadfastly claimed that he had never taken women for himself whom he knew to be married to other husbands. Avraham’s point was that he had no prior knowledge of the moral ethical standards prevailing among the Philistines, and had feared that they did not observe the 7 universal laws given by G’d to Noach. He cited his ample experience during previous sojourns in different countries in all of which no fear of the Lord was customary, and in all of which he conducted himself according to this assumption. Hence his caution was not a reflection on Avimelech, personally. He had been prompted by the sole motive of saving his own life. In addition, he explained that passing his wife off as his sister had not even been a lie, as indeed she was his sister by his father. According to Ibn Ezra, all Avraham’s explanations served only to confound Avimelech, his argument was basically similar to Yaakov, when challenged as to his identity, claiming in the presence of Yitzchok: אנכי, עשו בכורך, “it is I, Esau is your firstborn.” 
   20,13. ויהי כאשר התעו אותי אלוקים מבית אבי, “Ever since Elohim caused me to wander away from my father’s home, etc.” He meant that the idolatry practiced in his father’s house caused him to abandon their idolatrous lifestyles and to have the strength to follow his monotheistic convictions. (based on Onkelos) As a result, he had been wandering from one place to another.
   20,15. כטוב בעיניך שב, “settle wherever it pleases you.” The contrast with Pharaoh’s reaction to having felt deceived by Avraham is quite remarkable. The former could not forgive Avraham for having been the instrument that made him suffer chastisement by G’d, although he knew himself to have been wrong..
   20,16. הנה הוא לך כסות עינים, “let this be a visible proof of your vindication, etc.” Avimelech referred to the financial compensation he had felt forced to pay to Avraham in order to mollify him. The word אלף is not to be understood literally, but means the “thousands of shekel, etc.” The expression כסות עינים extends also to Avraham’s entire entourage, including any unattached women. Anyone even looking at these girls would be liable to a monetary fine for having done so. Knowing that even the King had been forced to pay a fine, the ordinary people would be most careful not to become subject to similar penalties. 
   @ונוכחת. “and you will be vindicated.” You will have a valid argument in countering any gossip spread about you (Sarah). Alternatively, the meaning of the expression is the Torah’s way of saying that whereas the money compensated Avraham for the wrong done to him, it did not mollify Sarah’s injured dignity. She would continue to argue that the wrong done to her could not be righted by money; the Torah mentioned this in tribute to Sarah’s lofty principles.
    
   Some commentators understand the expression כסות עינים as meaning that the monetary compensation would have the same effect as stunningly beautiful garments, which would raise the image of the wearer in the eyes of the beholder. The money would enable both her and her servant maids to buy beautiful clothes.
   @את כל ונוכחת, “he prepared all this when he purchased for her a wardrobe, in order to demonstrate to everyone that he felt the need to mollify Sarah.” The word נוכחת means preparing something, inviting someone, and appears in this context in Genesis 24,44 אשר הוכיח ה' לבן אדוני, “the one whom the Lord has prepared for the son of my master (as a wife)”.
   Ibn Ezra explains the words הנה הוא לך כסות עינים as Avimelch saying to Sarah: “concerning Avraham whom you had told me that he was your brother, it fulfils the function of an “eye-cover” (veil) for you to ensure no one will dare raise his eyes to you”. At the same time his stature also protects all your maids against anyone daring to take advantage of them. They will all enjoy the protection of the status of being wives of his servants.
   Yet another explanation of the words הנה הוא לך כסות עינים understands it as a reference to Sarah having described Avraham as her brother as a defensive stratagem, to protect his life, and the fact that all the entourage of Avraham and Sarah conspired together in this deception so as not to endanger their master’s life. At any, rate, Avimelech added, now that everything has been cleared up, ונוכת, you will be safe and do not need to misrepresent yourself.
   @וילדו, “they proceeded to give birth.” According to <i>Rashi</i> their wombs had been as if sealed while Sarah was in Avimelech’s palace. Now their wombs were reopened. Apparently all orifices of the women had been sealed.
   20,18. בעד כל רחם, “every womb.” Again, <i>Rashi</i> understands the word as applying to every bodily orifice.
   Nachmanides writes that the expression רחם cannot be applied to orifices other than the womb. He sees a further difficulty in the fact that according to the plain meaning of the text all of this transpired during a single night, and that Sarah was restored to Avraham on the morrow, immediately. If so when had the sealing of the orifices of potential mothers even been perceived as an affliction? Perhaps they experienced pains and were unable to give birth, or their menstrual cycle did not operate normally, or Avraham waited until he prayed on behalf of all these women. Personally, I feel that from the day that Sarah had been abducted to Avimelech’s palace, Avimelech’s reproductive organs had been stricken so that he could not have sexual relations with Sarah. Avimelech’s wife and servant maids were equally afflicted. This was the meaning of G’d telling Avimelech in his dream ולא נתתיך לנגוע אליה, “I did not allow you to touch her.” Whenever the term נגיעה or קרבה is used in connection with women, it has a sexual connotation. This is the meaning of וה' סגר רחמם. It is an expression applying only to prevention of the birthing process being initiated. A parallel expression is סגר ה' בעדה, when the prophet describes Channah’s being unable to have children at the beginning of the Book of Samuel. Apparently, Sarah was locked up in the palace of Avimelech for a considerable length of time, and until the night when G’d appeared to Avimelech in his dream, no one knew the cause of this peculiar affliction. At that point, G’d gave Avimelech a hint about what had caused this problem in his household. After Avraham’s prayer on behalf of those afflicted the problem was resolved.
   21.1. וה' פקד את שרה, “at this time G’d remembered Sarah benevolently;” The words כאשר אמר, “as He had said,” implies that the word פקד refers to her becoming pregnant, whereas the words כאשר אמר, refer to her giving birth, according to <i>Rashi.</i>
   Nachmanides writes that the expression פקידה always refers to remembering something pertaining to the party that is being remembered, such as פקוד יפקוד אלוקים אתכם, “G’d will surely remember you, etc.” in Genesis 50,23. Therefore, the meaning of ה' פקד את שרה is that “G’d remembered Sarah and did for her as He had said.” This formula is customary in connection with women who had been barren until G’d remembered them benevolently, as in the case of Rachel Genesis 30,22 who could give birth after being benevolently remembered by G’d.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi points out that the reason that the Torah used the term פקידה when referring to Sarah, and the term זכירה for remembering with Rachel, was that in the case of Sarah who was already way past child bearing age, G’d had to extend Himself more than in the case of Rachel who was still in her twenties. G’d had to restore bodily functions to Sarah, functions that had not ceased functioning in the case of Rachel. The <i>Mishnaic</i> term for the days between two menstrual cycles is מפקידה לפקידה. Rachel’s menstrual cycles had not yet ceased to occur regularly at the time she became pregnant and bore Joseph as a result. In the case of Channah giving birth to Shemuel, at a time when she was still young, the prophet uses the term זכירה, when she first prayed for children, (Samuel I 1,11) whereas when we hear about her having 5 more children in Samuel I 1,21 the prophet attributes this to a פקידה by G’d. seeing she had aged greatly in the interval.
   21,7. מי מלל לאברהם, “who had foretold Avraham, etc.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the word מלל is a form of a laudatory prediction such as an exclamation of “who would have known that Avraham is so distinguished and that HE who promised him this was capable of fulfilling his promise.”
   Nachmanides, on the other hand, writes that the word מי never introduces something laudatory but the contrary. Examples cited are the expressions מי אבימלך and מי דוד ומי אנשיו, in the Book of Judges and the Book of Samuel, respectively. He explains that Sarah exclaimed “the reason why all the people who hear about me nursing children will be so happy is that none ever believed that anyone who predicted that Avraham would father children was in earnest and knew what he was talking about.” 
   21,9. מצחק, making ”blasphemous comments” according to <i>Rashi.</i> 
   Ibn Ezra claims that Ishmael used the fact that he was older and stronger to make life somewhat difficult for Yitzchok who could not fight back. He indulged in pranks like most youngsters. Sarah could not stand watching this.
   Nachmanides claims that the incident occurred on the day Yitzchok was weaned, as appears from the context of our verse. It is therefore wrong to interpret Ishmael’s behaviour as connected to his disputing Yitzchok’s right to inherit the estate of his father when the time would come as stated by <i>Rashi.</i> Rather, Ishmael was making snide comments about the great feast Avraham had prepared in honour of Yitzchok’s being weaned. Sarah claimed that a slave who makes snide remarks about his master deserves either the death penalty or severe physical punishment. She, however would be content to see him expelled from the household to ensure he would not be a contender for Avraham’s estate claiming to share it with Yitzchok.
   21,11. על אודות בנו. “on account of his son.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Avraham feared that expelling him would lead to his abandoning the teachings he had learned in his home.
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah praises Avraham in this verse for not objecting to the demand for the expulsion of his concubine and her son as he was so fond of Hagar, but that he was troubled that the expulsion of his son would even further inhibit his growing up in the monotheistic Abrahamitic tradition. He waited until he had been instructed by G’d to follow Sarah’s instincts when it came to pedagogy. Seeing that Avraham was concerned about the personal security of Ishmael, He promised him that his son Ishmael would develop into a great nation. On the other hand, Yitzchok would be the recipient of G’d’s comprehensive blessings.
   21,14. שם על שכמו ואת הילד, “he placed it on her shoulder together with the child.” According to our sages Avraham placed both the jug of water as well as Ishmael on Hagar’s shoulders. According to the plain meaning of the verse the meaning of the words ואת הילד is that these words mean that not only Hagar but also Ishmael would walk with Hagar (not ride) also.
   @ותלך ותתע במדבר, ”She went and lost her way in the desert.” The water supply that Avraham had provided was exhausted only because instead of walking straight towards her destination, she procrastinated and made detours.
   21,15. ותשלך את הילד, “She threw away the child.” According to the homiletical approach, she threw Ishmael off her shoulder. According to the plain meaning of the text, she dropped him under a tree, the expression being similar to וישליכם אל ארץ אחרת, “He exiled them to another country. (Deuteronomy 29,27)
   Ibn Ezra understands the word ותשלך to mean that Hagar moved him down to her lap as a result of becoming tired and exhausted from thirst. As to why Avraham gave Hagar only bread and water and no supply of silver or gold or camels to ride on, this was due to his having been commanded by G’d to obey Sarah’s instructions, and she had objected to this.
   21,17. וישמע אלוקים אל קול הנער, “G’d listened to the voice (cries) of the lad.” <i>Rashi</i> derives from this wording that the prayer of the sick person himself concerning his recovery is more likely to be heard than all the prayers of other people on his behalf. This is so although we have a principle according to which a person whose hands and feet have been tied is unable to free himself, i.e. the stricken need outside assistance. We know that Chizkiyah whose sickness had been declared by the prophet to be terminal, was healed after he personally appealed to G’d on behalf of himself.
   @באשר הוא שם, “considering his present state of relative innocence.” When G’d asked the angels if Ishmael was guilty or innocent in their opinion at that time, they replied that he was innocent. This was in spite of the fact that he had previously been described (מצחק) as having displayed heretical behaviour. Nonetheless, concerning the matter which they (the angels) had accused him of, (harm he would cause to the Jewish people in the future) he was as yet not guilty. This is especially interesting seeing that a בן סורר ומורה, a 13 year old who steals a little meat and wine from his parents and who displays tendencies of becoming a delinquent, is executed at such a tender age. (Deuteronomy 21,21) The reason offered by our sages for what seems such a harsh way of dealing with a young boy is psychological. The Torah prefers to have him executed before he will become guilty of far worse crimes, and to thereby preserve his share in the world to come. Nonetheless, there is a difference between applying retribution for crimes decreed in heaven and those decreed on earth on the basis of the Torah. Human beings are not held accountable in heaven until they have completed 20 years on earth. Pre-emptive retribution does not exist in the vocabulary of Divine justice when it is meted out by heavenly tribunal, as opposed to justice handed out by human tribunal. The juvenile delinquent, בן סורר ומורה, although not yet guilty of the death penalty, has already begun a career of criminal acts and it is an act of love by his parents which brings about his “premature” violent death so that his eternal life may be preserved. Ishmael had not been guilty of any crime while he was in Avraham’s household for which he would have had to face a tribunal. Only his descendants would become guilty of such crimes. According to the plain meaning of the text, the words באשר הוא שם, mean that G’d listened to the prayer Ishmael offered up at the location he found himself in, in that the well which was to save his life suddenly caught his eye. He did not even need to have water brought to him from a more distant location.
   21,23. השבעה לי, “swear it to me!” He meant that Avraham should swear that if his offspring would dishonour this oath (the covenant of a non-aggression pact), he himself would be considered as having perjured himself. He was to call down curses upon himself should such a thing occur in the future.
   21,28. שבע כבשות, “seven ewes.” The number seven symbolized the word שבועה.
   21,32. וישובו אל ארץ פלשתים, “they returned to the land of the Philistines.” This means that they returned to the capital of the land of the Philistines, seeing that they had never left the land of the Philistines, the covenant having been concluded on land which was theirs.
   22,1. והאלוקים נסה, “and G’d tested.” Nachmanides describes the function of such “tests” as a device to ensure that the action undertaken by man under such conditions be perceived by him as absolutely free from external pressure, whereas from G’d’s perspective, of course, it is a commandment. (it is difficult to assume that G’d did not know beforehand how man would react to such a commandment.) G’d only wants to translate something He knew potentially into the domain of reality, a demonstration that what He knew man is capable of, man would actually carry out. Man cannot expect to be rewarded for potential acts of goodness, obedience, etc. In order to qualify for reward man must demonstrate that his goodness is more than just “potential.” Seeing that G’d’s objective is to reward man, there is no point in His subjecting the wicked to similar tests, as they will not only not garner the reward but incriminate themselves further by failing to carry out the command which constitutes the “test.” G’d subjects only the righteous to such tests, as He knows they will pass them with flying colours.
   <i>Rash’bam</i> explains the word נסה, as introducing a painful experience for the subject of such a test. An example of the use of the root נסה in such a context would be Exodus 17,7 where the Israelites had been tested in a painful manner in having gone without water before G’d provided same, miraculously. Other examples can be found in Job 4,2 or Psalms 26,2. The reason Avraham was subjected to such a painful test was that although G’d had given him a son at the age of 100 years, he had seen fit to make a covenant with Avimelech covering hundreds of years in the future, when he did not even know yet if this son would not die before ever having sired any offspring himself. Avraham did not realize that G’d did not actually want him to slaughter Yitzchok, but only wanted him to “offer” him on the altar, as the words העלהו לעולה indicate.
   Some commentators understand the word נסה to mean “elevate to a higher stature” in a spiritual sense, such as Kings II 2,17. The meaning would be parallel to נשאו with the letter ש instead of ס.
   22,2. אל ארץ המוריה, “to the land around Moriah.” Nachmanides understands the term מוריה as describing the region on earth whence reverence for the Lord originates. Other commentators connect it to the incense and frankincense offered on that site. Onkelos translates the term asארעא פולחנא , i.e. a land in which G’d is being worshipped. 
   The word מוריה, means fear and reverence, as at that site G’d is being revered and people are in awe of Him. This is also what <i>Midrash Rabbah</i> had in mind when focusing on the line (verse 9) ויבן שם אברהם את המזבח, “Avraham erected there the altar.” Avraham did not build a new altar, but used an altar on which religious people in former years had offered their sacrifices to the G’d in heaven.
   Regarding the plain meaning of the text, the words אל ארץ המוריה mean that this was a region where a variety of spices could be found, including first and foremost מור, myrrh. Whereas the Torah here refers to the whole region as ארץ המוריה, Ezra, in a parallel reference in Chronicles calls only the mountain הר המוריה. (Chronicles II 3,1) Avraham had been familiar with the region but not with the specific mountain G’d had in mind. This is why G’d instructed him to go to the general region, and once there, He would point out the specific mountain He had in mind. This mountain had already become a point on earth which G’d was especially fond of, and on which He had selected to make His terrestrial residence when the time was ripe. The merit Avraham would acquire by offering his beloved son there to G’d as a sacrifice would further endow this site so that prayers addressed to G’d from there in the Temple would be especially effective.
   22,3. ויבקע עצי עולה, “He split the kindling for use in the burnt offering.” He had made all these preparations in the event there would be no trees on that mountain. Alternately, he brought the wood from his house after he had examined that it was free from worms. We have a <i>halachah,</i> according to which worm eaten wood must not be used on the altar of the Temple. 
   22,4. וירא את המקום מרחוק, “he saw the place from a distance.” He observed that only this particular mountain was covered by a cloud. According to the plain meaning of the text, the verse means that Avraham could recognize the region already from a distance, as he had been familiar with it.
   22,5. ונשתחוה ונשובה אליכם, “we will prostrate ourselves (before the |Lord) before returning to you.” According to Ibn Ezra Avraham said this in order not to reveal to Yitzchok as yet what he had in mind. Other commentators suggest that the line be understood as a question: “do you really think that all we will do there is say a prayer and immediately return to you?”
   22,9. ויבאו אל המקום אשר אמר לו האלוקים, “they arrived at the place that G’d had spoken to him about.” This was Mount Moriah, which G’d had said He would point out to him.
   22,11. ויקרא אליו מלאך ה' מן השמים, “an angel of the Lord called out to him from the heaven, etc.” Why did the angel call from the celestial regions instead of first descending to earth and addressing Avraham, as had occurred on other occasions? The interference had become such an urgent matter that he was afraid that he would be too late, Avraham having already concluded the act of slaughtering Yitzchok.
   22,12. אל תשלח ידך אל הנער, “do not touch the lad!” According to the <i>Midrash</i>, the angel saw that Avraham had suddenly realized that he no longer had a knife in his hand. (this is why the angel told him not to harm Yitzchok with his hand, instead of with his knife). Avraham therefore decided to strangle Yitzchok with his bare hands in order to carry out G’d’s command. This is when the angel had to tell him not to harm Yitzchok in any manner.
   @כי עתה ידעתי, “for now I know, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the meaning is that up until that moment the degree of reverence for G’d that Avraham was capable of existed only as a potential; now it had been translated into reality.
   22,13. והנה איל אחד, “and lo there was a ram, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra, Avraham had not seen the ram until it had become enmeshed in the thicket with its horns. Other commentators hold that Avraham had observed the same ram previously when it was unencumbered and grazing, whereas now he saw it suddenly caught in the thicket by its horns. He assumed that this was in order for him to be able to secure it easily as a substitute for Yitzchok.
   22,16. יען אשר עשית את הדבר הזה, “because you have done this thing, etc.” G’d had already assured him long before this that He would greatly increase the number of Avraham’s biological descendants and compared them to the stars in heaven and to the sand on the beaches of the sea, etc. At this point G’d adds an additional blessing in the form of an oath that Avraham’s seed will be successful in conquering the land of their enemies.
   22,20. ויהי אחרי, “it was after;” according to <i>Rashi</i> the words הדברים האלה refer to the עקדה, to the episode of the biding of Yitzchok immediately preceding this paragraph. Although as a general rule the word אחרי, as opposed to the word אחר, refers to matters not immediately before what had been related last, in this instance it could mean either.
   @הנה ילדה מלכה גם היא, “Milkah also gave birth to several children.” According to Nachmanides the use of the introductory word הנה suggests that up until that moment Avraham had been unaware that Milkah had born any children. If Milkah had already born children while a young woman, it is difficult to imagine that Avraham would not have heard about this. After all, they did not live that far apart from one another. When Avraham had emigrated he had been 75 years old, whereas at this point he was 137 years old. Nachor obviously had also aged in the interval, and Milkah apparently had not been blessed with children until late in life. Nachor’s family had also become the beneficiary of G’d’s miraculous intervention in their lives. Milkah had shared the good fortune of her sister.
   22,21. קמואל אבי ארם. According to Nachmanides, Aram is mentioned in order to have an excuse to mention Kemuel, to show that Kemuel’s son Aram became far more distinguished than his father. [normally, the Torah lists the names of people as “son of such and such.” The reverse here indicates that the son outshone the father. Ed.]
   22,22. ובתואל ילד את רבקה, “and Bethuel sired Rivkah.” The Torah fails to mention Lavan at this stage, so that we have no clue whether he was older than Rivkah. The only reason for writing this paragraph at all was to inform us about the birth of Rivkah. 
   22,24. ופילגשו ושמה ראומה, “and his concubine who was called Re-umah.” The Torah relates all the details that had been reported to Avraham about his family at that time. It is possible that the reason why the Torah bothered to record all these details is to inform us about the genealogy of Nachor, to let us know that all of his family were potentially suitable marriage partners for Avraham’s family, and that concerning all of them Avraham had instructed Eliezer to search for a wife for Yitzchok when he told him “go only to my country and to the house of my father.”
   Parshat Chayey Sarah
   23,1. ויהיו חיי שרה מאה שנה ועשרים שנה ושבע שנים, “Sarah lived for 127 years.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason why the word is repeated twice is to draw our attention to the fact that each period so designated represented a separate part of her life. She was as free from sin at 127 as she had been at the age of 7 and as beautiful at the time of her death as she had been at the age of 20. 
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi</i> does not derive this information from the repetition of the word שנה, seeing that there is nothing exceptional in this, and the sum total of the lives of lesser individuals has been described in similar terms, Ishmael’s death being reported in a similar fashion to that of Sarah’s, for instance. Rather, we derive this interpretation quoted by <i>Rashi</i> from the superfluous sounding introduction of the words חיי שרה-followed by the words שני חיי שרה. This formulation indicates that all these years had been lived under the aegis of purity and beauty.
   There are some books in which the version in the <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> is as follows בת ק כבת עשרים ליופי ובת עשרים כבת שבע לחטא, “at 100 she was as beautiful as she had been at 20, and at 20 she was as free from sin as at 7. This is the correct version, seeing that girls are more beautiful at 20 than at 7 having learned in the intervening years how to use cosmetics to bring out their beauty.
   @ויבא אברהם, “Avraham came, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> he came from Beer Sheva. Nachmanides adds that <i>Rashi</i> did not mean to imply that at that time Avraham resided in Beer Sheva on a permanent basis, whereas Sarah had resided in Kiryat Arba, (Chevron) as it is quite inconceivable that Avraham and Sarah lived in different locations from each. Avraham heard the news of Sarah’s death while he was in Beer Sheva on “business.” Some commentators think that Avraham at the time was in the process of establishing residence in Beer Sheva, and had wanted to prepare everything before bringing Sarah there also.
   According to the <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i>, Avraham arrived on his returned from Mount Moriah to find that Sarah had died from the distress that Yitzchok had been sacrificed.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the report in the Torah the commandment to offer up Yitzchok as a burnt offering was issued when Avraham was in Beer Sheva, where he resided at the time. This was the meaning of 22,34-35 “he planted an orchard in Beer Sheva and he resided there for many years.” This is why it took him three days to get to Chevron, seeing that the land of the Philistines was not that close to Chevron. If Avraham would have had to return from Mount Moriah to Chevron it would not have taken more than a single day at most, whereas the Toah reports that it took him three days to reach Mount Moriah on his way to binding Yitzchok on the altar there. If the <i>Midrash</i> were correct in saying that Sarah died [precisely during the time Avraham performed the binding of Yitzchok, we must assume that at the time of the <i>Akeydah,</i> Avraham and Sarah had both lived in Chevron, so that the meaning of 22,4 “it was on the third day (of Avraham and Yitzchok’s journey to Mount Moriah) must be that G’d for reasons best known to Him, did not want Avraham to locate the mountain until the third day of his journey. He had been walking in the neighbourhood until G’d indicated to him which of the mountains He had had in mind. The reason that he went to Beer Sheva after the binding of Yitzchok was to give thanks for the miracle he had been allowed to experience, and while there the news of Sarah’s death reached him. It is the consensus of all the commentators that Avraham was not at home at the time that Sarah died.
   My personal opinion is that Sarah had a tent which served as her home as well as the home for her maidservants. She died within her own tent, and the words ויבא אברהם simply mean that he came to her tent upon hearing what had happened
   It is also possible that the term described Avraham’s preparation to eulogize Sarah appropriately. Whenever a person prepares himself to carry out a certain assignment, the term used to describe the preparation for such an undertaking is ויבא, He came, i.e., “he became ready.” In my opinion, it is most unlikely that the word ויבא means that Avraham came from another city, as the Torah would have mentioned from which city Avraham had to come in order to make burial arrangements for Sarah.
   @לספוד לשרה ולבכותה, “to eulogize Sarah and to weep for her.” At this point the Torah does not add the words: “and to bury her,” as he had not yet secured a suitable site where to bury her.
   23,4. גר ותושב אנכי עמכם, “I am both a stranger and a resident amongst you.” What he meant was that as far as not having been born in the land of Canaan he was a “stranger,” so that he did not have a piece of earth that would serve as his burial ground by right. If he were to bury Sarah on a piece of land belonging to someone else, that someone could raise valid objections and even dig up the soil forcing him to rebury Sarah elsewhere.
   Nachmanides understands the prevailing custom as each family owning burial plots for members of their respective families, whereas for strangers (not born locally) there was a mass grave where all such people would be interred. Avraham pointed out that as far as local custom was concerned he was indeed a stranger, though he had lived in this land for over 60 years. Still, he had not inherited a burial site from his father as he had not lived in the land of Canaan. He now requested that he be given the benefits of the status of a resident. He did not want to deprive anyone of part of their ancestral holdings, but he required to own in perpetuity, in a manner that could not be challenged, a piece of ground wherein to bury his wife. The local inhabitants were under the mistaken impression that he requested to be given such a piece of land for free, seeing Avraham had used the expression תנו לי, “give me.” This is why they responded that his standing was such that no one would refuse to give him even a site he had earmarked for his own burial in the future. Such a piece of burial ground would indeed be deeded to him in perpetuity.
   Other commentators hold that just as Avraham had used the term תנו לי, “give to me,” as a figure of speech, never intending to receive such as a present, so when the locals used the same expression they also did not mean literally 
to give him such a burial place. When they used the expression במבחר קברנו, they did not refer to the “choicest,” but to a random grave site belonging to some family without adding anything about the final status of such a piece of land. Avraham paid strict attention to the nuances in the Hittites’ offer and proceeded to offer generous payment.
   @את מערת המכפלה,”the cave Machpelah;” <i>Rashi</i> explains the word מכפלה as related to כפול, double, and that it was named so because couples were buried side by side, starting with Adam and his wife Chavah.
   Nachmanides disagrees seeing that the Torah described it as שדה עפרון אשר במכפלה, “the field of Efron situated at Machpelah.” The phrasing makes it clear that “Machpelah” is the name of a location that contained the cave. There is no need to investigate why certain locations had been named in a certain manner by the locals of the time
   In <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i>, 23,8 we are told that G’d miraculously reduced the size of Adam’s body when he died so, that the cave could accommodate his earthly remains. If so, the name Machpelah dates back to the time of Adam’s burial in that cave. Clearly, this had not been known to Efron as he would have multiplied the amount he asked for that cave from Avraham had he known that the first human being had been buried in that cave.
   @אשר בקצה שדהו, “which is at the edge of his field.” Avraham mentioned this, implying that his burying Sarah there would not in the least interfere with Efron’s activities on the field itself. Avraham would not even need to walk across the field as it was situated at the edge, allowing access from another direction. Avraham requested to purchase only the cave from Efron, leaving him in possession of the adjoining field. Efron, ingeniously, implying that it would be unseemly for a distinguished personage such as Avraham to bury his dead in a cave without having title to the adjoining land, suggested that he would deed to him both cave and field. Avraham replied that he had already set aside the money required to purchase the entire field. [He had realised that the price was likely to be sky high. Ed.]
   23,10. לכל באי שער עירו, “in the presence of all the assembled citizens of the his town.´ In connection with the dealings of Chamor and Shechem with their subjects, the Torah uses the expression לכל יוצאי שער עירו, “in the presence of all the inhabitants of his town who had come out (to the square)”. Avraham wanted to publicise his request for a burial ground even to people who were not residents of the region. The relatives of Efron, or anyone who would witness the transaction were disqualified as witnesses, whereas total strangers were fit to testify to the transaction legally.
   23,11. לעיני בני עמי, “in full view of all my people.” He called upon everyone present to be a witness to the transaction. He implied that everyone knew that he, Avraham, would not renege on an offer made by himself. In fact, as soon as he had handed over the money he took possession of both the field and the cave adjoining it. This act of taking possession was performed in full view of the people assembled be they rich, poor, tourists passing through, or local residents.
   23,13. נתתי כסף השדה קח ממני, “I have as good as given the money for the field, all that is needed is that you accept it from me.” He meant, not as Efron had indicated that “you” have given me the field, I have already given the money for this purpose; you only have to accept it, pick it up.
   23,15. ארבע מאות שקל כסף, “400 silver shekel.” According to Onkelos this was the objective value of the field.
   Our sages understood Efron as having greatly overcharged Avraham, and they describe Efron as an individual who says a lot, but falls far short in his performance of what he promised.
   According to Rabbi Meir, (Maha’ram from Rotenburg) Efron had never meant to give Avraham more than the cave for free, a promise he kept. He only charged Avraham for the field, seeing that it did not appear as proper to acquire only the cave.
   Nachmanides, following the plain text, writes that the words ארבע מאות שקל כסף,” 400 silver shekel,” refer to the price either Efron himself or his forebears had paid when they had bought the field originally.” 
   23,17. ויקם שדה עפרון, “Efron’s field ‘arose.” The Torah means that the handover of the money was not yet the conclusion of this transaction. The site had not become a recognized cemetery by Avraham handing over the purchase price, but the Torah means that after it had become his property Avraham designated the site as a burial site and then proceeded to bury his wife there. It was not admissible in those days to convert a piece of earth into a cemetery until such a change had been approved by the local community.
   23,19. ואחרי כן קבר, “after (all) this he proceeded to bury, etc.” Rabbi Meir points out that throughout the entire chapter thus far, Avraham had always spoken of burying מתי, “my (singular) dead,” whereas Efron and his townspeople had spoken about Avraham being allowed to bury מתיך, “your dead (plural).” According to this Rabbi the words ואת מתך קבור (verse 15) of Efron, (after the price had been agreed upon), also have to be understood as including other dead family members in the future.
   @ואחרי כן קבר אברהם את שרה אשתו אל מערת המכפלה...היא חברון בארץ כנען. “After this, Avraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of Machpelah. which is in Chevron in the land of Canaan.” The Torah goes to great lengths to describe the location of this field and its adjacent cave in great detail. The reason is that throughout the inhabitants of that land had been described as members of the tribe known as Hittites, a major tribe of the Canaanite nation, Whenever “the land of Canaan” is mentioned, the Torah, by implication, reminds us of the loving Providence of G’d Who gave this ancestral land to the Jewish nation. Although Avraham had only come to that land as a stranger with no claim on any part of that land, he had risen to be a highly respected member of that society, so much so that the people ceded a little of their ancestral land to have him use it as his in perpetuity.
   An additional reason for describing this location in such detail was so that we should be aware of where our patriarchs have been buried, in order to honour their memory on the occasions when we are obligated to honour the dead of our people who had led sainted lives .by visiting their graves.
   24,1. ואברהם זקן בא בימים, “Avraham had become old, advanced in years.” The Torah writes this comment at this point in order to inform us that as a result of the death of Sarah, symptoms of old age suddenly became manifest in Avraham’s whole demeanour. This is also what the sages had in mind when they said” “a wife’s death primarily affects her husband.” True, the Torah had already described both Avraham and Sarah as זקנים באים בימים, “old, advanced in years” (18,11), the matter has been repeated because as a result of Sarah having become pregnant and given birth to Yitzchok both she and her husband had become rejuvenated. Avraham now reverted to being an old man.
   It is also possible to justify the mention of Avraham having become an old man at this point in view of what follows, i.e. his empowering Eliezer to choose a wife for his son Yitzchok, seeing G’d’s promise that he would die at an old age בשלום, i.e. having seen his major hopes fulfilled, this could not occur until Yitzchok had been married and had produced an heir. We know from Psalms 128,6 וראה בנים לבניך שלום על ישראל, “and live to see children of your children, peace be unto Israel,” that until one has been blessed with grandchildren one does not consider oneself as having died בשלום. He therefore had concluded that the time was overdue to see to it that Yitzchok would marry. The Torah testifies that Avraham considered himself as blessed in all areas of life, i.e. וה' ברך את אברהם בכול, although he was too old now to undertake a strenuous journey to Aram Naharayim. The word בא in our verse is to be understood as being in the past tense as in Genesis 27,35 בא אחיך במרמה, “your brother has already come, deviously, etc.”
   @וה' ברך את אברהם בכל, “and the Lord had blessed Avraham in every way; material wealth, property, long life, and all the things which man aspires to make his life enjoyable. The only thing missing in Avraham’s life were grandchildren who would become the heirs of his prominent stature. He therefore decided to take a hand in bringing this about.
   24,2. שים נא ידך תחת ירכי, “please place your hand beneath my hip.” This was a request to swear an oath to his master by placing his hand on the site of the circumcision. Although in Jewish law, someone who needlessly touches his own or someone else’s male organ deserves to have that hand cut off, Avraham explained that in light of his having become an old man there was no chance that touching him there would result in the wasteful ejaculation of his semen.
   Ibn Ezra writes that in those days servants (slaves) used to place their hands under the hip of their master as a sign of obeisance. The master, by sitting on the servant’s hand signaled the fact that the servant had to do his bidding. The servant, by complying signaled his acknowledgment of his status.
   24,3. ואשביעך, “so that I make you swear, etc.” Avraham anticipates Eliezer’s concern that no woman in her right mind would a follow someone’s servant to a distant country on the servant’s say so that he had been empowered to select her as a wife for the son of his master. Therefore, Avraham told Eliezer that he would give him irrevocable documents, oath-like, to prove to the girl’s family that if she were to come she would indeed become the wife of Avraham’s son Yitzchok. Eliezer would have the widest possible latitude in using his good judgment.
   @אשר לא תקח אשה לבני מבנות הכנעני, “that you will not take a wife for my son from among the girls who are of Canaanite origin.” Actually, Avraham should have made Yitzchok swear an oath that he would not marry a Canaanite girl. The reason Avraham did not proceed in this fashion was that he wanted to send someone to his family in Charan or thereabouts, but he wanted to make his servant swear that he would perform the task either while he, Avraham, was still alive, or if necessary, even after his death. To this end he had to make Eliezer take an oath anyway. Seeing that he made Eliezer swear there was no longer any need to make Yitzchok swear to the same effect. He knew that Yitzchok would not violate the wishes of his father in this matter.
   Alternatively, Avraham actually appointed Eliezer to be his executor, ordering him to see that Yitzchok would get married and restricting his choices only by excluding women of Canaanite descent. To make this point quite clear to the reader, the Torah added the words המושל בכל אשר לו, describing Eliezer as having complete power of attorney concerning the affairs of Avraham.
    Some commentators believe that that at the time in question Yitzchok was simply not at hand, a view supported by the Torah when it described the chance meeting of Yitzchok and Eliezer when the former just returned from the well named by Hagar באר לחי רואי, (compare both 24,18 and 16,14) According to <i>a Midrash</i> (Yalkut), Yitzchok returned from <i>Gan Eden</i> at that time where the wounds inflicted upon him by his father when he had been lying bound on the altar had been healed.
   @ואשביעך בה' אלוקי השמים ואלוקי הארץ, “I will make you swear in the name of the Lord of heaven and earth.” The simile was apt as marriages are made in heaven before they are consummated on earth.
   24,5. אולי לא תאבה, “perhaps the woman does not want, etc.” He was referring to what might happen after he had located a girl he considered suitable as a future wife for Yitzchok.
   24,7. אלוקי השמים, “the Lord of the heavens.” In this verse Avraham did not refer to G’d as the “Lord of the earth,” according to <i>Rashi,</i> because when Avraham describes the state of mankind when he left Charan, G’d had not had a foothold on earth that could justify us in describing him as “the Lord of the earth.”
   Nachmanides says simply that the time frame described by Avraham in that verse refers to when he had resided outside the Holy Land, and we have a tradition that anyone residing outside the Holy Land is considered as if he did not have a G’d (protecting him individually)
   @אשר לקחני מבית אבי, “the One Who has taken me out of my father’s house, etc.” according to <i>Rashi,</i> the words מבית אבי refer to Charan, and the words מארץ מולדתי refer to Ur Casdim. Nachmanides considers this explanation flawed as if true, when Avraham instructed Eliezer to proceed to אל ארצי ואל מולדתי, he would in fact have instructed him to go to Ur Casdim, something Eliezer did not do. Avraham’s birthplace was Aram Naharayim and not Ur Casdim. G’d forbid that the seed of Avraham should become fused to a girl stemming from that region of the most blatant idolatry. Furthermore, why did Avraham call Charan ארצו, “his homeland,” when he did not even refer to the land of Canaan as “my homeland,” but described himself as a stranger there. He had lived in Canaan for over 60 years at that time, far longer than he and his father had stayed in Charan. Avraham’s birthplace had been Aram Naharayim, and this is where his family had resided from the earliest time. This is also how the matter is explained in <i>Pirkey de Rabbi Eliezer,</i> the most ancient of our <i>Midrashic</i> texts where we read: “and take a wife from my family.”
   @אשר לקחני מבית אבי, “Who has taken me from my father’s house;” the meaning of these words which sound as if Avraham had been removed from his father’s house against his will, is that it was G’d’s promise which had been instrumental in Avraham moving to a land where he had no family, to whose members he could marry off his son.
   @ואשר נשבע לי לאמור לזרעך אתן הארץ הזאת, “and Who has sworn to me; ‘to your descendants I will give this land, etc.” It is also written concerning the heir of Avraham :כי ביצחק יקרא לךזרע, “for your descendants will be named after Yitzchok,” so that it is quite clear that this G’d will send his angel with you to make your mission successful. Therefore I can tell you without reservation that under no circumstances are you to allow my son to move back there, seeing it was G’d Who had taken me away from there.
   24,8. ונקית משבועתי זאת, “and you will be absolved from this oath to me.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> this implied that under the circumstances just described, Eliezer would be free to take one of the daughters of Oner, Eshkol, or Mamre, Avraham’s closest allies I the land of Canaan..
   Nachmanides is appalled at the thought that Avraham would have given his consent for Yitzchok to marry a daughter of these Canaanites, the Torah having described Mamre specifically as an Emorite (Genesis 14,13). In fact, according to <i>Bereshit Rabbah,</i> the warning not to marry Canaanite girls was aimed especially at these girls of Oner Eshkol and Mamre as Avraham had specifically described himself as dwelling in their land. (quoting from Eliezer’s speech at the house of Bethuel). Therefore, Avraham’s warning was directed specifically at girls from Yitzchok’s immediate environment. Seeing that Avraham entertained covenantal relations with these three Emorites it would have seemed natural to reinforce such ties by intermarriage between these families.
   It is quite possible that Eliezer’s oath applied to all Canaanites, and that although Eliezer would be released from the part of the oath directing him to find a wife for Yitzchok from Avraham’s family, but he would not be released from the part forbidding him to select a Canaanite wife for him. This is why Avraha,m did not say (comprehensively) “you will then be released from your oath,” but משבועתי זאת, “from this (part) oath.” Eliezer had also threatened to “turn right or left,” he had not threatened to return to Canaan to look further. He could have had in mind either Ishmael, or the family of Lot.
   24,10 וכל טוב אדוניו בידו, “with all the good things of his master in his hand.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the word כל טוב refers to a document bequeathing all of Avraham’s wealth to his son Yitzchok. Although we already know (25,5) that Yitzchok had been appointed the sole heir, Avraham gave this document to Eliezer in order to encourage the family of the girl Eliezer would choose as Yitzchok’s bride to allow her to leave home and move to a distant land.
   Some commentators feel that when the servant (Eliezer) had sworn to his master, he took 10 camels and loaded them with all of Avraham’s portable treasures as he had been instructed to do just that
   Nachmanides explains the verse in line with the plain meaning of the text, i.e. that Eliezer took 10 of his master’s camels and loaded them with all the valuable chattels including exotic fruit which Avraham possessed.
   24,13. הנה אנכי נצב על עין המים, “here I am standing at the well of water, etc.” He meant that at this site he could conduct the kind of experiment which should show him if his mission would be successful as he could examine any prospective girl regarding her personal virtues, such as her attitude to unknown strangers making uncalled for requests. His reasoning was that if a girl behaves in a modest manner at home this was a reflection on her mother, whereas if she behaved modestly away from home she displayed her own virtue thereby, and not fear of being reprimanded by her mother.
   24,14. אותה הוכחת לעבדך ליצחק, “her You have designated for Your servant, for Yitzchok.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word הוכחת here as meaning “suitable.” Eliezer meant that a girl who would not only agree to draw water for him, the stranger, but would volunteer to also water his camels (although he was an able-bodied man capable of doing this by himself) had proven a fit successor for Yitzchok’s mother Sarah. 
   Nachmanides explains that the words אותה הוכחת וגו' are all still part of Eliezer’s prayer which started with the words הקרה נא, (verse 12) He would consider what appeared like a coincidence מקרה not as such but as a sign from G’d that this was indeed the girl he had been searching for. This sign would prove that G’d had shown an special kindness to his master. If the girl were to be a member of Avraham’s family, this would be an additional sign.
   If you were to object, pointing out that even non Jews are forbidden to practice any kind of witchcraft or reliance on omens, so that Eliezer’s having given the jewelry to Rivkah before she had told him whose family she belonged to, you would have to answer that he did not give her the bracelets and nose-ring until he knew whose family she belonged to. We have a rule that the Torah is not obligated to report events in their chronological order, hence the fact that here the Torah has chosen to report Eliezer as giving jewelry to Rivkah on the strength of her having helped him, even before reporting who she was, is not so surprising.
   Another approach could be the fact that actually the Torah describes Eliezer only as ויקח נזם זהב וגו', “He took a golden nose-ring, etc.,” i.e. it does not state that he had already handed over the jewelry or put it on her hands as we hear in verse 47 when the servant recounted his experiences at the well, when he describes this as something he had done after having identified her as a member of Avraham’s family. Maybe, at this stage he showed the jewelry to Rivkah and asked her about her family before giving it to her and placing the bracelets on her hands. The words על ידיה would then describe the function of the צמידים, the bracelets.
   A third possibility is that the whole question of ניחוש, reliance on magical devices, omens, subjective criteria, etc.’ to establish the truth of something, is not an issue either with Eliezer or with Yonathan, David’s friend. It is only when one bases one’s course of action exclusively on coincidences, magic formulas, etc., that one violates the Torah’s commandment not to do so. Eliezer used the criteria he had set himself to examine the character of the girl as a guideline, but not as determining the issue to the extent of abandoning his own evaluation as to her suitability. Similarly, Yonathan used the arrows to encourage the lad to search further not to determine David’s course of action a fateful course. (Samuel I chapter 20)
   Ibn Ezra wrote that many people are astounded at Eliezer’s conduct, considering it as inappropriate. He does not understand how these people’s minds work. After all, it is quite clear that if the first girl who had agreed to Eliezer’s request and beyond that had turned out not to be a member of Avraham’s family, he would look further.
    
   24,16. בתולה ואיש לא ידעה, “a virgin, with whom no man had been intimate.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the apparent duplication to mean that no man had even had abnormal sexual relations with her. Besides, if she had been sexually violated while being younger than three years of age, her hymen would have regenerated itself and left no visible marks of such penetration.
   24,17. וירץ העבד לקראתה, “the servant ran towards her.” He did so after witnessing that the waters in the well had risen in response to her approach. Our sages derive this from the wording of our verse ותמלא כדה ותעל, “she filled the jug and ascended.” There is no mention here of her having “drawn water,” ותשאב, something the Torah emphasis in verse 20 when she descended again in order to draw water for Eliezer’s camels. No miracle occurred in order to facilitate the watering of the camels. The first time the miracle occurred in order that Eliezer focus on the unusual speed with which this girl came up from the well, her jug already filled with water. 
   Although, when Eliezer recounts the events at the table of Bethuel and Lavan he did not mention the miracle which had occurred, but described Rivkah as having drawn the water normally, (verse 45) he omitted mention of the miracle as he was afraid Lavan and Bethuel would not believe him and would consider his having fabricated that event in order to enhance his chances of obtaining their consent for Rivkah to travel back with him to the land of Canaan. 
   24,23. מקום לנו ללין,”we have enough room to offer guests to stay overnight.” He meant “enough room to accommodate animals overnight?” She replied מקום לנו ללון, We have enough room to accommodate visiting strangers overnight. (including their beasts).” Although Eliezer had not enquired about fodder for his camels, she volunteered that all this was included in the invitation. He was not to think that he had to pay for it. She made it plain that her father would be offended if he offered to pay for the accommodation or the fodder.
   24,24. בת בתואל אנכי בן מלכה אשר ילדה לנחור, “I am a daughter of Bethuel, who is a son of Milkah she had born for Nachor.” She was so explicit because Nachor also had a concubine named Re-umah, and she wanted it understood that her father was not the son of a concubine. It was the custom in those days to enumerate the father’s genealogy before that of the mother. When it came to other matters, girls tended to keep company and share intimacies with their mothers, as in verse 28 where Rivkah relates her encounter with Eliezer to her mother. [If she had not suddenly worn costly jewelry Lavan might not have become aware that something unusual had happened at the well. Ed.]
   24,29. וירץ לבן, “Lavan ran;” some scholars ask what prompted Lavan to run to meet Eliezer even before he had seen the jewelry on the hands of his sister? They explain the sequence of what happened as follows: when Lavan realized that his sister took unusually long to return with her jug of water from the well, he ran to find out if anything had happened to her. He was afraid she might have been violated by some male. Instead of taking the normal route, he ran across orchards etc., in order to reach the well faster. When he did not find Rivkah at the well, seeing she was on the way home by her regular route, and had told her mother who had given her the jewelry, he returned home When Lavan on his return home not only heard the unlikely story of how Rivkah had come into possession of these trinkets, he turned back to confront the man she said had given her such precious gifts. There is no need for such a convoluted explanation. The words ויהי כראות את הנזם ואת הצמידים, “as soon as he saw the nose ring and the bracelets,” merely tell us the reason why וירץ לבן, “Lavan took off in a rush,” to meet this generous stranger. 
   24,32. ויבא האיש הביתה, “As soon as the man entered the house,” the man referred to was Eliezer.
   @ויפתח הגמלים ויתן תבן ומספוא לגמלים, “he untied the camels and provided them with fodder and straw to lie on.” Here the verse reverts to activities performed by Lavan who displayed concern for the well being of his guests and their beasts. Apparently, the camels had been tied to one another while they had been wandering. He also gave water for Eliezer and his men to wash their feet after what had been a lengthy journey.
   24,39. אלי לא תלך, “maybe she is not willing to go, etc.” the word “perhaps,” אולי, is spelled here without the customary letter ו, which prompts <i>Rashi</i> to suggest that Eliezer had a daughter whom he would have liked to be married to Yitzchok.. Since he did not dare suggest this to Avraham, the first time the word אולי appears in this connection it is spelled in the ordinary manner; only now when Avraham was not present, and the whole matter was hanging in the balance, did the Torah hint to the reader about Eliezer’s secret aspirations.
   24,40. ישלח מלאכו, “He will send His angel, etc.” Avraham had been referring to a specific angel, as in כי ילך מלאכי לפניך, “for My angel will travel in front of you” (Exodus 23,23) [where G’d speaks of an angel that will represent Him specifically during the conquest of the land of Canaan. Ed.] He did not refer to the angel described in Exodus 33,2 ושלחתי לפניך מלאך, “I will send an angel ahead of you.” [In that instance G’d’s benevolent providence had been reduced to a more indirect level, as evidenced by the absence of the suffix ו, “His” at the end of the word מלאך. Here the word מלאכו appears twice, indicating that there were two angels active to ensure the success of Eliezer’s mission. (compare 24,7) The first angel’s mission was to keep harm from befalling Eliezer and his men; the second angel was to ensure the arrival of the right girl at the right place at the right time.
   24,45. והנה רבקה יוצאת, “and lo, Rivkah was coming out, etc.” Eliezer had heard while in Lavan’s house that the girl whom he had met was called Rivkah. Alternatively, she might have told him her personal name already while at the well. 
   24,53.ויוצא העבד כלי כסף וכלי זהב ובגדים ויתן לרבקה . “The servant unpacked silver and golden trinkets and garments, and gave all of them to Rivkah.” These she was to take with them back to the home of Yitzchok. To Rivkah’s brother and mother he only gave exotic fruit and other condiments. If he had handed the silver and golden trinkets to her family, they surely would have remained in their possession.
   24,55. ויאמר אחיה תשב הנערה, “her brother said: let the girl stay here (for a while).” According to the plain meaning of the text, Rivkah’s father Bethuel was the one who had said: הנה רבקה לפניך קח ולך, “here is Rivkah at your command, take her and go.” When they heard this, Lavan and his mother said that she should not leave for a while, a year or at least ten months.
   Ibn Ezra claims that the ones who spoke were the ones who had received the gifts from Eliezer, whereas the father kept silent on the subject. It is possible that Lavan was a more prominent and distinguished person than his father, and this accounts for his speaking up first. This would be supported by the Torah writing ויען לבן ובתואל, instead of ויען בתואל ולבן.
   24,57. ויאמרו: נקרא לנערה, “They said: ‘let us call the girl herself and ask her.” This was a challenge to Eliezer who had represented her as already having agreed to come with him. Hence they asked her openly: “do you really want to go with this man?”
   Alternately, the question posed to Rivkah meant: “do you prefer to travel with this man, or would you prefer that one of us comes with you to the land of Canaan?” Her answer when she said; “I will go,” meant that she considered the man as trustworthy and that it would be unfair to delay him on account of the expensive jewelry she had already accepted from him.”
   24,61. ויקח העבד את רבקה וילך, “The servant took Rivkah and he went.” The Torah here describes the servant’s desire to quickly complete his mission, after all the women had first accompanied Rivkah to the outskirts of the town, now Eliezer personally took over the task of watching over her to protect her against any possible mishap.
   Alternatively, seeing that the entire entourage of Rivkah and her family and friends had delayed the orderly departure as they had difficulty in parting from her, Eliezer now told the locals to turn back and let him get on with his task; i.e. ויקח, he now took matters in hand, etc.
   Ibn Ezra opines that the meaning of the apparently repeated mention of Eliezer taking Rivkah is that he personally walked along side her until they eventually met Yitzchok, and that he did not mind the inconvenience of walking (instead of riding on a camel).
   24,62. ויצחק בא מבוא לחי רואי, “Yitzchok was just returning from having visited the well named E-lohay ro-I by the angel who had predicted Ishmael’s birth to Hagar.” According to Ibn Ezra מבוא is the name of a place which was also known as באר לחי רואי.
   Nachmanides explains that Yitzchok only now returned from the place known as באר לחי רואי. If the Torah had not added the word מבוא but had written בא מבאר לחי רואי, we would have thought that this was where Yitzchok resided permanently. By adding the word מבוא it becomes clear that Yitzchok at this point was on the way home to the city where he resided permanently. His stay at באר לחי רואי had been strictly temporary.
   It is possible that he would go there for the purpose of offering up prayers seeing that it had been at that location that he had seen the angel (when he lay bound) but that he had a permanent residence far more to the south of Moriah He had reached another town situated on the route to his home town, and there he went out towards evening to have a chat with a friend who lived there. While on route, he encountered Eliezer and Rivkah. And they walked all together to his home town.
   24,63. לשוח בשדה, “to pray in the field.” The expression שיח means “prayer.” Although the sages have said that it is bad manners for someone to pray in the outdoors, this case was special seeing the location was Mount Moriah, as our sages are on record that Yitzchok referred to G’d as שדה, “field.” [the field being the source of all nutrition for man and beast on earth. Ed.] 
   Alternately, what the sages disapproved of was prayer in the בקעה an open area frequented by travelers who would be a distraction to the person concentrating on his prayer. A שדה, an open field not frequented by people would not be a source of distraction, and offering one’s prayers there would be approved by the sages. 
   24,64. ותרא את יצחק ותפול מעל הגמל, “when she saw Yitzchok she fell from the camel.” <i>Rashi, in common with Onkelos,</i> understands this not as a “fall,” but that Rivkah slid down to the ground from her saddle in order to greet her husband to be not from a position above him, but by observing good manners. The expression השמיטה used by <i>Rashi</i> means that she did not actually descend to the ground prostrating herself, but that she dutifully inclined her head in greeting. One of the parallel uses of the word quoted by <i>Rashi</i> is ויט שמים, “He inclined the heavens,” also translated by Onkelos with the same expression אתרכינת that he uses for the word ותפול in our verse here.
   Nachmanides disagrees with this approach by <i>Rashi</i> to the word הרכין used by Onkelos to describe what Rivkah did. He thinks, that just as elsewhere, that word merely means that she adjusted her posture so as to be able to face Yitzchok in a manner she deemed appropriate. In his view the word השמיטה would mean falling or sliding all the way to the ground. Rivkah avoided facing Yitzchok directly and turned somewhat sideways.
   24,66. ותהי לו לאשה ויאהביה, “she became his wife and he loved her.” Onkelos supplies the reason why the Torah felt the need to write this line saying that when Yitzchok observed that Rivkah was a righteous woman like his mother Sarah he fell in love with her.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason that the Torah mentions Yitzchok’s loving Rivkah in one and the same breath as his finally comforting himself over the loss of his mother, was because Rivkah represented a replacement of all the virtues Sarah had possessed.
   25,1. ושמה קטורה, “whose name was Keturah.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that Keturah was identical with Hagar, who appears in a new guise. Her new name reflected her new and improved attitudes, comparable to the incense offered on the altar, the most beloved of Israel’s sacrificial offerings. In order to reconcile this comment with what <i>Rashi</i> had written on Genesis 21,14 where Hagar is described as ותלך ותתע, as returning to the idolatrous practices she had absorbed in her home as a child, we would have to postulate that in the interval she had become a penitent. Although she was of Egyptian origin [and therefore no better than a Canaanite from the point of view of Avraham’s criteria for intermarriage Ed.] she was not only of perfectly good character, but seeing that the first time Avraham had married he had done so with Divine approval, she was now also permissible to him as a wife.
   I have seen a comment in <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 61,4 that even at this stage Avraham married her at G’d’s instructions This is why the Torah wrote ויוסף אברהם ויקח, “he again married, etc.” The word ויוסף is to tell us that just as it had been with G’d’s approval that he had married Hagar the first time, he still enjoyed G’d’s approval when he took her back. The <i>Midrash</i> describes an argument between two scholars of the Talmud who debated this subject.
    
   25,2. ותלד לו את זמרן,”she bore Zimron for him.” Concerning Isaiah 29,22 אשר פדה אברהם, “who redeemed Avraham,” which according to our sages means that Avraham was freed from the burden of raising children, and which seems incompatible with the fact that he had to raise 6 children by Keturah, apart from the fact that most fathers enjoy having many children to raise, we must assume that what the author of that comment had in mind was that Avraham dd not have to experience the problems his grandson Yaakov faced when his son Joseph went missing, when his daughter Dinah was raped, and when various of his sons at different times behaved in a manner unacceptable to him.
   25,3. אשורים ולטושים ולאומים. According to <i>Rashi</i> these are all names of the eventual nations they developed into. Personally, I fail to reconcile what Onkelos says on these name with the wording of the text.
   Nachmanides writes that he understands Onkelos as saying that אשורים are camps and caravans which move from city to city, similar tote caravans of Ishmaelite traders described in the story of the sale of Joseph. The word is related to Job 23,11 באשורו אחזה רגלי, “I have followed in his tracks.” The word לטושים he understands as referring to Bedouins, dwellers in tents, instead of people housed in permanent structures. These are apt to be abandoned in time of need. The letter ל and נ are often used interchangeably as in נשכה instead of לשכה.”office.” (Nechemyah 13,7) Onkelos translates לאומים as נגון, i.e. a word meaning “islands.” (island dwellers) Probably Onkelos was alerted to the change in the text from יקשן ילד, “Yakshon sired,” to בני דן היו instead of בני דן ילדו, to see in the three wordsאשורים, ולטושים, and ולאומים something other than additional offspring. We would have expected a formulation parallel to Genesis 10,13 ומצרים ילד.
   25,5. ויתן אברהם את כל אשר לו ליצחק, “Avraham deeded all that was his to Yitzchok. Some people question this procedure, basing themselves on <i>Ketuvot</i> 53 where the Talmud rules that a father must not re-allocate part of his estate from a son who is morally unfit to one who has developed morally and ethically to his liking, seeing he does not know how the grandson from either son will turn out. It is stated there that a convert the son of Hagar, i.e. a slave woman, cannot inherit at any rate, as whatever is his belongs to his master. Whereas this is a good answer concerning the status of Yishmael, it leaves unanswered the question how Avraham could disinherit the sons of Keturah. I believe that there is no difficulty at all, seeing the Torah had told Avraham specifically that his seed will only be known through Yitzchok, i.e. that Yitzchok will be his only heir. It does not mean that the other sons were intrinsically unfit because of their character or some other impediment,
   According to <i>Rashi,</i> quoting <i>Sanhedrin 91,</i> Avraham handed to these sons שם טומאה, i.e. seeing they referred to their idols by the sacred name of the Creator, he taught them to refer to these idols by some other name.
   It is also possible that the meaning of this strange sounding comment by the Talmud is that he informed them of a name for G’d which it is permissible to use even in their state of ritual impurity. All this, because he observed that these sons of Keturah were practicing different forms of idolatry and worshipping those idols. The reason that these sons of Avraham also practiced this form of idolatry was their being so anxious to obtain information about their impending fate, something which the religion of their time promised to have for those who practiced their cults. By informing them of this name for the true G’d, he told them that by invoking it they would become privy to knowledge of the future. [According to the Maharal from Prague the reason Avraham taught his sons the “names” of these idolatries, i.e. the essence of their teachings, was to enable them to counter the damaging influence the power of these demons exercised upon them. According to the author of the כתב והקבלה, Rabbi Mecklenburg, the מתנות, “gifts” Avraham gave to his sons was the know how to protect themselves against the insidious influence of the various religious cults prevalent in their neighborhood.. Ed.]
   25,6. ולבני הפילגשים, “and to the sons of the concubines, etc” No doubt Hagar’s status in the household of Avraham had been that of a concubine, whereas Keturah was his wife in the full sense of that term. If she had been a servant maid in his household and he had raised her to the status of concubine the Torah would not have described this as ויקח אשה ושמה קטורה, “He married a woman named Keturah.” If the Torah here describes Keturah as a concubine, this was only since G’d had decreed that Yitzchok would be Avraham’s sole heir, so that sons from any other woman would have to content themselves with gifts handed to them during their father’s lifetime. Avraham had taken these women from the Caaanite women, for if Keturah had been an Egyptian or Philistine by birth the Torah could not have said that Avraham dispatched these sons somewhere to the Far East, but he would have sent them back to Egypt or the land of the Philistines when their mother had come. The prohibition of marrying Canaanite women applied only to Avraham’s heirs, not to children who would not inherit his estate, and thus represent his outlook on life.
    25,8. זקן ושבע ימים, “in a ripe old age.” He had seen all his aspirations fulfilled. The Torah here describes an attitude to life by the pious who do not demand more than has been granted to them by G’d’s grace without their pleading for this.
   25,11. וישב יצחק עם באר לחי רואי, “Yitzchok settled near the well which had been named א-לוהי רואי (by the angel who had foretold Ishmael’s birth and rise to greatness. Perhaps the cumbersome description of Yitzchok’s home is due to the fact that it was not an urban location.
   25,17. ואלה שני חיי ישמעאל, “these are the years that Ishmael lived, etc.” According to Nachmanides our sages offer a variety of reasons why the Torah bothered to go into such detail about the years of Ishmael, as well as his offspring.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah details much about the lives of the righteous, their offspring, etc.; whereas it is sparse with information about the wicked, so that he have no data about how old Esau was when he died, although it is clear that he survived his twin Yaakov. The story of the patriarchs is considered closed with the death of Yaakov, so that no further reference is made to his brother.
   @ויגוע, “he died.” Our sages have said that the formula combining ויגוע ויאסף is used only in connection with the righteous. When the term ויגוע is used without the word ויאסף אל עמיו following, this is an indication that the person concerned did not die as a righteous person.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why the word גויעה means “death” is that it describes death not preceded b terminal sickness. When the word is accompanied further by the word וימת or ויאסף, it means that the individual thus described was a righteous person and that he died suddenly. When death is described as גויעה alone, it means the person concerned was a wicked person. Examples are the death of the people during the generation of the flood, and the death of the Jews in the desert as a result of the sin with the spies.
   @ויאסף אל עמיו, “he was gathered in to his people.” Ibn Ezra writes that (according to some) this is a description of the honour being paid to the soul of the deceased. While the relatives are busy with interring the physical remains of the deceased, his soul meanwhile rises to the celestial regions, this being the first time that body and soul are each going their separate ways. Others claim that there is no ulterior meaning to this formulation but that it described the deceased now starting the journey to join his forebears, having already followed in their footsteps while still here on earth. This is what G’d promised Avraham when He said to him: “ואתה תבוא אל אבותיך בשלום, “but you will join your fathers in peace.”(prior to the commencement of the 400 years of being strangers or enslaved, Genesis 15,15)
   Parshat Toldot
   25,19. ואלה תולדות יצחק בן אברהם, אברהם הוליד את יצחק. “These are the generations of Yitzchok the son of Avraham, Avraham sired Yitzchok.” <i>Rashi</i> explained that the new element the Torah informs us of here, is that Yitzchok’s facial features were almost identical to that of his father Avraham. This was important because it made it impossible for people to claim that Sarah had been impregnated by Avimelech while being kept a prisoner there.
   Others believe that the reason that the Torah here repeated information we have long been familiar with, is to tell us that Avraham did not only produce Yitzchok physically, but he raised him in his image so that he represented a true continuation of Avraham’s teachings and their impact on his surroundings. This is why people would refer to him primarily as בן אברהם, although he had been named יצחק.
   Ibn Ezra explains that that the very word הוליד, does not only mean to provide the semen for such a child, but to raise it, educate it, etc. This was also what the Torah had in mind in Genesis 50,23 when the children of Machir, son of Menashe, are described as יולדו על ברכי יוסף, normally translated as “were born on the knees of Joseph.” Surely, what the Torah meant was that Joseph, their grandfather, was still able to become an influence in shaping these children’s character.
   Nachmanides writes that it is appropriate when speaking of someone’s descendants, to first list his own genealogy. <i>Yichuss</i>, never starts in a vacuum, except with the first man, of course. It is the Torah’s custom, when dealing with people who are of the elite, to list their founding father. The Torah was compelled to do this here in light of having written in 25,12 ואלה תולדות ישמעאל בן אברהם אשר ילדה לו הגר, “these are the generations of Ishmael, son of Avraham, whom Hagar had born for him.” If the Torah had only written:ואלה תולדות יצחק בן אברהם, without adding אברהם הוליד את יצחק, we would have equated Yitzchok to Ishmael. As it is, the Torah made plain that we would understand that the only תולדה of Avraham which counts is Yitzchok, and no other biological offspring of Avraham. This is again to remind us that G’d had told Avraham כי ביצחק יקרא לך זרע, “you will forever be exclusively identified with Yitzchok as your true seed.”
   25.20 בקחתו את רבקה, “when he married Rivkah, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that Rivkah was only three years old when she became married to Yitzchok. This is very difficult to accept in view of the fact that the Torah had referred to her repeatedly as נערה, a term used for girls at least 12 years old. This in turn would raise the question why Yitzchok did not divorce Rivkah after she had not born a child after 10 years of marriage, and according to the Talmud <i>Ketuvot</i> 64, in that event a husband should divorce his wife. If so why did Yitzchok even wait for 20 years before he prayed for Rivkah to have children? The Talmud answers the question by explaining that Yitzchok’s situation was unusual in that Rivkah had been biologically unable to have children during the first ten years of her marriage as she had been too young to bear a healthy child.
   In the <i>Sifri,</i> a sage is quoted giving Rivkah’s age at her marriage as 14 years. Such divergences of opinion between different sages quoted in a <i>Midrash</i> are not unusual, although in this instance that sage has to confront the question why it took Yitzchok 20 years before he prayed for children.
   @אחות לבן הארמי, “sister of Lavan from Aram.” It is customary for the Torah to provide the name of the elder brother of a girl as part of her genealogy.
   25,21. ויעתר לו, “G’d responded to his prayer.” The emphasis on the word לו is meant to tell us that G’d did not respond to her prayer. The reason is that we have a principle that a prisoner is unable to free himself (without external help) [In this instance it was Rivkah who could not have children, hence she is comparable to someone who is handicapped, like a prisoner in a cell. Compare <i>Sifssey Chachamim</i> on Genesis 21,17. Ed.] 
   25,22. ויתרוצצו, “They quarreled.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the wrangle inside Rivkah’s womb concerned two worlds. According to the plain meaning of the text, seeing that Esau developed a lot of body hair whereas Yaakov was smooth skinned, Esau’s hair kept rubbing Yaakov’s skin, resulting in violent movement inside her womb, Yaakov trying to escape being scratched.
   @ותאמר: אם כן וגו', “she said: ”if so, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> she said that “if my desire to found a nation of twelve tribes involves so much pain as part of the pregnancies, why did I ever aspire to become the founding mother of such a nation?” According to a <i>Midrash,</i> Rivkah’s complaint of למה זה אנכי was the reason that it was not she who became the founding mother of the twelve tribes. In practice, it was Esau who inadvertently damaged Rivkah’s uterus to the extent that she could not again become pregnant.
   Other commentators interpret Rivkah’s complaint not as directed against future pregnancies, but as her immediate fear of her embryos seeing the light of the world too soon due to their conduct within her womb. She was afraid of giving birth to premature babies, babies that would die at birth or shortly thereafter. Her complaint was that if she had to undergo all these pains only in order to abort at the end, what was the point in her becoming pregnant in the first place? Why would she have been singled out for such a difficult pregnancy?
   Yet other scholars see Rivkah’s question as not addressed to G’d, but to other women who had born children successfully. After these women told her that they had not experienced any of the symptoms Rivkah had been plagued by during her pregnancy, she then addressed the question of why she had been singled out to G’d, (using the head of the academy of Shem and Ever as her intermediary)
   Nachmanides understands Rivkah’s question as wanting to know if her children were already quarrelling before they were born, her own life would not be worth living and she would be better off dead.
   @ותלך לדרוש את ה', “she went in order to enquire from G’d.” <i>Rashi</i> understands her question as pertaining to the future of these children. Perhaps the reason she preferred to address her enquiry to the head of the Academy of Shem instead of to her father-in-law Avraham, who was still alive at the time, was that she did not want to let him know that she was so beset by mental and physical anguish.
   Nachmanides understands the words ותלך לדרוש את ה', to mean that Rivkah appealed directly to G’d in prayer seeing that she felt so much anguish.
   25,23. שני גויים בבטמנך, “there are two nations within your womb.” G’d informed her not to worry, that her condition was due to the fact that she would give birth to twins. All the commotion going on within her was due to that fact; women who are pregnant with twins usually experience these violent upheavals within their wombs.
   Alternately, it is possible that G’d informed her that the convulsions she had experienced foreshadowed that these twins would not live harmoniously together, especially at the time preceding the redemption of mankind. In the meantime, these convulsions would cease forthwith. 
   @ורב יעבוד צעיר, “and the senior one would serve the junior one.” This can be interpreted in various directions. Either, literally, the older one will serve the younger one, or as in Ezekiel 26,2 אמלאה החרבה, where the prophet describes the city Tzor (Tyre) as discontent as long as Jerusalem has not been destroyed. The philosophies of Esau and Yaakov are mutually exclusive, and as long as both are alive and vibrant the other can not be content.
   Another approach to the word רב sees in it a reference to “abundance, surfeit,” as in ’ורב מקולות וגו, “enough, too much of the thunder, etc.” (Exodus 9,28) Translated into our verse here, the meaning of the prophecy would be that the many would serve the few. (Yaakov’s descendants being “the few.”)
   25,26. וידו אוחזת בעקב עשו, “and his hand was holding on to the heel of Esau.” He tried to keep Esau from becoming the firstborn. Possibly, Yaakov only wanted to emerge from his mother’s womb simultaneously with his brother. He did not want his mother to experience separate birth pangs on his account.
   @ויקרא שמו יעקב, “his father called him ‘Yaakov.’” Seeing that Yitzchok’s name is not mentioned here as such, <i>Rashi</i> considers G’d Himself as the subject of the word ויקרא. His view has been confirmed by the <i>Midrash.</i> When the Jerusalem Talmud states that whereas both Yaakov and Avraham whose names had been given by their respective fathers, underwent changes of name, Yitzchok who had been named by G’d in the first place, never underwent such a change of name, this may not be a contradiction to the <i>Midrash,</i> but may mean that the reason Yitzchok’s name was never changed was that he was so named before Sarah had even conceived him. Seeing that Yaakov was not named by G’d until after he had been born, his name could be subject to change, [or in his case to an addition, seeing that the name Yaakov was never abolished. Ed.]
   25,27. ויגדלו הנערים, “the lads grew up, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> it was not evident until they reached the age of 13 that their actions were noticeably different, one from the other. This was so in spite of the prediction that they would be distinctly different from one another already from birth, i.e.ממעיך יפרדו. To the outsider it was impossible to tell which of the two was the righteous son and which was the sinner. <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary is difficult in that it describes the age of 13 as the one at which it became plain that Esau was the son disloyal to his father’s teachings, as according to our <i>Midrashim</i> the reason that Avraham died at 175 instead of living to the age of 180, was to spare him the anguish of seeing one of his grandchildren rejecting his teachings. If Esau became delinquent at 13, Avraham would only have been 178 years old at that time. There is a <i>Midrash</i> according to which Yitzchok spent 2 years in <i>Gan Eden</i> immediately after the <i>Akeydah,</i> years which are not included when we combine the various periods of his life. According to such a count, Avraham would have been 162 years old at the birth of Yaakov and Esau, and when these boys reached the age of 13, Avraham would have been 175 years old, so that he would have died before becoming aware of Esau, his grandson, rejecting his spiritual heritage
   If we consider that on occasion, a single day in a year can be equivalent to an entire year, -such as when a King ascends the throne on the last day of the month of Adar, so that the following day is considered as part of the second year of his reign, since in Jewish law the calendar year for kings commences on the first day of <i>Nissan</i>, then by allowing for such an occurrence at the beginning of Yitzchok’s life, and something similar at the beginning of Avraham’s life, we would not have to resort to the <i>Midrash</i> which describes Yitzchok as spending 2 years in <i>Gan Eden</i> in a state of suspended animation from the point of view of calendar calculations.- Even this calculation involves contradictions, seeing that G’d promised the righteous את מספר ימיך אמלא, “I will make the days of your life’s year full,” i. e. no year of the life of a person such as Yitzchok or Avraham could possibly contain only a single day. 
   25,28. כי ציד בפיו, “for he would provide venison to eat.” Onkelos explains that Yitzchok would eat from the proceeds of Esau’s hunting expeditions. Accordingly, our verse is slightly abbreviated and should have read: כי יתן ציד בפיו, “for he would feed him venison.” Alternately, the expression בפיו refers to Yitzchok’s mouth, and informs us that Yitzchok was in the habit of dining on venison. He loved Esau, seeing Esau was an expert in providing choice venison.
   Nachmanides holds that the statement is a euphemism describing Esau as deceiving his father into thinking he was loyal to his teachings by flattering him. The use of euphemisms by the Torah is nothing unusual.
   25,29. ויבא עשו מן השדה והוא עיף, “Esau came home from the field, very tired;” he was so tired that he was overcome by a dizzy spell, fainting, so that he concluded that he was about to die soon. He meant that unless he would get something to eat immediately, his condition would deteriorate and result in his death. This being so, what good would the birthright be to him?
   One of the allegorical explanations of the <i>Midrash</i> claims that his condition was due to his having lost his bearings in the field and the forest, areas that do not abound with markers showing the way; instead of finding deer to kill, he exhausted himself finding the way home. When he found his brother Yaakov tending his father’s flocks in the field, he remarked that he would die soon as there was no one who had the power to restore him except his saintly father. [in the <i>ספר הישר,</i> Esau’s exhaustion is even described as fatigue after having successfully battled two of Nimrod’s soldiers, and his fearing for his life as a result. Ed.] 
   The expression הלעיטני נא, “spoon-feed me,” indicates that this commentary may be close to the truth, as otherwise Esau would have said something like “תן לי,” “give to me!” He was so weak that he could not even lift his hand to his mouth.
   25,30. מן האדום האדום הזה, “from this reddish looking dish.” Some commentators understand the second word אדום as a reference to Esau himself who was known as אדום, “the red one.” It was a play on words, the “red one” saying that the reddish looking dish is fit for the reddish looking man, meaning himself.
   25,31. מכרה כיום, “sell me as of this day!” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word כיום as describing the transaction about to take place to be as clear and beyond misunderstanding as daylight, which illuminates everything clearly. The plain meaning of the word is: “immediately,” as, for instance in Samuel I 2,16 קטר יקטירון כיום את החלה, “let me first burn the fat presently, etc.”
   Onkelos, taking into account that the sale under discussion will become effective only after Yitzchok’s death, understands the word כיום to mean “as and when, with retroactive closing date as of today.”
   Some commentators understand Yaakov as saying that the sale, trade, will be effective only today when you are close to death. It is appropriate that you receive some of this dish now for once you have died the entire inheritance of our father will automatically come to me. Esau admitted that Yaakov was right and proceeded to gulp down the red dish.
   The major problem with the whole transaction is that a birthright has never been understood as something that can be acquired or disposed of by selling and buying. What kind of procedure represents the transfer of the object being sold to the buyer, i.e. what מעשה קנין is there possible? If the object of the sale was the double share of the father’s inheritance decreed by the Torah for the firstborn, we have learned that if someone says “I sell you what I will inherit from my father,” that such a declaration is legally quite meaningless. (<i>Baba Metzia 16)</i> Some resolve this problem by saying that seeing Yaakov should by rights have been the firstborn as he was formed out of Yitzchok’s first drop of semen, and that Esau was born first only because he pushed himself ahead at the time of the delivery, he did not even need to make a קנין, act of acquisition, for something which rightfully was his in the first place. We do not think that this argument is tenable, as the Torah specifically calls the “first born” the one that emerges first from the mother’s womb. (Exodus 13,2)
   Others hold that Yaakov was convinced that his father was going to deed him all his belongings during his lifetime, just as Avraham had deeded all his belongings to Yitzchok during his lifetime. He would do so in order to forestall any legal protest by Esau when the time came.
   Still other Rabbis claim that the word בכורתך did not refer to inherited wealth at all, but to the dignity, the standing among his peers that the senior brother usually commands. Yaakov wanted to trade the dish of lentils he was about to give to Esau for that intangible symbol of dignity.
   Still other sages say that all Yaakov was about to buy from Esau was anything that he might inherit from his father on this very day, (if his father were to die on that day). If so, such a sale would be legally valid. Yaakov used the words מכרה כיום to clarify that legal point. When hearing this, Esau said: ”what good is the birthright to me that you want to buy from me only what might accrue to me this day, seeing that I am not going to outlive my father anyway, you might as will buy my future share in any birthright also.” This is why the Torah testifies in a line later on that Esau displayed his disdain for the birthright. (verse 34) In any event, seeing that the part of the transaction described by Yaakov with the words מכרה כיום was legally valid, any codicil, such as proposed by Esau, would be valid also. Esau seized upon that point later on when he accused Yaakov of ויעקבני זה פעמים (27,36) referring to the fact that Yaakov had tricked him into this codicil, something that would not have had legal standing but for his having first agreed to the sale of limited duration, i.e. מכרה כיום.
    
   My late father, the רא'ש of blessed memory, seized on this detail to rule that when someone sells something to one’s neighbour which is not subject to regular methods of acquisition, such as “what I am going to inherit from my father,” or “a loan which I have outstanding for repayment with X and secured only by an oral promise to repay,” both objects not subject to sale in the accepted sense of the word, and the seller adds an oath to his verbal sale, such a sale has become valid, and the court can enforce the terms of the sale from the seller due to the seller having obligated himself by oath. This is all derived from the pains Yaakov took to legalise the sale for the day on which it was concluded by adding the words “swear it to me,“ to Esau.
   25.34. ויעקב נתן לעשו, “meanwhile Yaakov had already given to Esau, etc.” Some commentators believe that the food Yaakov had given to Esau had not been in exchange for the birthright, but had been an ordinary human gesture, something everybody does when faced with an extremely hungry person whom he is able to help. The type and amount of payment Yaakov gave Esau in exchange for the birthright has not been recorded in the Torah.
   @ויבז עשו את הבכורה, “Esau displayed disdain for the birthright.” According to Ibn Ezra, Esau’s disdain for the birthright was rooted in the fact that his father Yitzchok, though initially heir to an immense fortune, had become poor, so that he even depended on his food supply on his son Esau who supplied his meat diet. If bread had been plentiful in Yitzchok’s home at that time, Esau would not have sold his birthright for a mere dish of lentils. Even assuming that Yitzchok had been eating delicacies on a daily basis, how are we to account for the fact that Rivkah sent her son Yaakov empty-handed to find a match in the house of Lavan who was known to cherish money above all else? Yaakov even had to pray to G’d that He should provide him with bread to eat and clothes to wear! (Genesis 28,20)
   Nachmanides accuses Ibn Ezra of misunderstanding or misrepresenting the state of affairs in Yitzchok’s household. The Torah testifies that Yitzchok had inherited great wealth. If he had been poor, why would Avimelech have been afraid of the influence which his great wealth bestowed on Yitzchok so that he described him as being more powerful than he, the king of the Philistines? (26,26) It is unreasonable to suppose that in the short interval between Avraham’s death (or even his “retirement,”) and the sale of the birthright he had lost all his wealth. Moreover, the Torah testifies after the death of Avraham that G’d blessed Yitzchok (seeing that Avraham had neglected to do this, so as not to offend Ishmael) If Yitzchok had become a pauper, how would G’d’s blessing have manifested itself as such? The fact that Rivkah did not send a dowry with Yitzchok was not because they were poor, but because she was afraid that this would give Esau additional reason to ambush him and kill him. As to the venison Esau supplied for his father, his father happened to be fond of venison, and he used this supply of venison brought to him by his son Esau in order to strengthen the mutual bond of love between father and firstborn son. [Yitzchok was keenly aware that additional external prompts were needed to firm that relationship. Ed.] The Torah sees the example of Esau’s selling the birthright for a dish of lentils as an illustration of his general lack of moral stature.
   26,1. מלבד הרעב הראשון, “in addition to the first famine, etc.” Nachmanides, basing himself on the word הראשון, “the first ever,” speculates that the famine in Avraham’s time may have been the first famine on record in antiquity. If not, why was there a need to once more refer to a famine, which, at this time, does not interest the reader at all?
   It is possible that the reason that the Torah does refer to the previous famine is that people in Yitzchok’s generation still recalled the famine which had occurred some 70-80 years earlier, and they recalled that Avraham had moved to Egypt at the time on account of that famine. They also remembered that Avraham had become a very wealthy man during his stay in Egypt, and had even retained all that newly acquired wealth despite his confrontation with the Pharaoh of Egypt. It was natural then to expect that like father like son, Yitzchok too, would move to Egypt to await the end of the famine there. This is why G’d told him not to leave the Holy Land, or, more specifically, not to move to Egypt. G’d added that He would extend His blessing to him. He renewed the oath He had sworn to Avraham at the time.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> explains the reason why Yitzchok was not to descend to Egypt being the fact that someone who had been a burnt offering on the altar on the Holy Mount Moriah is not to demean himself by leaving the Holy Land.
   Other commentators feel that G’d stopped Yitzchok from traveling to Egypt because in the Heavenly Court the decree that the Jewish people would be enslaved in Egypt had already been promulgated, so that if he had traveled there he could not have left until the end of that period of enslavement.
   Nachmanides writes that G’d’s directive to Yitzchok was also a סימן, a historical preview of what the Jewish people would experience when the time came, i.e. that any move to Egypt was a move to eventual exile, and that Yitzchok’s sojourn in the part of the Holy Land occupied by the Philistines under Avimelech was not considered as part of that exile. The very fact that our patriarchs resided in that land is proof that it is ancestral land and will forever remain part of the Holy Land promised to Avraham by G’d. The fact remains that in spite of Avimelech having been a partner of Avraham in a non-aggression pact extending for 3 generations, this did not prevent him or his son from expelling Yitzchok. Eventually,.Avimelech personally, did not harm Yitzchok seeing he had sworn an oath of friendship to Avraham; His subjects, however, did what they could to make life miserable for Yitzchok. The Jewish exile experience in Babylonia is compared to Yitzchok’s experience in the land of the Philistines, welcome turning into hatred and even the destruction of our Temple by the Babylonians. This was followed by another change of heart, this time by the Persians. [Rabbi Chavell traces the Ramban’s historical analysis by quoting both from the Book of Ezra and the Book of Daniel. Ed.]
    
   At any rate, the Philistines remembered that G’d had protected Avraham against outrages done by both the Egyptians and the previous Avimelch, so that they were careful not to harass him too much.
   26,2. שכון בארץ אשר אומר אליך, “reside in the land which I will tell you about.” Nachmanides explains that the negative “do not go down to Egypt,” was not followed immediately by a directive to settle in Gerar, but that the words “reside in the land which I will tell you,” were a sort of hint that in due course G’d would give more specific instructions. In this respect Yitzchok’s experience paralleled that of his father, who also traveled through different parts of the Holy Land in order to have already established a presence there when the time would come for G’d’s promise to give the entire land to his descendants to be fulfilled. It goes without saying that Yitzchok complied with G’d’s directive until G’d eventually told him to settle in Gerar.
   26,3. והקימותי את השבועה אשר נשבעתי לאברהם אביך, “so that I can fulfill the oath I have sworn to your father Avraham.” There is, of course, no need for G’d to give an assurance that He will not renege on His oath. Besides, Avraham did not have any other seed which would qualify for the promise of G’d to give the land to Yitzchok’s offspring to create doubt to whom G’d would give the land. After all, only he was in a covenantal relationship with G’d. When it came to G’d repeating His promise to Yaakov, in due course, this was necessary in order to make clear that Esau, though included in the promise: “your seed will be known through Yitzchok” did not automatically exclude Esau. The meaning of והקימותי את השבועה וגו' therefore is that G’d swears a separate oath to Yitzchok concerning who He will give the land of Israel to. When we read in Exodus 33,1 Numbers 32 11, and Deuteronomy 34,4 the formulaאשר נשבעתי לאברהם, ליצחק, וליעקב, we would be hard pressed to find where exactly G’d swore such an oath to Yitzchok, if not in our verse here. 
   It is also possible that the reason why Yitzchok was added to be a beneficiary of G’d’s oath was in order to confer upon him also the blessing which G’d had bestowed at the beginning of chapter 12, i.e. that just as Avraham was to be a blessing for the nations, so his son Yitzchok’s very existence would do the same for the nations of the earth. G’d had promised that the nations of the earth would be blessed through Avraham’s seed; now the same blessing was in effect for the seed of Yitzchok.. Accordingly, the meaning of the entire verse would be: “I will keep My oath to Avraham your father through you. The same promise was repeated in due course to Yaakov when the time was ripe for that.
   26,5. עקב אשר שמע אברהם בקולי וישמר משמרתי, “as a result of Avraham heeding My instructions and observing My directives.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word בקולי as referring to such instructions as offering his son as a sacrifice, whereas the word משמרתי is supposed to refer to rules governing incest with blood relations of the second tier of relatives, and such rules as adding a few minutes to the Sabbath before it actually begins, and similar Rabbinic prohibitions ensuring the sanctity of the Sabbath will not be violated inadvertently, i.e. שבות.
   Nachmanides queries this, writing that if it were correct, then, if indeed Avraham kept not only the 613 commandments but also Rabbinic regulations, how could Yaakov have been allowed to marry two sisters while both were alive? How could he have erected a מצבה, seeing that the Torah prohibits the erecting of such monuments? How could Amram have married his aunt Yocheved the daughter of Levi? If the fathers and grandfathers of these people had already adopted these Rabbinic rules, surely their children and grandchildren would have been obligated to observe them also? After all G’d specifically revealed certain aspects of His manner of meting out justice “in order that Avraham teach his descendants to emulate the ways of the Lord!?” (Genesis 18,19)
   One could answer that the word משמרתי refers to the 7 Noachide commandments, laws to which all of mankind is committed. and that the additional words חקות, refer to the prohibition of crossbreeding, and the word מצוותי to finer points of the law, as well as the word תורתי referring to the establishment of courts, the banning of idolatry, etc. The fact is that according to our sages, the wagons Joseph sent to transport his father on his journey to Egypt, were to symbolically remind his father that he had not forgotten the law of עגלה ערופה, the last lesson his father had instructed him in before his fateful journey to Shechem. (compare Deuteronomy 21,1-9)
   It is clear from what our sages have described that they all agreed that Avraham observed the Sabbath meticulously with all its details, as he had divined G’d’s intention through his holy spirit. However, he did so as something voluntary; He therefore observed these commandments revealed in the Torah later only while he was on Holy Soil, in the land of Israel. The statement that someone kept all the <i>mitzvoth</i> such as Joseph in Egypt, is most likely to be understood as Joseph observing the Sabbath, and thus observing the whole Torah, as in the parlance of our sages Sabbath observance is equivalent to observance of the entire Torah.
   From the perspective of the plain meaning of the text, the <i>peshat,</i> the word משמרתי refers to basic belief in the sole Creator, something that drove him to preach monotheism publicly, and to decry all forms of idolatry. He was the first “evangelist” preaching G’d’s attributes since Chanoch, emphasizing the benevolent nature of G’d, and His love for His creatures. The word מצותי refers to Avraham’s suppressing his own feelings when carrying out G’d’s command to offer his only son Yitzchok as a total burnt offering to this G’d.. He expelled his maidservant Hagar against his own better judgment, in order to comply with G’d’s orders. The word חוקותי refers to his emulating G’d’s attributes, being hospitable, charitable, etc, to the deserving and the not so deserving. Finally, the word תורותי, refers to his performing circumcision on himself and all members of his household, and teaching this rite as a condition of calling oneself a true descendant of Avraham. 
   26,7. ויאמר אחותי היא, He said: “she is my sister.” The local people did not enquire as to the maternity and paternity of the children (Esau and Yaakov.) They might have been children from a former wife, for instance.
   26,8. והנה יצחק מצחק את רבקה אשתו, “and lo, Yitzchok was fondling his wife Rivkah.” Even though, according to Jewish law, marital relations between husband and wife during daylight hours are forbidden, and there is no reason to assume that Yitzchok’s house was in darkness at the time, seeing that Avimelech could see what was going on.
   One may resolve the problem by saying that when a saintly and learned person such as Yitzchok wraps himself in his <i>Tallit</i> at the time, it is as if he was wrapping himself in darkness, so that he may indulge in marital relations in such conditions. However, this does not answer the question how he could indulge at a time when famine was raging, and we have a long standing rule that in conditions of famine marital relations are to be shunned. Possibly, the fact that he, personally, was not suffering famine, and no other Jew was suffering from famine at that time either, this consideration would suffice to waive the rule not to sleep with his wife during famine.
   26,14. ויהי לו מקנה צאן ובקר, ועדה רבה, “and he had acquired masses of sheep, cattle and servants.” The reason the Torah does not mention Yitzchok as having accumulated silver and gold, is that in that country wealth was not measured in terms of money, but in terms of herds and flocks. When Yitzchok possessed more than the king, the matter became embarrassing for the king to host a commoner richer than himself. This is why he expelled Yitzchok, being careful to word that expulsion in a courteous manner.
   26,19. וימצאו שם באר מים חיים, “they found a well of spring water in that region.” The reason the Torah stresses the origin of this water is that the shepherds of the region had accused Yitzchok’s shepherds of diminishing their own water supply by letting their sheep drink from the water of the נחל, the local stream. The water found by Yitzchok’s shepherds did not originate in that stream, but represented a new and additional water supply. Yitzchok’s herds and flocks did not need to use the locally available sources of water.
   26,20. ויקרא שם הבאר עשק, “He named the well in question “strife.’” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah devotes so much space to relating these incidents although at first glance they do not appear to contain any new kind of information, is, that although these verses do not contain new information on the surface, they do hint at hidden mystical connections. Torah is described in the parlance of the prophets as מקור מים חיים, “the source of truly life-giving water.” With the building of the Temples by Yitzchok’s descendants, the Torah became ever more firmly established among the nation, and though several Temples were subject to eventual destruction, the time will come when a permanent Temple will be erected, no longer subject to dispute and destruction, and at a time when G’d will expand the inheritance of the Jewish people, just as at Rechovot, Yitzchok felt that he had achieved the ability to expand. 
   26,24. אל תירא, “do not fear!” G’d reassures Yitzchok that his expulsion was not the beginning of a downturn in his fortunes, As proof, immediately thereafter it is Avimelech who begs Yitzchok to observe the treaty obligations his father had entered into with the (previous) Avimelech. Yitzchok is accorded far more respect and reverence after his expulsion than while he was a guest at Avimelech, needing the latter’s protection.
   26,28. תהי נא אלה בינותינו, בינינו ובינך, “let there be a treaty confirmed by a mutual oath between us, between us and between you.” From the phrasing it is clear that Avimelech was not prepared to swear an oath in the name of Yitzchok’s G’d. Hence he used the expression בינותינו to indicate that he meant to swear by the deity he was in the habit of swearing by. 
   26,29. אם תעשה עמנו רעה, “If you will do us any harm, etc.” Nachmanides writes that Avimelech’s concern was not that Yitzchok would invade his country, an unlikely scenario, seeing that he was only a stranger in his country, but he was concerned because of the treaty Avraham had concluded with his father and committing several generations into the future. Now that he had been guilty of expelling a descendant of Avraham, he worried that Avraham’s descendants, in due course, would no longer feel bound by the original non-aggression pact between the Philistines and themselves.
   @כאשר לא נגענוך, “just as we have not laid a hand on you, etc.” We issued a decree that anyone harming you would be severely punished.
   @וכאשר עשינו עמך רק טוב, “and seeing that we have only treated you well.” We protected your property against looting, etc., and warned the people not to damage what is yours.
    ונשלחך בשלום, “and we let you depart in peace.” Even though all my countrymen had become jealous of your new found wealth, all of which originated in our land, and they would have liked nothing better than to deprive you of it, we did not allow this to happen. In view of all the foregoing, we are entitled to ask you to renew the pact your father made with my father. It is entirely possible that, although, in his time, Avraham was very powerful so that he had defeated the four most powerful kings with an army of only 318 men, Yitzchok may have become even more powerful so that Avimelech had reason to fear him if he would incur his displeasure.
   @אתה עתה ברוך ה', “clearly you are now blessed by the Lord.” The word “now” is important here. Avimelech, while acknowledging that Yitzchok at this time is more powerful than he is, hints that times may change, and a time may come when their relative positions will be reversed, so that having a treaty will also be of benefit to him.
   26,32. ויבאו עבדי יצחק, “The servants of Yitzchok arrived just then, etc.” According to Nachmanides this statement refers back to what had been written in verse 25 i.e. ויכרו שם, “they dug there (Beer Sheva). The digging had already begun before Avimelech set out to conclude this treaty with Yitzchok. Their efforts were rewarded with success on the very day the agreement was concluded.
   I believe that it is most likely that this was the same well which Avraham had dug in the same location, and that he had at the time given 7 sheep to Avimelech as testimony that that well had been dug by his servants and that the water was his. (Genesis 21,24) The Philistines had stopped up that well after the death of Avraham. Yitzchok now renamed the well with the name given to it by his father at the time.
   26,33. על כן שם העיר באר שבע, “this is why the town became known as באר שבע.” The fact that both Avraham the father, and Yitzchok the son, had called the well באר שבע resulted in the urban center surrounding it becoming known by the name given to it by these two prominent people.
   From a mystical perspective, this name is an allusion to the Tabernacle which stood at Shiloh for over 300 years When the Philistines captured the holy ark which Eli’s sons had taken to war with them, they stopped up that well again, until the Israelites, once the Hoy Ark was returned by the Philistines, reopened it.
   Ibn Ezra comments that there were two separate reasons why the well and the town were called Beer Sheva. On the other hand, seeing that this is somewhat unlikely, it is possible that the city Beer Sheva is not the site at which this well was dug and the treaty concluded.
   26,35. ותהיינה מורת רוח, “Their conduct caused both Yitzchok and Rivkah mental anguish.” The Torah writes this so as to explain that due to their not visiting Yitzchok and Rivkah often, it is not surprising that they were not on hand to reveal Yaakov’s masquerading as Esau.
   27,1. ויהי כי זקן יצחק, “it happened when Yitzchok aged, noticeably;” According to Nachmanides, Yitzchok at that point had intended to bless Esau seeing that he would inherit the land of Canaan being the firstborn, and as such it would be his duty to uphold the covenant G’d had made with Avraham. Rivkah had never revealed to her husband the prophecy she had received while pregnant with the twins in her womb, according to which the older of the brothers would be subservient to the younger one. Had Rivkah revealed this information to him, Yitzchok would have been violating an express commandment by G’d if he had accorded the blessing of Avraham to his son Esau. The reason Rivkah had not revealed this information to her husband, was her innate modesty. She did not want Yitzchok to feel slighted that G’d had revealed information to her that He had not seen fit to reveal to her husband. Alternately, she thought that Yitzchok, being a saint, had to be aware of anything she knew and more than that, so that revealing to him something that he already knew would appear as if she had underestimated her husband’s close relations to his Creator. At any rate, she feared that due to his open preference for Esau, Yitzchok might not bestow a blessing on Yaakov at all. She was afraid that if she would reveal her prophetic vision to Yitzchok at this time, he would decide not to bestow a blessing on either son, but leave everything to heaven, as his father had done before him.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi does not believe that Yitzchok ever had the intention of bestowing on Esau the blessing of Avraham [which carried with it the power to bless or to curse effectively, Ed.] He did not feel that Yaakov needed a blessing, seeing that he was a righteous individual in his own right. He felt that Esau was in need of a blessing precisely because he was a wicked individual. He hoped that by providing Esau with the opportunity of pleasing his father by bringing him venison to eat, the pleasure he would experience eating it would restore a measure of Holy Spirit to him, something that had been lacking in his life of late. Even the prophet Elisha had suffered from the absence of such Holy Spirit until it had been restored to him as a result of the music played for him, something that relieved his mental depression. [in both cases the mental depression had been brought on by the person’s failure to see his words of benevolent instruction take root in the listener. Ed.] (Kings II 3,15)
   27,3. הנה נא זקנתי לא ידעתי יום מותי, “here I have aged and I do not know how soon I will die.” If I were to die now, you would lose your share of the inheritance seeing that Yaakov bought it from you. I therefore decided to divide my estate in accordance with the principle that when a father decides to divide his estate between the sons allotting more to one than to the other, but not disinheriting one of them, this is legally acceptable, (<i>Baba Batra 8,5</i> compare<i> Bartenurah)</i> even if the firstborn thereby loses his extra share of the inheritance.
   27,3. תלייך, “your quiver.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this is a reference to Esau’s sword, swords being hung in their scabbard. [based on the root תלה, “he hung” Ed.]
   According to Ibn Ezra the word means “quiver,” i.e. the container within which the arrows are stored. Yitzchok told Esau to equip himself with his hunting tools, these consisting of a bow and arrows and their container, or the sword and its scabbard.
   @וצודה לי ציד, “and hunt some venison for me.” This reveals that Yitzchok was quite unfamiliar with Esau’s lifestyle, as if he had been familiar with it he would not have eaten anything that had been killed by his son. Still, it is problematic how Yitzchok could have eaten animals that had been killed by an arrow. Some commentators therefore explain that Esau had perfected a technique of luring animals by imitating their voices so that when they came close he could slaughter them. This is what the Torah alluded to when it wrote כי ציד בפיו, “he hunted with his mouth.”
   27,4. ועשה לי מטעמים ואוכלה, “and prepare it for me into a delicacy so that I will eat it.” Seeing you had forfeited your birthright through something that you ate, I will help you to regain it through the food you give me to eat.
   27,7. ואברכה לפני ה', “I will bless you in the presence of G’d.” Although Yitzchok had only said: בעבור תברכך נפשי, “in order that my soul will bless you, without adding the name of the Lord, he was certain that G’d would fulfill such a blessing when pronounced by him. After all, all blessings originate with the Lord.
   27,12. אולי ימושני אבי, “perhaps my father will subject me to a “touch-test.” Yaakov did not worry that his father would need such a test to recognise him, but he was concerned that in the process of offering and serving him the meal, Yitzchok would unintentionally touch him, even wanting to kiss him, something which could alert him to the fact that he was not Esau. Actually, it is remarkable that Yaakov did not worry that his voce would betray him for who he was in reality. We know that in the event, Yitzchok became immediately aware that the voice speaking to him sounded like that of Yaakov (Genesis 27,22). It is possible that the brothers, being twins, had very similar sounding voices, and that is why Yaakov was not worried about being recognised by his voice. When the Torah wrote: “the voice sounds like the voice of Yaakov,” this is not a reference to the tone of voice, etc., but to the manner of Yaakov’s speech, which was so totally different from the mode of speech used by his brother. It is also possible that he had tried to fake his voice to sound like that of his brother. The art of impersonating other people’s voices is a well known phenomenon.
   27,13. ותאמר לו אמו עלי קללתך בני, “His mother said to him: “any curse will devolve upon me, my son.” According to Onkelos, Rivkah said what she said in view of the prophecy which had been revealed to her during her pregnancy that her older son would serve the younger one as his master.
   Another approach suggests that she meant: “he will not curse you but he will curse him or her who made you deceive him.” (in other words, “he will curse me”.) Yet another commentary offered is that the word קללה, loosely translated as “curse,” actually implies that the victimised party will be deprived of something. Rivkah assured Yaakov that if he were to be deprived of his inheritance as a result of this charade, she could make it up to him out of her marriage settlement.
   27,15. את בגדי עשו בנו הגדול, ”the garments of her older son Esau.” The use by the Torah of the terms בנו הגדול and בנו הקטן, instead of the customary בנו הבכור and בנו הצעיר, for the older son (the firstborn) or the younger son, is intended to underline that although, usually, honour is accorded to the firstborn, etc., Rivkah being aware that her firstborn son had forfeited any claim to such honour, thought of her two children in terms of the physically older one and the physically younger one, i.e. הגדול והקטון, respectively. She was now concerned with arranging for the transfer of the undeserved privileges of birth from her undeserving older son to her deserving younger son.
   27,22. הקול קול יעקב, “the voice sounds like the voice of Yaakov, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that Yitzchok meant it was not the habit of Esau to mention the name of the Lord in his conversation, something that made Yitzchok wonder who stood before him.
   Nachmanides writes that it his hard to imagine that Yitzchok viewed Esau as a wicked person and yet he was about to give him the blessing of Avraham. Possibly, he thought that seeing that Esau was a man of the field, he deliberately refrained from mentioning the name of the Lord, as he might utter it in a location where it would not be appropriate to do so. In other words, Yitzchok considered the very fact that Esau did not usually mention the name of the Lord as a point in his favour.
   From the point of view of the plain text, we are being told that the voices of the two sons were quite different from one another, and Yitzchok could not fail to notice this.
   27,25. ויבא לו יין וישת, “he brought him wine, and he (Yizchok) drank it.” Where did Yaakov take the wine from, seeing that his mother had only given him bread to accompany the delicacies she had prepared? According to the <i>Midrash</i> the angel Gavriel brought the wine whose origin was in <i>Gan Eden</i> to Yaakov. Presumably, the words of the <i>Midrash</i> were inspired by the fact that this is the only time in Scripture that the drinking of wine is described as having only positive results. When wine is mentioned as a gift by Malki Tzedek to Avraham, it was a subsidiary to the bread. (Genesis 14,18) 
   27,26. גשה נא ושקה לי בני, “come closer please and kiss me, my son.” Yitzchok was confused seeing that on the one hand, the voice of the person serving him sounded like that of Yaakov, whereas his skin felt like that of Esau. By making a third test, the fragrance of his clothing, something that could not be determined unless the person came very close to him, Yitzchok meant to decide who this person was. When he smelled the familiar fragrance of Esau’s clothes, he conferred the blessing having been convinced that Esau was in front of him.
   27,27. ראה ריח בני כריח שדה, “indeed the fragrance of my son is like the fragrance of the field.” The meaning of the word ראה here is that the expression does not reflect something Yitzchok saw with his eyes, but that this is what he observed internally, when thinking about what his son Esau’s presence projected. He felt that there could not be any doubt that of his two sons it was Esau who represented the fragrance of blossoming flowers and all the blessings associated with nature when it unfolds. This is why he determined to accord him the blessing.
   Other commentators see in this statement about the fragrance simply a reference to the perfume with which Esau sprayed his garments, something which matched what could be found in the field.
   27.28. ויתן לך האלוקים, “and may G’d grant you, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> emphasizes that Yitzchok deliberately chose the attribute of Justice to be the origin of Esau’s blessing, i.e. אלוקים, instead of <i>Hashem,</i> as this implied that the blessing would be fulfilled only if Esau remained worthy of it in the eyes of the attribute of Justice. [note that when Yaakov made his vow after the dream of the ladder, he too conditioned fulfillment on the promise that he would be worthy of what he asked for in the eyes of the attribute of Justice. (Genesis 28,21) Ed.] Later on, when Yitzchok knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that it was Esau who had stood before him, he promised him material blessings without conditioning this on his worthiness. (Genesis 27,39-40) This is remarkable, as by then Yitzchok had been made aware of Esau’s true character and he had confirmed the blessing he had given to Yaakov.
   @ויתן לך האלוקים מטל השמים, “and G’d will give you from the dew of the heaven, etc.” According to Nachmanides this is not a formula appropriate for use in blessings. Dew descends on the earth all over the earth, and does not require a special blessing to make it happen. If Yitzchok had implored G’d to give Esau an additional amount of dew, this would be different, but all he did was to assure him that he would participate on an equal basis in the blessing of dew, something that every farmer enjoys. Yitzchok’s blessing meant that Esau should enjoy the blessing of dew and the other blessings G’d bestows on the earth, and through it on His creatures, without any interruption through famine of drought, etc.
   Alternately, the letter ו at the beginning of the word ורב דגן ותירוש means that the ordinary amount of dew, etc., should result in his crops being especially abundant. [I have difficulty with this kind of blessing, seeing Esau was a hunter, not farmer. Maybe Yitzchok suggested obliquely that Esau should stop hunting and become a farmer instead. Ed.]
   Possibly, what is introduced as a consolation prize for Esau, the blessing in verse 40 that he would survive by means of his sword, was in fact a denial of the blessings he had given Yaakov while he thought that Yaakov was Esau.
   27,29. יעבדוך עמים וישתחוו לך לאומים, “nations will serve you, and states will pay homage to you.” This promise/blessing was fulfilled at the threshing grounds of Atad, (Genesis 50,11) when the various Canaanite kings, and representatives all paid homage to Yaakov’s coffin as it was on the way to burial in the cave of Machpelah. According to tradition, these kings saluted Yaakov by placing their crowns on the fence of that threshing ground.
   @הוי גביר לאחיך, “be your brother’s superior, etc.” Seeing that at this point Yitzchok thought that Esau stood in front of him, we cannot escape the conclusion that Rivkah had never told him of the prophecy that the younger son would be the superior one, otherwise Yitzchok would have now rebelled against the prophecy. 
   @אורריך ארור ומברכיך ברוך, “the ones who will curse you will themselves become cursed, and those who will bless you will themselves become blessed.” In Bileam’s blessings, the order is reversed; he said מברכיך ברוך ואורריך ארור, “those who bless you will themselves be blessed, and those that curse you will find themselves cursed.” The righteous will endure problems before finding themselves rewarded and blessed, whereas the wicked may start out as if enjoying blessings, whereas in reality they will wind up being accursed. Still, when G’d spoke to Avraham in chapter 12,2-3 He phrased it thus: ונברכו בך כל משפחות האדמה, “all the families of the earth will enjoy blessing, thanks to you.” Seeing G’d wanted to conclude with this blessing, He commenced also with a blessing.
   27,30. ויהי אך יצא יצא, “and as soon as Yaakov had left the presence of his father,” The reason why the Torah speaks of 2 exits, i.e. יצא, יצא, indicates that as soon as Yaakov saw Esau approach he quickly hid himself, and when the way was clear he emerged from his hiding place and left the house of his father.
   27,32. מי אתה?, “Who are you?” He thought that he was addressing Yaakov who when he had heard that his father had eaten of Esau’s venison, had also prepared a dish for him in order to secure a blessing for himself. He therefore asked: “who are you?” in order to ascertain the true facts.
   27,33. גם ברוך יהיה,”he shall also retain his blessing.” Since when is the reaction to someone who complains that he has been tricked out of a blessing, that one tells him that the party who received the blessing in his place is to keep it? Surely, the normal reaction would be to curse the swindler who came by the blessing by devious means! Moreover, seeing that Yitzchok repeated the blessing he had given to Yaakov a second time, this clearly indicates that Yaakov did not obtain the blessing by deceitful means in the first place! Why else would he now bless Yaakov willingly and knowingly?
   This is why Nachmanides explains the entire verse commencing with the words: מי איפוא הצד ציד ויבא לי ואכל מכל as referring to Esau, i.e. “who is the person who has fed me a line which I swallowed hook line and sinker all these years so that I was befuddled enough to bestow the blessing on him?” 
   Alternately, what Yitzchok meant was that once he had uttered the blessing it was too late for him to recall it and to invalidate it, even if it had been obtained under a false premises. Yitzchok had realized as soon as he had finished blessing Yaakov, that he had indeed blessed the son who deserved the blessing. It was this belated inspiration supplied by the Holy Spirit, which made him tremble in the sudden realization that he had lost his beloved son permanently..
   27,35. בא אחיך במרמה, “your brother came using trickery.” Even though initially, Yitzchok had asked: ”who then is the one who came, etc.”, having had the revelation from the Holy Spirit, now he knew for certain that it had been Yaakov who had come and snatched the blessing from his father.
   27,37. ואת כל אחיו נתתי לו לעבדים, “and I have designated that all his bothers be his servants.” These words are not a reference to the line הוי גביר לאחיך in verse 29. It is possible that someone is senior to his brothers without the brothers therefore considering themselves as subservient to that brother. The best example in Scripture is that of Yehudah, who was the leader of his brothers without his brothers ever considering themselves as servants of Yehudah. 
   @ואת כל אחיו, “and all his brothers, etc.” Even though he had only one brother, Yitzchok speaks of him in the plural, as he meant to include all of Esau’s future descendants in his remarks. Other commentators feel that the plural extends to Ishmael, as well as Ishmael’s descendants as well as the sons of Keturah.
   27,39. הנה משמני הארץ יהיה מושבך, “here you are assured that the region in which you will dwell will belong to the most productive ones on earth.” According to Nachmanides, the expression הנה here introduces the limitation of any blessing Yitzchok can bestow now. He says, that although I can assure you of a materially brilliant future, riches based on what the earth you dwell on will produce, but the political power, ממשלה, will belong to your brother.
   Yitzchok did not bless Esau with the parallel blessing of רוב דגן ותירוש, “an overabundance of grain and wine, either, as he had done when he blessed Yaakov thinking that he was Esau. (verse 28) Both of them, Esau and Ishmael, are sufficiently blessed with the wish that they will dwell on the fertile parts of the earth. Yitzchok was concerned that the one whom he had blessed first would enjoy a clear advantage even in the wording of the blessing he had obtained. This is also why, before sending Yaakov to look for a wife, he added specifically; ויתן לך את ברכת אברהם וגו', “and may G’d grant you the blessing conferred upon Avraham, etc.” The fulfillment of the blessing of “overabundance of grain and wine,” was thus deferred to the period after the land of the Canaanites had been conquered by Yaakov’s descendants. (28,4) The dew of the heaven and the fatness of the land promised to Esau applied to some country other than the land of Israel. There was a distinct difference in the qualities of the blessings extended before Yaakov was dispatched to look for a wife, and the blessings resulting from Yitzchok’s eating the venison. In the first and last blessing the name of G’d as the source of the blessing does appear, whereas in the blessing to Esau, the “consolation prize,” Yitzchok does not even mention the name of G’d. The reason was that Esau had not mentioned the name of G’d either.
   It is of significance that when blessing Esau as Esau, Yitzchok mentions the fatness of the earth before mentioning the dew of the heavens, whereas when speaking of the same phenomena to Yaakov, Yitzchok reversed the order by mentioning the heavenly part, the dew before mentioning the earth’s contribution to man’s success as a farmer. The reason is that when blessing Yaakov, Yitzchok had already blessed him specifically by invoking the name of G’d.
   27,40. ועל חרבך תחיה. “and by means of your sword you will survive.” The expression על חרבך is equivalent to בחרבך,”through your sword.” Yitzchok meant that the hands of the one who had pleased him by feeding him venison will be saved through the successful use of the sword that these hands make. Yitzchok most certainly did not wish Esau to become a conqueror and to survive by consuming the loot he had acquired from the enemies he had slain. Having blessed Esau with success in agriculture in the previous verse, there certainly was no call for wishing him success as warrior. He did, however, assure him that in his war against adversaries he would not become the victim of the swords of his enemies.
   Some commentators hold that the words ועל חרבך תחיה are a consolation to Esau, seeing his father had blessed his brother by appointing him Esau’s superior. Yitzchok now hedged his blessing by assuring Esau that he would not become the victim of any abuse of his stronger brother’s power. Esau’s service to his brother would consist of being employed as his brother’s mercenary, using his sword to what are essentially Yaakov’s battles.
   Rabbeinu Saadyah Gaon, questions why Yitzchok chose such an unusual wording for his blessing to Esau, instead of saying: “may the Lord give you from the fatness of the earth and the dew of the heaven.” The reason is, according to Rabbeinu Saadyah, that in fact Yitzchok did not bless Esau at all; he merely stated that seeing he had already said to Yaakov that those that curse him would be cursed, if he were to accord something to Esau at the expense of Yaakov, He would make Himself liable to a curse by having diminished what had been promised to Yaakov. However, he consoled Esau by assuring him that his fate already included the fact that bounty of nature would always be at his disposal in the shape of the fatness of the land and the dew of the heaven that would ensure bountiful harvests.
   @והיה כאשר תריד, “it will come to pass when you have reason to grieve, etc.” when Yaakov will abuse this power of superiority by giving you justifiable reason to complain especially since at a time when Yaakov’s descendants do not live up to the terms of their covenant with G’d, you will be able to shake off his yoke. Yaakov then will not regain his superiority, as Bileam already stated in Numbers 24,19 וירד מיעקב והאביד שריד מעיר, [the root of the word תריד is not ירד “to descend,” but רדה, “to rule, exercise authority.”] “The one who ruled obtaining his power from Yaakov, will lose it, retaining only a city.” This is a reference to the time when the Romans would rule over the entire region of Mesopotamia. Bileam describes the period in the distant future at the time of the redemption when Yaakov/Israel will regain its position of dominance. After that Esau will never again experience a rise in stature.
   @והיה כאשר תריד, the word תריד is used in a sense similar to Psalms 55,3 “if the Israelites oppress you more than is justified, turn to G’d in prayerful complaint and He will throw off his yoke from you.”
    
   Yitzchok hints to Esau that Yaakov will not be at liberty to use his power over him injudiciously. Another explanation sees in the word תריד a variant of רדוי, being vanquished, captive, as if Yitzchok were saying to Esau: “when you do not wish to endure Yaakov’s dominance, conquer his land and shake off his yoke.”
   27,41. ויאמר עשו בלבו, “Esau said to himself: etc.” According to Ibn Ezra, Esau may have revealed his intention to one of his intimate friends. Nachmanides feels that there is no need to resort to such an explanation, [which distorts the meaning of the text, Ed.] seeing that something that a person resolves in his heart is often described by Scripture as אמירה, “something that has been said.” Esau’s resolve to eventually murder Yaakov was as good as if he had actually said so with his lips. The fact that he had made such a resolution consoled him over the present situation.
   @יקרבו ימי אבל אבי, “the days of mourning for my father’s death are approaching;” according to the plain meaning, Esau looked forward to his father’s death as he would not have wanted to cause his father such a painful experience as losing a son. Not only that, his father might curse him for what he had done. Other commentators believe that the words do not mean that Esau looked forward to his father’s death, but that he said: ”I will bring my father’s mourning Yaakov’s death closer by murdering Yaakov.”
   27,42. ותשלח ותקרא ליעקב, “she sent a message to Yaakov calling him to come and see her.” She had to send him a message as he was not at his usual place, being in hiding, either in fear of Esau’s revenge or because he was too embarrassed to face his brother, being ashamed of what he had done, and Esau having loudly complained about him to all who would listen.
   @מתנחם לך להרגך, “he is consoling himself with the plan to kill you.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this either means that he consoles himself over the loss of the blessings by killing you, or that he had already prepared the cup of wine given to a mourner to allow him to comfort himself over the loss of a dear relative.
   27,45. למה אשכול שניכם יום אחד?, “why should I be bereaved of both of you on the same day?” According to the plain meaning of the text she referred to the death of both Yaakov and Esau. Some commentators believe she was referring to the death of Yaakov and Yitzchok, as Esau had said he would kill Yaakov as soon as Yitzchok would die.
   28,5. אחי רבקה, אם יעקב ועשו, “the brother of Rivkah, who was the mother of Yaakov and Esau. Nachmanides explains that the reason why Rivkah is described here by the Torah as “the mother of Yaakov and Esau,” [something that we all know perfectly well, Ed.] is because Yitzchok had commanded Yaakov to select a wife from among the daughters of Lavan, “the brother of your mother.” The Torah is at pains to remind us that Lavan was also the brother of Esau’s mother, and because of this it would have been appropriate for Yitzchok to command Esau also to take a wife from among his uncle’s daughters. However, seeing that the seed of Avraham would be carried on only through Yaakov, there was no point in Esau marrying someone from Lavan’s family.
   Other commentators feel that the Torah was at pains to give Yaakov precedence over Esau who was biologically his senior, as soon as Yaakov had secured the blessing of his father. The Torah’s mentioning “Yaakov and Esau” in that order, serves as proof that the blessing was indeed fulfilled, and that Yaakov would henceforth be deemed as senior to his brothers, i.e.הוי גביר לאחיך as we read in 27,29. All of this, in spite of the fact that after Yitzchok’s death the Torah reverts to mentioning Esau first when it reports Yitzchok’s funeral. This was because Esau had never left the land of Israel, attending to his father’s needs, whereas Yaakov had been outside the Holy Land for over 20 years. [I find this difficult as Esau had voluntarily left the Holy Land (Genesis 36,6), not because of his life being in danger and his father having sent him out of the land to get a wife without giving him a dowry, 11 years before his father died. Ed.]
   Some commentators say that the reason why the Torah repeats these details about Yaakov’s genealogy is in order for you not to be dismayed that from two such righteous parents as Yitzchok and Rivkah, a wicked person such as Esau could have been produced. The Torah does not want us to forget for a moment that Rivkah herself had a brother who was everything but righteous. Our sages have established a rule (based on empirical knowledge, Ed.] according to which most children have a tendency to develop in accordance with their mother’s brother(s).
   Parshat Vayetze
  28,10. ויצא יעקב מבאר שבע, ”Yaakov left Beer Sheva, etc. “
   According to allegorical commentaries, the earth literally contracted beneath his feet so that the words וילך חרנה mean that he arrived at Charan on the same day.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the verse described that Yaakov was headed for Charan. Other commentators understand the words וילך חרנה as telling us where Yaakov would take up residence from now on, the Torah then filling in what happened on the way before Yaakov reached his destination, his nocturnal encounter with the angels climbing the ladder, etc.
   28,11. ויקח מאבני המקום, “he took from the stones of that place, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text, he took a single one of these stones. The sages explaining the allegorical meaning of the text, say that Yaakov took quite a number of such stones, but that these stones miraculously all became fused into a single stone.
   28,12. ויחלום, והנה סולם מוצב ארצה, “he dreamt, and here in his dream there was a ladder which had been placed on earth, etc.” There are numerous allegorical explanations which our sages have offered in explaining the purpose of this phenomenon in Yaakov’s dream.
    
   Some say that the ladder represents Mount Sinai, and that the angels ascending and descending on it symbolise Moses and Aaron. Others believe that the ladder represents an altar and that the angels represent the priests, who in real life, ascend and descend from the altar.
   I believe that the correct explanation is that G’d showed Yaakov by means of a dream, that whatever occurs on earth is engineered by angels carrying out G’d’s will, and though G’d had known long in advance whatever would come pass, He showed Yaakov an image purporting the angels telling G’d that they had now carried out His will. Moreover, He wanted Yaakov to know that although the angels are His messengers, carrying out His will, this did not mean that G’d personally, left the earth and the angels to their own devices, but that He took an ongoing interest in the affairs unraveling on earth, and was ever ready to intervene when the need would arise. Thus He assured Yaakov of His ongoing protection on the journey fraught with danger that he had undertaken. In <i>Bereshit Rabbah 68,13</i> we are also told that the angels ascending and descending represented the ascent and subsequent descent of the 4 super powers which ruled over the Jewish people in their respective exiles.
   28,13. והארץ אשר אתה שוכב עליה, “and the earth that you are lying upon, etc.” What did G’d’s gift amount to, seeing that Yaakov occupied only 4 cubits square of earth on the spot he lay on? <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 69,4 quotes an opinion according to which G’d had compressed the entire surface of the Land of Israel beneath Yaakov at the time when he had this dream. He meant to show him that the conquest of the land would not be difficult at all when the time came.
   My sainted father, the רא'ש, explained the plain meaning of our verse as follows: the location where Yaakov was sleeping was in fact the site of the future Temple, as pointed out by the <i>Midrash</i>; whereas Avraham had described that site as הר, “mountain,” i.e. something not easily accessible, Yaakov viewed it as בית, a house, a place where everyone can feel at home, in this instance the אבן השתיה, stone covering the orifice in the earth, the “navel” of the earth in the parlance of our sages, leading to the innermost part of earth, a site covered by the altar in the future. Seeing that whatever blessing there is on earth is distributed centrifugally to all parts of the earth, Yaakov was in fact lying on the entire earth. (By the way, Yitzchok had viewed the site of the temple, i.e. G’d’s manifestation on earth as שדה, as we know from Genesis 24,63.) [whereas originally, G’d walked on earth just as did man; He withdrew after Adam’s sin, and He kept withdrawing until Avraham reversed the process, beginning with viewing His manifestation while on earth, yet not easily accessible. Ed.] G’d’s blessing comparing Yaakov’s offspring to the dust of the earth, meant that just as dust scatters all over the globe, so Yaakov’s offspring would scatter all over the globe at one time or another.
   28,17. אין זה כי אם בית אלוקים,וזה שער השמים, “this must be the House of G’d, and at the same time the gateway to heaven.” This is a reference to the eventual Temple, the site from which the prayers of mankind will ascend to heaven without making any detours. The reason why prayers ascend more swiftly towards heaven from here, is the fact that they accompany the fragrance of the smoke of the various sacrifices.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that according to the view of Rabbi Yossi ben Zimra, the feet of the ladder were standing in Beer Sheva, whereas its head was above Bet El, whereas the middle point of its slope was directly above the site that would become the site of the Temple. When Yaakov eventually returned to the land of Israel, and he remembered that he had not prayed at that site, he retraced his steps as far as Bet El to make up for that failure. The site of the Temple, Mount Moriah “jumped” to meet him. This is what our sages described as קפיצת הארץ, “a jump by the earth.” (a contraction of the earth’s surface) 
   Nachmanides queries that the Talmud <i>Sanhedrin</i> 95 appears to attribute the earth’s “jump” both to Eliezer and to Yaakov, seeing we are told there that there were three individuals for whose benefit the earth’s surface contracted in such a manner, the three being Eliezer, Yaakov, and Avishai. The meaning is not that the earth repeatedly jumped to yet another location, but that just as it had accommodated Eliezer, whose purpose had been lofty, so it accommodated, facilitated Yaakov’s journey. Yaakov, being angry at himself for passing a holy site without offering a prayer there, set out to retrace his steps to make up for his omission. Before he could do so, the earth moved in his direction to forestall his having to turn back. Nachmanides speculates that although, apparently there is a divergence of opinions as to where precisely the feet of the ladder in Yaakov’s dream were anchored, it is possible that all the sages agree that Yaakov experienced three occasions when the earth contracted to enable him to fulfill a meritorious deed more easily. The three occasions were: when he went from Beer Sheva to Charan and wanted to turn back in order to pray at Chevron where his fathers had prayed. Similarly, on his return from Charan. to Mount Moriah, and his return from there back to Charan after having prayed there. [the speculative nature of how to reconcile conflicting interpretations is due to the apparent contradiction of where precisely Yaakov spent that night, seeing that the text speaks of Luz, i.e. Beyt El, neither of which can be identified with Moriah.
   28,18. ויקח את האבן אשר שם מראשותיו, “He took the stone which he had made into a pillow for his head.” This was in spite of what we learned in <i>Zevachim 116</i> that it is forbidden to construct an altar made of matter which has already been used secularly. When it concerns a new structure that one built oneself for the purpose, it is acceptable for a layman to do so.
   28,20. אם יהיה אלוקים עמדי, “if G’d will be with me, etc.” He referred to G’d’s personal promise to him that He would not become a victim of the way of the righteous who are forever fearful of not possessing sufficient merit, and therefore consider any assurance to them by G’d as only conditional, i.e. אם. [the problem in the text is how did Yaakov dare to apply the word “if” to G’d’s promise. Ed.]
   Another view of this line is the reason why Yaakov prefaced this line with the word אם, “if,” is not that he conditioned his continued righteous way of life on G’d’s protection, but that seeing it was based on a dream, he could not be sure that this was a divine revelation rather than wishful thinking on his part. Divine promises experienced in a dream may be just that, a dream without substance.
   Still another interpretation of this verse is that it was an oath. “Just as I am certain that G’d will be with me and that I will return safely to my father’s house, so I am certain that after that I will erect a house of G’d on this site.”
   Nachmanides states that the word אם does not necessarily have to mean a conditional “if.” An example of such a different meaning of the word אם is found in Numbers 36,4 ואם יהיה היובל לבני ישראל, where it means: “and when the Jubilee year will arrive for the Children of Israel, etc.” Yaakov refers to what he will do as soon as G’d’s promise to him has been fulfilled.
   28,29. והיה ה' לי לאלוקים, “the Lord will then be even my G’d as attribute of Justice.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> these words are a continuation of those that preceded them, i.e. the words אם יהיה אלוקים עמדי, so that Yaakov is saying that once the Lord will be his G’d in practice, having displayed His personal benevolent providence to Yaakov by extending His protection to him, he will convert this stone into a house of worship for that G’d where he will bring the tithes that he spoke about.
   Some commentators understand the words ושבתי בשלום אל בית אבי, “and I will return hale and hearty to my father’s house, etc.,” as the source of the <i>halachic</i> ruling that travelers, while engaged on their journeys, are relieved from the need to perform certain commandments that would make their getting home safely more difficult.
   29,1 וילך ארצה בני קדם, “he proceeded in the direction of the land of the people of the East.” It is a mystery why Yaakov should go to the land of the people of the East, seeing the Torah already wrote that he was heading for <i>Charan,</i> (28,10). On the other hand, according to the tradition that Yaakov had reached Charan on the day he set out in that direction, but that he had turned back to pray at Moriah, not having been aware at the time that he had inadvertently gone past that site without doing so, the meaning of the verse becomes abundantly clear. From Moriah he went forth to the land of the people of the East, where he remained for 14 years before again going to Charan and joining the household of Lavan.
   29,2. וירא והנה באר בשדה, “he looked and saw a well in the field.” The plain meaning of this verse is a practical illustration of Isaiah 40,31 וקווי ה' יחליפו כח, “the people placing their hope and trust in the Lord will experience physical rejuvenation, etc.” Yaakov’s ability to roll the rock from the well, something several shepherds had been unable to do even jointly, proves that the new hope he had been given through his dream about the ladder had left its mark also on his body.
   Our sages also derived from the description in the text that the well mentioned is an allusion to the Temple, and that the three flocks of sheep described as lying around the well represent the three annual holydays on which the Jewish people would make pilgrimages to the Temple, seeing that the Temple serves the Jewish people as their spiritual inspiration, just as water serves as the liquid which keeps the body alive and healthy. Not only that, but the Torah itself has been compared to spring-water, seeing that it makes life meaningful, and the people who study it and observe it become people who see a purpose in their existence. The “various flocks“ which are described as lying around that well symbolize the people congregating around the Temple, or around Torah scholars, waiting to become inspired. The replacing of the stone on the well symbolizes the period after the pilgrimages when the Temple is in a relatively dormant condition.
   29,5. הידעתם את לבן בן נחור?, “do you know Lavan, son of Nachor?” The reason why the Torah does not write: “Lavan, son of Bethuel,” is that Nachor was by far more prominent in that town, and Lavan himself did not like to be referred to as his father’s son, but as his grandfather’s grandson.
   Some commentators write that “Lavan son of Nachor,” means “Lavan citizen of Nachor,” seeing that the town had been named after its founder, Nachor. It was likely that the shepherds did know the mayor of the town Nachor, without knowing Bethuel, father of Lavan.
   29,6. ויאמר השלום לו, “He said: “is he o.k.?” Yaakov wanted to know if Nachor was powerful enough to protect him against Esau, should the latter try and attack him. The shepherds answered in the affirmative, adding that after all, Nachor was the ruling power in that city. 
   29,9. כי רועה היא, “for she was a shepherdess.” The Torah meant that Lavan had only one daughter who was the shepherdess, as opposed to Yitro who had seven daughters all of whom were tending flocks. The reason why Rachel was the only daughter of Lavan who was entrusted with his flocks was that her sister Leah’s eyes were weak so that she could not perform the tasks expected from a shepherd or shepherdess. 
   It is also possible that Lavan did not want to send Leah to the well where she would meet with the male shepherds, seeing she was older than her sister and should not go about unchaperoned. Yitro, on the other hand, was a highly respected and prominent personality, and no one would have dared molest his daughters sexually. It is also possible that Lavan, who was of the same family as Avraham, observed stricter standards of modesty than did Yitro, and therefore he would not let a girl above a certain age go out alone to where she was apt to meet men.
   29,10. את רחל בת לבן אחי אמו, “Rachel, daughter of Lavan, the brother of his mother.” The words “the brother of his mother,” appear three times in this verse. Apparently Rachel told Yaakov first that her father was a swindler, and that it would be a mistake on the part of Yaakov to live in his house. Yaakov replied to her that seeing that her father was a brother of his mother, he was aware, and would know how to protect himself against trickery on the part of her father.
   29,12. ויגד יעקב לרחל כי אחי אביה הוא, ”Yaakov told Rachel that he was the brother of her father.” According to Ibn Ezra, the Torah now fills us in on something Yaakov had told Rachel already earlier in their conversation, before he had kissed her.
   @ותרץ ותגד לאביה, “she ran home and told her father.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason she told her father, not her mother, as when Rivkah had encountered Eliezer, was that her mother had died already.
   Nachmanides writes that we do not need to resort to <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation and assume that Rachel was a semi-orphan. Seeing that Yaakov was a relative of her father’s and not of her mother’s, it was natural that she would bring this news first to her father. Rivkah, running to her mother was natural, as she wanted to entrust the jewelry she had received to her mother’s safe keeping.
   29,14. אך עצמי ובשרי אתה, “after all, you are of my own flesh and bone.” The word אך usually denotes an expression of pain, regret, i.e. in this instance: “how sad it is that you are penniless; but seeing you are my flesh and bone, etc.” Alternately, Lavan meant:: “although seeing that you deceived your brother, and I should by rights keep my distance from you, the fact that you are my own flesh and blood causes me to deal with you differently.”
   29,15. הכי אחי אתה ועבדתני חנם?, ”do you have to serve me without recompense just because you are my family?” Nachmanides points out that the Torah had not even mentioned that Yaakov “served” Lavan, It is possible, that as soon as Yaakov had met Rachel, he had taken over her former duties of tending Lavan’s flocks. He did so because he had fallen in love with her. It is also possible that Lavan had immediately spoken to him with deceitful intent, saying that seeing he was family, he would provide for him as a family member. After a month had passed, he suggested to Yaakov that surely as a moral individual he would not expect Lavan to continue doing this without Yaakov compensating him. Since he did not want him to have to be in the service of people unrelated to him by blood, and he also could not afford to feed him for an indefinite period without Yaakov compensating him, he suggested that Yaakov work for him and that he tell him what he expected in the way of wages. Yaakov realized what was on his mind, and suggested that he would work for Lavan for 7 years in order to receive Rachel’s hand in marriage. The עבודה that the Torah refers to here, is simply the tending of Lavan’s sheep. Lest we think that this was an easy vocation, Yaakov in Genesis 31,38-42 describes in detail what extreme discomfort was involved when one took one’s responsibilities in this regard seriously, as he did.
   Some commentators believe that what Lavan had in mind was to appoint Yaakov as what is known in <i>halachah</i> as שומר שכר, a paid guard, someone who is responsible for the items entrusted to him, being liable for theft, loss from a variety of causes, as opposed to an unpaid guard who is liable to make restitution for any loss only when negligence or worse can be proved against him.
   29,17. ועיני לאה רכות, “Leah’s eyes were sensitive;” according to Onkelos, this is a compliment, Leah’s eyes being round and lustrous like those of a young and beautiful calf. Targum Yonathan omits the comparison with a calf. Apparently, when the Torah points out Leah’s eyes as being beautiful, this is in contrast to the remainder of her physical features which were not attractive.
   Other commentators who view the comment as describing a flaw, feel that the Torah was at pains to point out that Leah’s only physical flaw were her eyes. Her sister Rachel, however, was flawlessly beautiful.
   29,18. אעבדך שבע שנים ברחל בתך, “I will serve you for seven years in return for your daughter Rachel.” Under normal circumstances it is not good manners, is inappropriate, to serve for a woman. The only reason that Yaakov agreed to this arrangement was that his father had commanded him not to marry a Canaanite woman but to marry one of Lavan’s daughters. He therefore told Lavan that if he would not give him Rachel as a wife now, he would not violate his father’s command by marrying some other local girl, but would serve for Rachel for seven years. The reason why he offered to wait seven years for consummation of this arrangement may have been that at the time Rachel was so young that he could not expect to have children from her at her tender age.
   @ברחל בתך הקטנה, “for your younger daughter Rachel.” He did not want to marry Leah, seeing she was the older of the two and therefore was meant for his older brother Esau. It would have been impolite to speak about her directly; this is why he chose to add the words “your younger daughter.” 
   29,20. ויהיו בעיניו כימים אחדים באהבתו אותה, “they were in his eyes like a few days because of his love for her.” According to our yardsticks such a long wait is extremely difficult. The Torah reports that after the seven years were over, in retrospect, these seven years appeared as if they had been only a few days, as he was so in love with Rachel that he considered the price he had to pay as cheap.
   29,27. מלא שבוע זאת, “let this week pass.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the week in question were the seven days of celebration following the nuptials.
   Nachmanides writes that he has found no record of such a practice prior to Moses having instituted it for the Israelites. Perhaps in earlier times only the elite of the people observed 7 days of festivities after the wedding, just as they observed seven days of mourning after the death of prominent personages. (Compare Genesis 50,10 when Joseph decreed seven days of mourning for Yaakov)
   It is also possible to explain that when Yaakov entered the seventh and final year of his service, the year known as שנת מלואים, the final year, he asked Lavan to give him Rachel, arguing that now Lavan did not worry about Yaakov leaving his employ as he had so much more to gain by staying for a relatively short period. At that time Lavan refused. Now that he was about to assuage Yaakov’s feelings of bitterness of Lavan’s deception, he told him that Rachel would be given to him at the end of seven more years of service to make plain that he would have to wait until then, as if he were to give him now, on account as it were, Yaakov might not honour the terms of the contract and would abscond with both women before carrying out his duties. [the anomaly causing the commentators difficulty is that on the one hand Yaakov refers to מלאו ימי, “my days are complete,” whereas twice the Torah refers to שבוע instead of either ימים or שנים, “days, or years.” In verse 28 it is difficult to explain the word שבוע as meaning “week,” as <i>Rashi</i> does in verse verse 26. Ed.]
   @ונתנה לך גם את זאת, “and we will give you also this one.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the word ונתנה as an active form of the word נתן in the first person plural of the future conjugation. As in Genesis 11,7 הבה נרדה ונבלה [as opposed to the third person singular passive mode with the prefix ו changing the meaning to the future tense of the same root, meaning “it will be given.” Ed.] 
   Nachmanides writes that everything Lavan said was deceptive in nature, and when he said that it was not the custom in his town to give the younger daughter’s hand in marriage to anyone until the older daughter had been married, and that the people of the town would not let him get away with making such a precedent, as it would offend their sense of propriety, he added that if Yaakov would agree to these terms, i.e. to complete another term of service,מלא שבוע זאת, they would then honour him greatly by their making a feast for him when he would wed Rachel.
   29,30. ויאהב גם את רחל, “he loved Rachel also.” Concerning Yaakov also loving Rachel, when he had loved her all along, Nachmanides explains that normally a man loves the first woman he marries, i.e. has intimate relations with.. In this instance, the Torah informs us that in spite of this general rule, and Yaakov having had intimate relations with Leah, he continued also to love Rachel.
   29,31. וירא ה' כי שנואה לאה, “The Lord took note of the fact that Leah was hated, etc.” According to <i>Bereshit Rabbah, 70,2</i> the reason Yaakov hated Leah was that she had betrayed her sister. Seeing that G’d knew that her intentions were pure, that she wanted to be married to a righteous person such as Yaakov, He had compassion with her.
   Some commentators believe that we must not understand the word שנואה at face value; the Torah merely describes Yaakov’s relations with Leah by comparing them to his relations with Rachel. When looked at from that angle, Leah appeared as if she were hated. We would have to say that G’d saw that Leah was “hated,” [not just by Yaakov, but when compared to her sister who was popular, Ed] so that G’d compensated her by granting her motherhood in spite of natural biological obstacles to this.
   29,35. הפעם אודה את ה', “this time I will give thanks to the Lord, etc.” She had now received her entire share of blessings seeing that she had born four children for Yaakov. Seeing that she considered herself fulfilled, she no longer became pregnant, ותעמוד מלדת.
   30,1. הבה לי בנים, “get me children!” Rachel demanded that Yaakov pray on her behalf, failing which she would die She considered any woman who had no children as “dead.”
   Nachmanides expresses his amazement at such an interpretation as he cannot understand why this was something that would infuriate Yaakov, as the Torah reports in the next verse when he upbraids her by asking if he was in place of the G’d Who had denied her children. One even prays on behalf of people to whom one is not married, so why should he feel offended by her demand that he pray on behalf of his wife? As to the comment by the <i>Midrash</i> that Yaakov rejected the comparison with Yitzchok praying for Rivkah to have children as inappropriate, seeing that Yitzchok at the time did not have children, whereas he, Yaakov did have already four children, surely that is not a reason why he should not pray on behalf of his favorite wife!?
   According to the plain meaning of the text, Rachel demanded children from her husband. She threatened that if he refused to pray on her behalf she would kill herself. She would not lay a hand on herself, but she explained that she would simply die from frustration and shame, and would blame her death on her husband. 
   Yaakov’s anger was aroused because she so misunderstood the power of prayer that she felt that the prayer of a צדיק automatically commits G’d to fulfill it. Yaakov thought that Rachel used the threat of her death as a ploy, something not unknown when women are denied having their way. At any rate, after telling Rachel that the matter was not really in his hands, seeing that G’d had granted him children but not from her, she decided to pray on her own behalf. This is what the Torah means in verse 22 that G’d “listened to her,” as a result of which she bore Joseph.
   30,3. הנה אמתי בלהה, בא אליה ואבנה גם אנכי, “here is my maidservant Bilhah, sleep with her and I too will be built through her (child).” Sarah, when suggesting that Avraham sleep with Hagar, had phrased it differently, saying “perhaps I will be built up though her.” (Genesis 16,7). Rachel appeared certain that Bilhah would have a son. The reason for her feeling certain that she would succeed was that Avraham had not yet been told by G’d that he would have a son by Sarah. Rachel, having revealed to her sister the secret code between her and Yaakov so that she would not be embarrassed under the wedding canopy, was certain that this merit would work in her favour now. Her preparedness to allow a competitor to sleep with her husband would, she was sure, produce in the desired result.
   Some commentators believe that Rachel’s certainty was based on the extra letter ה in Bilhah’s name, this being an allusion to offspring as per הא לכם זרע, or כי בי-ה ה' צור עולמו, this world having been created under the aegis of the letter ה. Rachel, רחל was the only of one of the matriarchs who did not have the letter ה in her name. She meant to make up for this deficiency by giving בלהה to her husband as her alter ego.
   30,5. ותלד ליעקב בן, “She bore a son for Yaakov.” Nachmanides draws our attention to the fact that with all the births by the maidservants the Torah writes the formula: “she bore a son for Yaakov,” to indicate that Yaakov wanted these sons and acknowledged them as his, and that is why they are not referred to as “sons of the maid.” When the Torah speaks of “a fifth son and a sixth son” (verses 17 and 19) when Leah bore them, whereas no such ordinal numbers had been used in connection with her first 4 sons, and we could have expected these ordinal numbers to have been applied to the two sons Bilhah bore, the Torah wanted to emphasise how welcome these sons were not only to Leah but also to Yaakov. The repetition of “for Yaakov,” was more important seeing that Leah had already borne him four sons. 
   30,8. נפתולי אלוקים נפתלתי, “I have writhed repeatedly in prayer before G’d, etc.” (a prophetic pronouncement) I have become closer to G’d through him (Naftali) as Chirom of the tribe of Naftali did for the construction of Solomon’s Temple what Betzalel had done for the building of the Tabernacle in Moses’ time. (Kings I 5,24,32) Other commentators view Rachel’s struggles with G’d as concerning the inclusion of Bilhah’s sons in the 12 tribes, “the tribes of the Lord.”
   30,9. ותרא לאה כי עמדה מלדת, “Leah became aware that she had stopped becoming pregnant, etc.” Nachmanides endeavours to justify Leah giving her servant maid Zilpah to Yaakov as a wife although she was not barren and had already born 4 sons for her husband. He suggests that Leah, as a prophetess, was aware that 12 sons would be born for Yaakov, and she wanted to be sure that the majority would be from her or her family. The reason that Yaakov agreed was that he, too, wanted to have more sons.
   It is possible that seeing that Yaakov knew that the land of Canaan had been given to Avraham, and both Avraham and Yitzchok had not produced many children, Yaakov wanted to make up for this by marrying a number of women. He knew that the fourth generation of Avraham’s descendants would return to the land of Canaan to take possession of it.
   30,11. ותאמר לאה בגד, “Leah said: ‘good fortune has come.’” Some commentators, in zeroing in on the name גד, point out that members of the tribe of Gad were the first ones to receive their ancestral portion of land in the land of Israel, as documented in Numbers 32,2 “the members of the tribes of Gad and Reuven came, etc.”
   Other commentators hold that that the word בגד means that Leah said: “now I know that my husband has betrayed me, seeing that he has taken my maid servant as a competing wife.” When Avraham took Hagar he had not had any children by Sarah. When Rachel gave her maid servant to Yaakov, she too had not born any children for him. But I have born my husband four children, so there was no reason for him to take her as a wife. If, nonetheless I have started being capable of having children again this must be my reward for allowing him to take my maid servant. When she bore another son she called him אשר to reinforce this feeling of joyous gratitude to G’d Who had blessed her with 6 sons.
   30,14. דודאים, “jasmines.” According to Ibn Ezra jasmines exude a pleasant fragrance and also possess the shape of a human being with head and hands like extrusions. Other commentators claim that these flowers are conducive to its owner conceiving. Ibn Ezra himself doubts this as in his estimation theses flowers are “cold,” i.e. do not stimulate sexual arousal.
   Nachmanides writes these jasmines were not intended to make her pregnant, but she wanted to enjoy their fragrance, being aware that Rachel had become pregnant as a result of her prayers and not as a result of inhaling the fragrance of jasmines. Reuven brought his mother the branches of the jasmine plants, not the roots which resemble human features. This may be why people say that these roots may somehow help a woman to get pregnant, although Nachmanides did not find reference to this in any medical text at his disposal.
   30,18. ותקרא שמו יששכר, “she named him Issachar.” Actually, she should have called him שכר, “reward.” Since she felt she had been rewarded for two actions, the handing over of her maid servant, as well as the handing over of her son’s jasmines, she indicated this by the second letter ש in the word שכר calling this son יששכר.
   30,20. הפעם יזבלני אישי, “this time my husband will reside with me.” Seeing I have so many children my “tent” is no longer adequate for my needs. My husband now has to take me into his tent.
   30,21. ואחר ילדה בת, “after that she bore a daughter.” In this instance the Torah fails to mention that Leah was pregnant prior to giving birth. The <i>Midrash</i> explains the real pregnancy producing Dinah (should have ?) commenced with Rachel who was supposed to give birth to Dinah. However, Leah her sister prayed, asking that Rachel should not become embarrassed by producing fewer sons than either of the maid servants. As a result of this prayer, the embryo in Leah’s womb at that time was changed to being a female and was born as a girl. 
   [The Talmud <i>Berachot</i> 60 attributes the prayer to Leah who was pregnant, but does not mention the transfer of an embryo to her womb. According to the version in the <i>Bereshit Rabbah 72,6</i> before me, the embryo was not transferred, but its sex was changed, something which the <i>Midrash</i> claims is possible even at a much later stage, such as the woman being already on the birth stool. Rachel had prayed for one more son, G’d fulfilling her prayer later when Binyamin was born. There is no reason to believe that Rachel was pregnant at the time Yaakov left Lavan, as she could hardly have claimed to be menstruating when her father searched her tent for the <i>teraphim</i> in Genesis 31,35 if she had been pregnant. The Talmud warns that a miracle such as occurred here, should not be used as a precedent for praying for male or female children, after the pregnancy has been in effect for 40 days. Ed.] 
   30,25. ויהי כאשר ילדה רחל את יוסף, “it was as soon as Rachel had given birth to Joseph, etc.” Yaakov felt certain that now Lavan would permit him to leave, as there was no further reason for him to fear that Yaakov would divorce Rachel seeing that he had a child by her; it is also possible that before this even Rachel might not have been willing to leave her father’s house and town. She herself might have been afraid that Yaakov would divorce her if she failed to bear him any children. 
   30,27. נחשתי ויברכני, “I have myself come to feel that the Lord has blessed me on your account.” The expression נחש usually implies that the knowledge one has acquired is empirical, the result of experimentation. Lavan had made all kinds of experiments to determine to what he owed his good fortune during the 14 years that Yaakov had been with him.
   Another explanation is that he used his “<i>teraphim</i>,” his oracles, to determine this, and even those indicated that Lavan’s new found wealth was due to Yaakov’s presence. It is interesting that later on in verse 30 Yaakov does not attribute Lavan’s wealth to his presence but to לרגלי, from the day I came, i.e. not because of anything I did. Yaakov was a model of modesty.
   30,30. מתי אעשה גם אנכי לביתי, “when will I also be able to do something for my family?” According to <i>Rashi</i> he meant that up to now only his children had supported him with their work, whereas, i.e, their father had been fully occupied in providing wealth for his father-in-law.
   According to Nachmanides there is no evidence that Yaakov owned any flocks which his sons could have tended. Besides, Reuven, his oldest son was only 6 years old at this time, so that his efforts could not have amounted to much. Therefore, what Yaakov meant was: ”when can I start doing for my family what I have been doing for your family?”
   30,32. אעבור בכל צאנך היום הסר משם כל שה נקוד וטלוא, “I will go through all your flocks today. Remove from these every dappled or blotched lamb, etc.” The word וטלוא means או טלוא, “or blotched,” not that the same sheep displays both dappled and blotched skin patterns. The males are the subject of discussion here.
   @וטלוא ונקוד בעיזים, “or the blotched or dappled among the kids.” These are the female goats. This is spelled out again when in verse 35 Lavan carries out the suggestion Yaakov had made.
   @וכל שה חום בכבשים, “and all the brown sheep.” Lavan set aside (for himself) all the male sheep which had any brown coloured spots on their pelts, and all the female sheep which had any white spots on their skins. Lavan gave those animals to his sons to tend, and henceforth any of the remaining flocks that would give birth to animals with such markings would be Yaakov’s wages. [He thought that he had made certain there would be only a minute number of such births, seeing that the animals that were likely to provide such genetic input had already been removed. Ed.]
   I find it difficult to understand to what end sheep are suddenly introduced in a context that dealt with different kinds of skin patterns of goats, both of males and females of the species.(verse 35) We would have expected the Torah to write: sequentially, התישים והעזים, just as the Torah describes this when writing את התישים העקודים...ואת כל העיזים וכו'. 
   Nachmanides writes that the males of the goats were generally dappled and blotched, whereas the male sheep were generally brown. He proceeds to explain our verses as follows: [starting with verse 32. Ed] “remove from there all the lambs that are dappled or blotched, and from the sheep also the brown ones place with the dappled and blotched ones, so that my wages will consist of animals born having these markings on their skin. He wanted the same to apply to the dappled and blotched goats.” He did not mention male goats at all, just as he had not mentioned the male sheep separately. Nachmanides quotes as proof that his interpretation is correct that when Yaakov peeled off some bark from the staves near the water troughs so that they resembled the desired skin patterns, no mention is made of the colour “brown” at all. (compare verses 37-38). If Yaakov had among his flocks of prime sheep only brown ones, i.e. the choicest animals of the flocks, it would follow that he made no attempt at all to increase the number of brown patterned lambs that would be born and would be part of his wages. We must also note that in Yaakov’s dream (31,10) which he relates to his wives, not a word is mentioned about any brown-coloured animals. From the animals and their behaviour which appeared in Yaakov’s, dream it is evident that his wages, or rather the wages that he and Lavan had agreed upon, had been the עקודים, נקודים, and ברודים, not the brown ones. If he had mentioned brown ones in verse 33 it was because among the brown sheep or goats for that matter, these never reproduced in a variety of skin colours other that their original brown. If he had attempted to increase the number of animals with illegal machinations, why did he not try to increase the number of brown sheep that would be born? He did not do so because only brown sheep reproduce brown skinned lambs. 
   30,35. ויסר ביום ההוא את התישים, “On that day Lavan removed the he-goats (of special skin patterns).” Nachmanides writes that Yaakov had been imprecise and had spoken only about טלוא ונקוד בעזים, the dappled and blotched she goats, whereas Lavan was aware that the male genetics are paramount in determining the skin pattern of the young; this is why by removing the male goats he hoped to effectively prevent goats being born which bore the skin markings which would have made them Yaakov’s. Lavan had even removed the עתודים, animals with just a little white around their ankles. (According to many commentators what is described here as חום, brown, refers to generalized spotting of a brownish colour, the basic colour of sheep being white). 
   According to the way we explained matters this is all logical, as Yaakov also did mention the male animals since it is written הסר משם כל שה וגו', “remove from there every lamb, etc.” The word כל included the males, the billy-goats.
   Alternately, one may explain that the words כל אשר לבן בו in verse 35, refer back to the goats from which he had separated all those that had any white stripes or spots. The meaning of the words וכל חום בכבשים in the same line, would mean “every sheep displaying the skin pattern mentioned earlier,” i.e. נקוד וטלוא, referring to brownish dapples and blotches.
   30,37. ויקח לו יעקב מקל לבנה,”Yaakov took for his use an aspen stick, etc.” Some people are amazed at why Yaakov the righteous person could resort to such a device. Nachmanides counters that seeing that they had made an agreement that the animals born with such skin patterns would be his wages, Yaakov was well within his rights to do everything to ensure that as many animals showing such skin patterns would be born.
   Perhaps Yaakov had even conditioned his acceptance on his being allowed to do what he could to encourage the birth of animals with the skin patterns that were to remain his. Seeing that Lavan did not have the expertise in genetics which Yaakov possessed, [or the angel taught him in the dream, Ed.] he did not object to such a request. The other shepherds did not become aware of Yaakov’s stratagem as he used it only twice each year in the spring and fall when the animals are in heat. If Yaakov had used the stratagem every time before the animals were at the troughs, Lavan would not have had any lambs born to him at all.
   Some commentators say that in the first year many lambs were born to the flocks by the grace of G’d, the angel having revealed to him that by the use of the aspen sticks whose bark was peeled in the right way, the sheep while in heat would exercise their imagination and their young would reflect this in their skin pattern. Yaakov made no use of this information until the second year, so as to avoid being accused of having stolen some of Lavan’s sheep. Once he had sheep with such skin patterns of his own, he was no longer suspect.
   30,40. והכבשים הפריד יעקב, “Yaakov had already separated the sheep, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this means that he set aside as his own flocks all those that had been born with the skin patterns agreed upon as his wages. He made separate herds of them and made them walk in front of the mature flocks in a manner that caused them to face those flocks. This is the meaning of the line ויתן פני הצאן אל עקוד וכל חום בצאן לבן, “he made them face all the ankle-striped and the brown ones among the sheep.” 
   The problem with this commentary, writes Nachmanides, is that it does not explain why he had separated the sheep only and not the goats, both male and female, so that they too would reproduce young ones of the desired skin pattern. Why did he not make a separate herd of the goats also? Furthermore, seeing that according to <i>Rashi’s</i> opinion the sheep do not produce the skin pattern called עקוד as we surmise by the fact that Yaakov was not given such as part of his wages, as opposed to brown (speckled) ones, there was no point in his peeling aspen sticks when these sheep came to the water troughs. It therefore made perfect sense that Yaakov kept the sheep completely apart from the goats. He had a flock of goats, both male and female, which were נקוד וטלוא; these he made walk in front of the senior generation of sheep. All this makes sense according to those who hold that any נקוד וטלוא among the sheep would not belong to Yaakov in any event.
   According to <i>Rashi’s</i> own opinion that all the skin patterns mentioned applied to both goats and sheep, the reason he separated the herds of sheep from those of the goats was that among the goats there were not (as yet) any which showed brown patches of skin.
   30,41. המקושרות, “the early-bearing ones,” some commentators understand the word as “the strong ones.” They believe that it refers to those whose limbs were firmly attached to each other. Such firm attachment between the various limbs is considered a sign of good health. By contrast, the עטופים (verse 42) are the ones whose health was more precarious. They were the weak ones. The word occurs in this context in Lamentations 2,19 העטופים ברעב, “the ones weakened by famine.”
   Nachmanides writes that הקשורים are the male animals which follow the females very close on their heels and never stay far away from them as they are usually in heat. A parallel expression in the Torah would be ונפשו קשורה בנפשו, the manner in which Yehudah describes the spiritual bond between his father and Binyamin. (Genesis 44,30).
   Ibn Ezra explains that in the month of <i>Nissan</i>, all the young lambs born to the sheep were strong and healthy, to wit מקושרות. Seeing they are so healthy and strong, they have a strong sex drive, always staying close behind the females. On the other hand, the ones born in fall, in <i>Tishrey</i>, are by nature weak, and Yaakov was not particularly interested in them, hence he did not bother with the aspen sticks at that time of year. At least, he refrained from doing so in order to minimize the chance of Lavan learning of his stratagem.
   30,42. ובהעטיף הצאן לא ישים, והיה העטופים ללבן. “When the ewes and she-goats were late he would not place the aspen sticks in their path to the troughs.” This was because at that time they did not give birth to lambs or kids with the desired skin pattern. As a result, all the blotched ones would belong to Yaakov, being strong animals born in spring. 
   Some commentators understand that the fact that these skin patterns appeared was not even due to Yaakov’s stratagem, but was a divine assistance Yaakov experienced, a minor miracle. This explains why Lavan did not check regularly on what Yaakov was up to, as he had been unaware of what had been happening. He did not even view the use of the aspen sticks as responsible for the fact that the young sheep and goats born under Yaakov’s supervision mostly had the skin patterns favouring him. Most miracles are not of the type of splitting the sea, or water turning into blood, but they are “additives” to initiatives undertaken by man. [According to that view, had Yaakov not used this stratagem the miracle could not have occurred, just as if the woman whose oil the prophet Elisha increased manifold could not have experienced this miracle if her jar had been totally empty of oil. Ed.] (compare Kings II 4,1-6) This commentary, is not valid in our situation, as without question the stratagem used by Yaakov can be successfully applied by other shepherds whom G’d does not favour with miraculous intervention.
   31,8. אם כה יאמר: נקודים יהיה שכרך, וגו', “if he would say thus: “the blotched ones will be your wages, etc.” Originally, Yaakov had stipulated two skin patterns among the goats, as well as the colour brown when it would show up among the sheep. When the result favoured Yaakov, Lavan changed the terms of the agreement, substituting skin patterns which had been rare up to that point. However, as soon as he did so, the animals bore young with the skin patterns which favoured Yaakov disproportionately. The new skin patterns were already totally unrelated to anything Yaakov could do by peeling them and patterning them. It was clear that without Divine intervention on behalf of Yaakov, he could not have become so rich in so short a period of time. We know this from the fact that Yaakov did not add that he had to use these stratagems again and again.
   31,10. והנה העתודים העולים על הצאן עקודים, נקודים וברודים. “and behold, the he-goats were ankle striped, dappled, and blotch-striped.” If the male possessed one of each of these skin patterns, the lamb born by the female which it had mounted would have the corresponding skin pattern.
   According to Nachmanides, whenever the Torah mentions the term עתודים, what are meant are the rams or billy-goats, the אילים, the fully grown, even outsize specimen. Other commentators understand the term עתודים as describing fat animals of their species The reason that they are mentioned separately is that although these animals are raised only for eventual slaughter to serve as meat, and not for siring lambs, the phenomenon of the lambs which they sired having the skin pattern favouring Yaakov was in evidence. According to <i>Rashi,</i> angels brought these animals from Lavan’s flock to Yaakov’s flocks in order to help him increase the proportion of appropriately skin-patterned animals. According to Nachmanides, the plain meaning is that appropriately skin patterned males had to be seen as mounting the females which would later on bear the young reflecting the father-animal’s genes. The word הנה, which Yaakov uses in describing his dream, is meant to show how vividly he experienced this in his dream.
   31,13. אנכי הא-ל בית א-ל, “I am the G’d of Beyt-El, etc.” According to Nachmanides, Yaakov recounted all that the angel had said to him in his dream to his wives in order to win their agreement to leave their father’s house and to return with him to the land of Canaan. This was not all a single dream. The revelations involving the aspen sticks occurred while Yaakov was still in Lavan’s employ, whereas the revelation in our verse here occurred during their journey, for as soon as Yaakov had been instructed by G’d to leave Charan and to return to Canaan he did so. He sent for Rachel and Leah, told them of the Divine instructions in his dream, and they left forthwith.
   31,14. ותען רחל ולאה, “Rachel and Leah replied, etc.” I have been bothered by the fact that Rachel did not display courtesy for her older sister and spoke first. In the meantime I have seen a comment in <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i>, 74,4 where the author quotes an opinion that the reason that Rachel died before her sister was that she spoke up before her sister. In that connection Rabbi Yossi questioned the author of that statement by asking him if he had ever seen that when someone calls Reuven that Shimon will answer that call (instead of Reuven?) What did Rachel do wrong? The Torah reports that Yaakov called Rachel and Leah to the field in that order. Why should not Rachel have replied first? Rabbi Yossi must explain Rachel’s death as due to a different circumstance, i.e. Yaakov’s conditional curse of the person who had stolen Lavan’s <i>teraphim.</i>
   31,19. ותגנב רחל את התרפים, “Rachel stole the <i>teraphim.”</i> According to <i>Rashi,</i> she intended to wean her father from idolatry by removing the idol from him.
   Nachmanides admits that it is possible that Lavan had been using the <i>teraphim</i> in his worship of idolatry. It is however by no means certain that <i>teraphim</i> served only as idols. We certainly would not expect to come across idols in King David’s residence, and yet we are told in Samuel I 19,13 that Michal, David’s wife placed such <i>teraphim</i> in David’s bed, feigning that it was he who was sleeping in that bed. Surely, David did not keep idolatrous figures in his home.
   It is most likely that the <i>teraphim</i> were objects which enabled people to know the time of day, and in that connection they were also used to help them to predict future events. The root of the word is from רפה, “weak” as in רפי ידים, “weak-handed,” or נרפים אתם, “you are weak” (in the sense of lazy, not pulling one’s weight.) The reason people call these objects תרפים is to hint that the reliability of these objects in predicting future events is not very strong, although in the majority of instances the predictions prove more or less accurate. Only people who do not pray to the Lord, the Creator, would be foolish enough to put their trust in them.
   Some people argue that astrologers possess the power to summon up certain images at a time which they can accurately predict.
   Ibn Ezra writes that <i>teraphim</i> are objects made of copper which are designed to help us determine portions of an hour, such as minutes. Some people claim that some astrologers possess the skill to raise some life-like shapes at a predetermined hour, and that apparition appears to speak intelligently.
   Personally, I believe that <i>teraphim</i> are replicas of human beings, constructed in a manner designed to endow them with some divine powers.
   Some commentators believe that Rachel stole the <i>teraphim</i> in order to wean her father from practicing idolatry. If that were so indeed, why did she keep these <i>teraphim</i> with her instead of at least burying them? It is far more likely that Rachel, being aware that her father was an astrologer, was afraid that by a combination of astrology and the <i>teraphim</i> he would succeed in tracking the movements of Yaakov and his family and he would overtake them in short order. Another view is that she took the <i>teraphim</i> so that these would not reveal to him where Yaakov was at that time. [according to that view she did not really ”steal” them but denied him their use at a critical point in time. Ed.]
   31,22. ויגד ללבן ביום השלישי, “Lavan was informed on the third day, etc.” <i>Rashi e</i>xplains the time lag by the fact that Lavan’s flocks grazed a distance of three days travel from those which Yaakov tended. It does not refer to a distance between the town and the area where Lavan’s flocks were grazing. 
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary that there is no proof for his contention as Yaakov hardly set out from the middle of the field, but went back to town to gather up his and his family’s belongings.
    
   It is possible that Lavan’s flocks grazed close to the town, these flocks being on the east side of town, whereas Yaakov grazed his flocks on the west side of the town. Yaakov returned home, gathered up his belongings. Seeing that he had not given Lavan reason to suspect that he was about to leave him, he gained an initial advantage and Lavan only found out that he was gone when he had occasion to return to the town. By the time Lavan had organized his sons and sheepshearers, arranged for a pursuit, plus the time spent riding in pursuit, seven days had elapsed until he caught up with Yaakov.
   31,23. וידבק אותו בהר הגלעד, “He caught up with him at Mount Gilead.” Lavan reached the slopes of the mountain on the evening of the sixth day after Yaakov’s departure and he saw Yaakov’s encampment from a distance. During the night G’d appeared to him and warned him not to molest Yaakov in any shape or form.
   Ibn Ezra explains the sequence וידבק, “he caught up,” followed by ויבא, “he arrived,” as one of many examples in the Torah when a major point is being made before something which actually had happened earlier, but was subordinate in importance.
   31,24. אל לבן הארמי, “to Lavan from Aram.” The reason this detail-with which we are already familiar- was mentioned here, was to emphasize that although Lavan, as an Aramite like the other members of his town, was an idolater, G’d appeared to him in a dream for the sake of the righteous Yaakov..
   @מטוב עד רע, “either good or evil (threats).” When wicked people do you favours, “טוב”, such favours are tainted because they originate with the wicked. Sooner or later, something רע, “evil,” will happen as a consequence of such a “favour.”
   According to Nachmanides, G’d did not permit Lavan to try and convince him to come back with him, in return for favourable conditions which he would provide for him. Neither was he allowed to try and frighten Yaakov by warning him of what he would do to him if he did not come back.
   31,29. ואלוקי אביכם אמש אמר אלי, וגו', “and the G’d of your father has said to me last night.” I find it difficult to understand why Lavan told Yaakov that G’d had told him not to do harm to him. After all, it was a known fact that Lavan hated Yaakov and wanted to totally uproot him. Seeing that G’d had forbidden him to do so, why did he mention this to Yaakov? Yaakov would have been more afraid of him if he had not mentioned his nocturnal experience at all? I believe the reason is that Lavan was aware that Yaakov was a prophet and he thought that G’d would have revealed to him what He had said to Lavan. Under those circumstances he felt it would be better for him to come clean right away and admit that G’d had warned him.
   31,32. עם אשר תמצא את אלוקיך לא יחיה, “the one in whose possession you will find your deities shall not live.” Some commentators hold that this is not the formula used in a curse, but that Yaakov meant to say that such a person did not deserve to live, but deserved to be hung as a thief. If he were to be convicted of the death penalty, Yaakov promised to be the first one to assist in the execution.
   31,33. באהל יעקב ובאהל לאה, “in Yaakov’s tent and in Leah’s tent.” According to <i>Rashi</i> Yaakov’s tent was in fact Rachel’s tent as he spent most of his nights in her tent. Even when he left the tent of Leah, he, Lavan, went back a second time to Rachel’s tent as he was aware that she was fond of rummaging around. (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> on that section. Ed.] .
   Nachmanides does not agree that the same tent in the same verse is referred to once as Rachel’s tent and another time as Yaakov’s tent.
   Ibn Ezra wrote that Lavan searched in this order: 1) the tent of Yaakov, 2) the tent of Leah, followed by the tent of the two maidservants who shared a tent, or to each of their tents separately, Afterwards he went back once more to Leah’s tent. The proof is that the Torah writes: “he departed from the tent of Leah.” The Torah describes this procedure in a manner which enables it to say that Lavan had failed to locate the <i>teraphim</i> in any of these tents. as they had not been hidden there. In verse 34 when he came to a tent that did contain the <i>teraphim,</i> the Torah reports this search separately, to stress that although this tent contained the <i>teraphim,</i> Lavan failed to find them. Hence the words “he did not find” are repeated again. He continues that he feels that what most likely happened is that Lavan proceeded in order by first searching Yaakov’s tent, followed by searching the tent of Leah, followed by searching the tent of Rachel, and that of the two servant maids. The reason why the Torah describes Rachel’s tent as being searched last was to emphasise that in spite of the fact that the <i>teraphim</i> were in her tent, he did not find them as by then she had hidden them under the saddle of the camel that she was sitting on.
   31,35. אל יחר בעיני אדוני כי לא אוכל לקום מפניך. “may my lord not be angry, for I am suffering from my monthly menstrual pains.” Nachmanides writes that he does not understand what kind of an excuse Rachel offered with these words. Who has ever heard of women who experience these pains being unable to get up and stand on the floor? Perhaps she meant that all women suffer from pains in their head and in their limbs when these pains begin.
   I believe it is far more likely that the women in those days were quarantined during their monthly cycles so that men would not approach them and speak to them as it was considered that they could thereby confer disease through their exhaling bad breath. Our sages have already confirmed this in a <i>Baraitha</i> in the tractate<i> Niddah</i>. Even to be looked upon by a menstruating woman was considered hazardous. This is why special huts were set aside for the use of women in such a condition. [this editor has seen such a hut in Hawai with his own eyes. Ed.] According to the aforementioned <i>Baraitha</i>, a Torah scholar is forbidden to even enquire after the well being of such a woman. Rachel said that good manners require that she give a kiss to her father but that due to her present condition she was unable to do so, etc.
   Some commentators do not understand the words דרך נשים as applying to menstruation pains but, on the contrary, to the state of pregnancy.
   31,36. ויחר ליעקב,”Yaakov became angry.” Even though, originally, Yaakov had given Lavan permission to search, seeing that he had said that the person with whom the <i>teraphim</i> would be found should not live, and he had said in front of everybody “please identify anything in my entourage as yours if you are able to,” how would Lavan be able to find anything unless he searched all of Yaakov’s belongings? Originally, Yaakov had thought that Lavan suspects one of his servants to have stolen the <i>teraphim;</i> he therefore permitted the search. It had not occurred to him that Lavan would suspect even him or his wives of being thieves. When Lavan had not found anything in his camp, he concluded that he had come with a trumped up charge. This is why he accused Lavan of having staged a pursuit for nefarious reasons, other than that he wanted to retrieve his property. He now told him that if anyone had been robbed it was him, whose wages Lavan had changed so many times, that he, Yaakov, would have been in his rights to search among Lavan’s belongings what he had robbed Yaakov of.
   31,39. טריפה לא הבאתי אליך, “I did not present to you wounded animals.” Even animals which had been wounded or killed by wolves and lions, for which I was not legally liable, I did not bring you as proof that I had not caused you the loss of an animal. I rather made restitution out of my own pocket. Seeing that according to Jewish law, a paid guard is responsible for this type of loss, how did Yaakov excel in any way by making good such losses to Lavan? When he speaks about stolen (not by violence) animals he refers still to the above-mentioned torn animals. He is only describing various situations which are all classed as <i>force majeure,</i> conditions beyond man’s control, for which he could not have been held responsible. Losing an animal to wolves or lions is something that no shepherd can be blamed for.
   31,42. ופחד יצחק היה לי, “and the one whom Yitzchok fears was on my side.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that Yaakov did not want to use the name of G’d outright by saying אלוקי יצחק, “the G’d of “Yitzchok,” as we have a tradition that G’d does not associate His name with the living, as the chance always exists that even a righteous person may become corrupted before he dies. This “rule” is contradicted when Eliezer spoke of אלוקי אדוני אברהם, “the G’d of my master Avraham. [besides G’d Himself associated His name with the living in Yaakov’s dream of the ladder. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra explains the words פחד יצחק as meaning that the fact that Yaakov’s father Yitzchok had been G’d fearing now came to the assistance of his son, something known as זכות אבות, the merit of the fathers.
   @ויוכח אמש, “when He reproved you last night.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word יוכח as a derivative of תוכחה, rebuke, and not as a derivative of הוכחה, proof. 
   It is more likely that the word has the same meaning as in 31,37 ויוכיחו בין שנינו, “and let them judge between us.” At this point Yaakov says that the G’d Who is aware of all the things that are hidden from man, has intervened and shown who is upright and who is not. Proof that this is the correct interpretation is that Yaakov did not say ויוכח אותך אמש, “and He has judged you last night.”
   31,43. ולבנותי מה אעשה לאלה, “as to my daughters, what (harm) should I do to these?” We must understand this as if he had said ולבנותי מה אעשה להן,. “what could I possibly do to my daughters?”
   Nachmanides explains the whole expression as one expressing pity, i.e. Lavan when looking at his daughters and grandchildren is overcome, and exclaims: “how could I possibly be cruel enough to cause any harm to my own family?” This is why he added the words אשר ילדו, “the children that they have given birth to in my own house?” He says this in the form of an apology to Yaakov who had accused him of pursuing him with evil intent. He asks Yaakov rhetorically how he could accuse him of harming them when all he wanted was to see his grandchildren, and kiss them! He now wants to do them a favour by making Yaakov promise that he would not marry any additional wives, depriving his grandchildren of part of their inheritance.
   31,44. והיה לעד ביני וביני, “which will be a witness between me and between you.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the subject of the word והיה is G’d, i.e. G’d will be the witness.
   Nachmanides says that G’d is not a part of this covenant at all, but the word ברית is the subject of the word והיה. In other words: “the covenant will serve as witness.” Anyone violating this covenant will become the victim of the curses associated with the sin of violating a solemn agreement.
   It is also possible to understand what happened here as follows: Lavan wanted to select a witness that endures throughout the lifetime and beyond of the parties making the agreement. This is why Yaakov erected a stone to serve as the witness. (verse 45) This is also why Lavan said in verse 48 that this heap of stones would serve as the witness to this agreement.
   31,46. ויאמר יעקב לאחיו, “Yaakov said to his brothers” A reference to Yaakov’s sons, seeing that the people accompanying Lavan were all his supporters, members of his immediate family, as well as members of Nachor’s family generally. Yaakov’s sons were like brothers to him. Lavan had refrained from bringing strangers with him, people who for one reason or another might side with Yaakov in the approaching confrontation.
   Some commentators believe that Yaakov did speak to Lavan’s supporters asking them to help collect stones. His addressing them as “brothers,” was intended to be a rebuke, i.e. they ought to behave like brothers and not like opponents.
   Nachmanides also interprets the word לאחיו as applying to Lavan’s brothers. He did not want to ask for such assistance from his father’s-in-law directly, as he related to him with respect. He wanted to avoid giving the impression that everything was under his sole control. The situation is similar to Pharaoh’s enquiring from Joseph’s brothers what their occupational skills were in Genesis 47,3. 
   @ויאכלו שם על הגל, “they ate there next to the heap of stones.” There, as a symbolic gesture cementing the conclusion of the covenant, something that was customary when any pact or alliance was concluded between two or more parties. The point was that both the parties involved ate from the same loaf of bread as a sign of friendship. Having partaken of that symbolic meal, they swore to one another to maintain that agreement and not to breach it.
   It is also possible that they had the meal described in verse 54 next to this monument to their reconciliation. In that event, the purpose of the collecting of stones may have been to erect tables and seating arrangements around which the meal would be consumed. 
   31,48. ויאמר לבן הגל הזה עד, “Lavan said: “this pile of stones will be witness.” After Yaakov had named this pile of stones “Gilad,” (a pile of stones that is testimony), Lavan adopted Hebrew for the sake of confirming the agreement, seeing that they were able to agree on a mutually acceptable name for the monument in question. Alternatively, the Torah renders what Lavan said in Aramaic in Hebrew for the sake of the readers who do not understand Aramaic.
   31,49. והמצפה אשר אמר, “he also called it <i>mitzpah, (lookout)</i> as he said.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this mountain which appears by that name in Judges 11,29, got its name from the fact that that both Yaakov and Lavan had said to the other that G’d would look down upon this monument to ensure that neither party would breach the agreement.
   Nachmanides, on the other hand, claims that if <i>Rashi</i> were correct there must have been a high platform on top of this pile of stones. In view of the unlikelihood of this, he believes that our verse is a continuation of verse 47, which had been interrupted by Lavan in verse 48. The words ויעקב קרא לו גלעד והמצפה על כן, must be read as a single sequence, i.e. Yaakov called the pile of stones “Gilad” as well as “<i>hamitzpah</i>.” The reason he did so was because he invited G’d to supervise the agreement which had been sealed between him and Lavan, and to protect him against any attempt to violate that agreement.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the words אשר אמר, (verse 49) refer back to Lavan, so that the meaning of the line is: “Yaakov called the pile “Mitzpah” because Lavan had said to him: “may G’d look upon (יצף) this monument, etc.”
   31,52. עד הגל הזה, “this pile of stones is a witness, etc.” This is why Bileam (re-incarnate of Lavan) had his foot squeezed against the wall by the she-ass when he was on the way to curse the descendants of Yaakov, the “wall” described in Numbers 22,25. The “wall” is a euphemism for this pile of stones, Bileam, being the re-incarnate of Lavan. [this may account for the fact that when Bileam arrived at Balak he was limping. Ed.]
   @אם אני לא אעבור אליך את הגל הזה ואם אתה לא תעבור אלי את הגל הזה ואת המצבה הזאת לרעה. “that I will not pass this pile of stones and neither will you pass this monument with hostile intent.” According to Ibn Ezra the words את הגל הזה are not to be taken literally, but are a symbol for the agreement confirmed by both Yaakov and Lavan when they erected the pile of stones and ate a sacrificial meal together to seal the covenant. The word אם here has the same meaning as the word אשר, “that.” The word תעבור, too, does not refer to walking past an imaginary line, but is a euphemism for action, i.e. hostile action.
   Other commentators see in the verse a mutual promise to cross this symbolic boundary in order to come to the assistance of the other party when this is called for. It is a boundary only to prevent hostile invasion of the other party’s realm.
   Still other commentators believe that Lavan did not want to say something offensive, negative, hence he couched it in a manner that describes it as an inactivity, although the final word לרעה strictly speaking, only makes sense if the opening words had been אם אעבור, instead of to אם לא אעבור.
	 Still another opinion understands the negative opening as a hint that Lavan agrees that when either one of them is in difficulties which the other party can save him from, that in such a situation it is, of course, in order to cross this new boundary between their respective realms. This would be in line with other agreements called ברית, alliance, when either party promises the other to assist them when the need arises.
   31,53. אלוקי אברהם ואלוקי נחור ישפטו בינינו, “the God of Avraham and the gods of Nachor may judge who between us is righteous.” We have to understand this verse as each of the two parties saying what he said as applicable only to the deity that he worshipped. Yaakov certainly did not accord the gods of Nachor legitimacy by considering them as fit to judge anything. Each of the parties mentioned the deity worshipped by their respective grandfathers, something Yaakov also did when he swore in the name of Avraham, who was his grandfather. This was a courtesy, Yaakov actually only swearing by the G’d of his father, i.e. בפחד אביו יצחק. 
   32,1. וינשק לבניו, ”he kissed his grandchildren.” His daughters children.
   32,2. ויפגעו בו מלכי אלוקים, ”angels of G’d met him.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that these were the angels assigned to protect him while he was in the land of Israel. These angels now came to welcome Yaakov, whereas the ones who had accompanied him thus far still had not taken their leave.
   @מחנים, “i.e. two camps.” Nachmanides is astounded at this interpretation by <i>Rashi</i> of these two verses, in view of the fact that Yaakov had not yet crossed into the territory of ארץ ישראל, and in fact was a long way distant from the border even when he sent messengers to Esau in verse 4. We were told shortly before that he had crossed the fording of the river Yabbok, a river which flows from East to West and ends up as a tributary to the river Jordan, the dividing line between the land of Canaan and the territories of Ammon and Moav. Even the land of Edom still lay between him and the Holy Land. Yaakov’s entry into the Holy Land occurred only when he arrived at Shechem physically and spiritually whole, as the Torah testifies in verse 18. We must therefore view what the Torah described here as a vision granted to Yaakov, a vision which was to reassure him that he had more friendly forces on his side than had Esau, his brother, whom he still had to confront. He called the location מחניים, to symbolize the occasion. There is nothing unusual in that. 
   Parshat Vayishlach
   32,4. וישלח יעקב מלאכים לפניו, “Yaakov sent messengers ahead of him.” Their assignment was to walk in front of him.
   Alternatively, their assignment was to investigate the “face” of Esau, i.e. his attitude toward Yaakov at this time. Although G’d had given Yaakov all kinds of assurances, (some time earlier) he did not rely on his righteousness alone to save him from Esau, but took every prudent precaution to minimize the risk to his family and to himself. Yaakov’s conduct is to serve as a model for his children and future descendants to teach them how to deal with the descendants of Esau. Just as he prayed, offered bribes, and was prepared for battle, so his descendants should employ these three means of insuring their survival also.
   @ארצה שעיר, שדה אדום, “the land Seir, the field of Edom.” Anyone traveling from Charan to the land of Israel travels through the land of Seir. Even though Esau spent most of his time in the land of Canaan, as is clear from Genesis 36,6: “Esau took his wives and went to “a (another) land,” on account of his brother Yaakov,” Yaakov had reason to believe that he would encounter him near his wives, who had come from the land of Seir. Our sages have criticized Yaakov, comparing his conduct to the proverbial “he who grabs the ears of a dog must not be surprised if he gets bitten.” Yaakov’s sending gifts ahead to Esau alerted him to the fact that he was about to approach him. Yaakov’s mistake was repeated during the latter days of the second Jewish commonwealth, when the Romans were invited by a Jewish king Aristobul, descendant of the Maccabees, to conclude an alliance with him. This was the beginning of the collapse of the Jewish commonwealth and of the second Temple, followed by total loss of Jewish independence, such as it had been.
   32,5. כה תאמרו לאדוני לעשו, “thus you shall say to my lord, to Esau.” This does not mean that Yaakov called his brother: “my lord,” as this would not make sense unless you are in the presence of the person so described. It means that he commanded his servants to address Esau with the title “my lord, thus has said your servant Yaakov.” when they would meet him.
   It is also possible that that Yaakov did refer to Esau as “my lord” even when he was not in his presence in order to warn his messengers to address him with the proper degree of deference even when they were not in his presence. They would do so once they noticed that even their own master did so even in his absence.
   All of this was not an unusually obsequious behaviour by Yaakov, but it was customary for the younger brother to refer to his older brother in such terms, as a sign of respect. The reason the Torah reports all this, is to tell us that although Yaakov had purchased the birthright from his brother, he still considered him the senior brother, biologically speaking. He hoped to persuade Esau by this stratagem that the “birthright” in terms of personal honour, was of no concern to him whatsoever.
   @עם לבן גרתי, ”I have sojourned with Lavan, etc.” I have stayed all this time even though he kept treating me like a stranger (and not like a son-in-law).
   @ואחר עד עתה, “I delayed my return until now.” I was not forced by external pressures to delay my return, but I did so of my own free will.
   32,6. ויהי לי שור וחמור, “I acquired herds and flocks, etc.” Even though I have always been considered a יושב אהלים, a “<i>yeshivah bachur</i>, a “highbrow,” a misfit in the world of “men of the world,” I am not as naïve as you think, as thanks to G’d’s help I have become wealthy. This was not a boast, but Yaakov wanted to make Esau think twice before he would launch a military attack on him.
   @ואשלחה להגיד לאדוני, “I have sent messengers to inform my lord of my impending arrival.” According to <i>Rashi</i> these words were meant to show Esau that Yaakov came with friendly intentions, bent on healing any breach that had existed between them. According to this explanation, the words are not a repetition of something implied previously.
   Nachmanides does understand the last few words as referring to what had been said before, i.e. Yaakov’s announcing that he had become wealthy since he had last seen Esau. Seeing that he had attained such wealth, he was able to treat Esau with the honour due to an older brother. i.e. this was the reason for the tokens of his esteem he had sent ahead of himself. If Esau, preferred, he could make a selection of the gifts Yaakov had sent for his approval.
   Some commentators see in Yaakov’s conduct confirmation of what Solomon said in Proverbs 19,7 כל אחי-רש שנאהו, “all the brothers of a poor man hate him.” Yaakov wanted Esau to know that he did not have to hate him, as he had not come as a potential burden, i.e. a poor relation who is in need of a handout. On the contrary, he was bent on finding favour in his eyes.
   32,7. וגם הולך לקראתך, “he is also on his way to meet you.” Just as you are walking towards him, so he is coming towards you, and you will soon meet up with one another. The reason the messengers phrased Esau’s approach not as בא לקראתך, the usual syntax, but said הולך לקראתך , was to alert Yaakov that while on the way, Esau was mobilizing his soldiers, before meeting up with his brother.
   32,8. ויירא יעקב, “Yaakov was afraid (when he heard this). He worried that the merit of Esau having practiced the commandment of honouring father and mother during the 35 years when Yaakov had not been able to do this, would give him an edge in any hostile confrontation.
   32,9. והיה המחנה הנשאר לפליטה, “so that the remaining camp may escape.” Some believe that the plain meaning of the verse is that Yaakov hoped that if the first camp that would be attacked by Esau would be defeated, then the people in the second camp might be able to save themselves through fleeing in time, or Esau’s anger might have spent itself so that he would not give pursuit, or that help might materialize through Divine intervention.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that the words mean that the second camp would definitely survive as Yaakov himself would engage Esau in battle.
   Personally, I think that Yaakov’s certainty was based on the fact that he knew that not all his offspring would fall victim into Esau’s hands at anyone time. This was also to be a sign for his sons to remember that the descendants of Esau will never be able to obliterate all the Jewish people. Whenever, during the long years of our exile, one king or government would issue harsh decrees against us, another king somewhere would be prepared to offer refuge and shelter.
   32,11. קטונתי מכל החסדים, “I am unworthy of all the acts of love and kindness, etc.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Yaakov means that each act of kindness performed on his behalf by G’d diminished the sum total of his remaining merit balance.
   Nachmanides does not accept this interpretation as linguistically correct, seeing that the words “small” and “big” are appropriate for bodies but not for concepts such as merits. These concepts are measured according to quality not according to quantity. The correct interpretation therefore is that Yaakov did not consider himself worthy of the kind deeds G’d had seen fit to perform in his interest.
   The difference between the חסדים and the אמת lies in deeds performed for his sake even without the benefit of his having vowed to give tithes and to build a Temple, They refer to the promises G’d had made him prior to his having made any vow whatsoever. The word אמת is a reference to assurances given to Yaakov by G’d, and these having been fulfilled (in his lifetime). They are named thus as man is entitled to expect G’d to make good on His promises. (unless he had done something to forfeit the claim these assurances were based on)
   @כי במקלי עברתי את הירדן הזה, “for when I previously crossed this river Jordan, all I possessed was my walking staff.” I used to have a problem with the expression “this river Jordan,” seeing that Yaakov’s route was far distant from the river Jordan. The Jordan constitutes the eastern boundary of the land of Israel! My brother Rabbi Yehudah answered my question by pointing out that actually it was not Yaakov who crossed the Jordan but his staff, which by splitting the Jordan (as per tradition of our sages) enabled Yaakov to cross the river. [the meaning of the prefix ב in the word במקלי is not “with” but “by means of.”] The use of the word זה, “this,” for something not at hand, is not unique. We encounter it, for instance in the line כי זה משה האיש, “for this man Moses,” (Exodus 32,1) as a reference to Moses who, at that time, was on Mount Sinai, far from the camp of the Israelites.
   32,12. והכני אם על בנים, “and he will smite me, mother and children.” He means “mothers and their children.”
   32,13. ואתה אמרת היטיב איטיב עמך, ”and You have said: “I will keep on doing good with you.” Nachmanides explains that although Yaakov was afraid that sins he might have committed would prevent G’d from making good on His promises to him, he refers to very generous kind deeds G’d had already performed, implying that he had not been worthy of these favours. He argues that if G’d had seen fit to perform favours for him which He had not promised, He will most certainly perform those which he had promised him, regardless of any sins he might have become guilty of inadvertently in the meantime.
   Some commentators claim that Yaakov was concerned as a loving father that Esau should not be allowed to harm members of his family, as it was possible that he would stage a hit and run raid, and only he, Yaakov, would escape due to G’d’s protection of him as promised. In such an event, G’d could still fulfill His promise by enabling Yaakov to start a new family and to raise children. This scenario, as something which Yaakov had in mind with his words here, is not plausible, as if this was what Yaakov had in mind he could not have formulated his prayer with the words “and You yourself have said, etc.,” a reference to people whose very life he attributed to G’d having already fulfilled part of His promise. Furthermore, part of G’d’s promise during the dream of the ladder had been that He would protect Yaakov on all his journeys etc. If his family would become victims of Esau’s vengeful attack, how could this promise still come true? We must attribute Yaakov’s fear as worry only about any sins committed since the promise of G’d had been received as a cause of invalidating such a promise.
   32,14. מן הבא בידו, “from something he had acquired.” The gift he prepared was not something he had to buy, but it came out of his own possessions, Seeing that he was not near any town, he did not have time to look for something especially suited as a gift. He took from the items which represented his wealth.
   32,16. גמלים מיניקות, “camels with their young.” The males of the species were not mentioned here. Some people claim that the word גמל, camel, is the description for both the male and the female of the species. We would then assume that there were 10 adult males, 10 adult females, and their 10 female young. The male/female ratio of the camels would then correspond to the male/female ratio of the donkeys.
   32,17. ורווח תשימו בין עדר לעדר, “and place some distance between one herd of animals and the next.” This measure was also to serve as a model for the behaviour of Jews in the future; Yaakov was asking G’d that if the need would arise to chastise the Jewish people, the decrees should not all be carried out at the same time, but that G’d should allow the people to recover from one disaster before having to contend with the next one.
   Some commentators understand the words ורווח תשימו as ensuring that different species of animals were not to mix with one another. 
   32,18. כי יפגשך עשו אחי, “when Esau my brother will encounter you,“ My father of sainted memory, the ר'אש, commented on this that Yaakov instructed his messengers not to open a conversation with Esau, but only to reply to him if he engaged them in conversation first. If Esau did not begin a conversation they should simply proceed on their way to Esau’s home.
   32,21. כי אמר: אכפרה פניו, “for he had said: ”I want to gain his goodwill.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this as an attempt to mollify Esau’s anger. Whenever the word כפרה occurs in connection with sin, either intentional or inadvertent, this is its primary meaning.
   Nachmanides comments that if we accept <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation the words are not words spoken by Yaakov at all, but are the Torah’s report of what motivated Yaakov’s entire conduct in offering a gift to his brother. Why would the Torah spell out Yaakov’s thoughts, when we had already read in verse 15 what was the reason for his preparing this gift. Not only that; most people who send gifts ahead of themselves do so for precisely the same reason, namely to put the recipient in a good mood so that they can be certain of a friendly reception. 
   Another difficulty with <i>Rashi’s</i> comment raised by Nachmanides is that this consideration by Yaakov should have appeared at the beginning of this paragraph. Moreover, what possible reason is there for the Torah to quote the messengers as saying והנה גם הוא אחרינו, ”and lo he is also behind us?” Surely, this is not part of Yaakov’s thoughts at that time!
   For these various reasons Nachmanides explains that Yaakov now added as an afterthought that the messengers should add the words: “here he is also behind us,” as a polite way of explaining that the gift was indeed something preparatory to Yaakov’s personal arrival, designed to ensure that Esau would grant him an audience. Yaakov’s entire behaviour reflects Proverbs 16,14: ואיש חכם יכפרנה, “a wise man can appease it.” (the king’s anger) 
   32,22.והוא לן בלילה ההוא במחנה, “whereas he himself spent that night in the camp.” He did not enter his tent but spent the night in the company of the shepherds, in order not to become the victim of a surprise attack by his brother.
   32,23. ויקח את שתי נשיו ואת שתי שפחותיו, “he took his two wives and his two maid servants, etc.” Nachmanides comments that we must remember that the Torah is not obliged to report events in chronological order, and that therefore the order in which the people in this verse are mentioned is not indicative of any order of priorities. The Torah simply mentions the steps taken to save the lives of these people by transporting them across the river. He himself remained on what was considered the exposed bank of that river. Yaakov’s crossing the fording of the river was designed to establish whether the water level was low enough to cross that fording safely without danger of drowning. After having satisfied himself on that score, he made all his people and livestock cross the river.
   32,25. ויותר יעקב לבדו. “Yaakov remained alone.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Yaakov had gone back in order to retrieve small and inexpensive utensils.
   Nachmanides explains the plain meaning of the statement to be that Yaakov had accompanied his family and folk and livestock across the river. After having done so, he commanded his servants to ferry the chattels across, while he supervised the work personally.
   @ויאבק איש עמו, “a man wrestled with him, etc..” The word ויאבק descries an activity similar to ויחבק, “he embraced him,” presumably in a kind of bear hug. The letter א frequently substitutes for the letter ח.
   32,26. וירא כי לא יכול לו, “when the man realized that he could not overpower him, etc.,” actually, he could have overpowered Yaakov, seeing that he was an angel disguised as a human being, איש; however he had not received permission to do this. All he had been allowed to do was to dislocate Yaakov’s hip joint. This injury too was intended to serve as a warning to the Jewish people in the future that there would arise a descendant of Esau, the Roman Empire, who would threaten to totally annihilate the people.
   @ויגע בכף ירכו, “he ‘touched’ his thigh-joint.” He intended thereby to cause Yaakov to fall to the ground, in the manner of two people wrestling, when each one attempts to first force his opponent to the ground.
   Some commentators claim that the angel tried to inflict a disabling blow on Yaakov, one that would disqualify him from performing service on the altar, as a penalty for his having taken the birth right from Esau, i.e. Esau’s privilege to perform such service for G’d. on the altar. Prior to the building of the Tabernacle all such service was performed by the firstborn of each Jewish household.
   32,27.כי אם ברכתני, “unless you have first blessed me.” In accordance with the accepted principle that the person who inflicts injury is in a better position to heal same than anyone else by pronouncing a formula wishing his victim a speedy recovery. The angel wanted to know Yaakov’s name, as it is mandatory for the healer to know the victim’s name if his efforts are to be crowned with success.
   Another explanation of the meaning of כי אם ברכתני, has Yaakov asking for a blessing from the angel, as an acknowledgment that he had prevailed in the struggle. with celestial forces. This was the reason why Yaakov asked the angel for his name. He wanted to be able in the future to be able to tell whomever it concerned that he had battled an angel to a standstill. The angel protested that it would be embarrassing for him that Yaakov should boast to have overcome him. In lieu of revealing his name, he bestowed a blessing on Yaakov that incorporated an allusion to this nocturnal encounter every time he would be addressed by this name.
   32,30.למה זה תשאל לשמי?, “why do you have to know my name?” The angel implies that knowing his “name” will be of no use to Yaakov at all. The reason is that he does not possess any powers of his own, he is only a tool in the hands of G’d, so much so that if Yaakov were ever to call upon him he would not even respond. What he was able to do however, was to give Yaakov a blessing. The reason he could do so was because G’d had commanded him to do so. The Torah did not spell out the text of the blessing. Our sages add that Yaakov thanked the angel for his blessing.
   @ויברך אותו שם, “he blessed him there.” In that same location Yaakov was not willing to wait until he would get to Beyt El to receive this blessing; therefore the angel spelled it out already now.
   32,32. ויזרח לו השמש כאשר עבר את פנואל, “the sun shone for him as son as he had passed Penuel.” The Torah means that the sun had risen already long before Yaakov reached Penuel. The reason why it took him so long to get there was that he now had a limp to contend with.
   Another interpretation of the words והוא צולע על ירכו, “he was limping on his thigh-joint,” is that he walked deliberately so slowly that onlookers did not even notice that he was limping. During the extra time it took Yaakov to reach Penuel the sun had already long risen and begun to shine. Only now did his limp become recognizable, due to the bright light of the sun.
   32,33. על כן לא יאכלו בני ישראל את גיד הנשה, “this is why in the future the Jewish people would not eat the disjointed sinew.” The Jews not eating this sinew are comparable to sons who make a point of fasting on the anniversary of their father’s death. Another way of looking at this law: In the future, the Jewish people would be commanded not to eat this sinew in order that they should remain aware of the miracle which had occurred when a mortal man, their ancestor Yaakov, had been able to prevail against a celestial force trying to wrestle him to the ground.
   33,5. מי אלה לך?, “what relations are these of yours? His question concerned all the women and children.
   @הילדים אשר חנן אלוקים את עבדך, “the children whom G’d has granted your servant.” Yaakov was conveying a lesson in good manners, not referring to his wives directly, letting Esau surmise that the women concerned were the mothers of these children.
   33,6. ותגשן השפחות הנה וילדיהן ותשתחוין, “the maid-servants with their children approached and prostrated themselves.” In this instance no mention is made of the children prostrating themselves, as opposed to the verse describing both Rachel and Joseph as prostrating themselves.
   Other commentators say that originally, the sons of the maidservants did not prostrate themselves, saying that their mothers whose social status was inferior, prostrated themselves caused them to prostrate themselves, whereas they, being sons of Yaakov, would not do so. When they observed that the sons of both Leah and Rachel did prostrate themselves, the sons of the maid-servants felt that they could do no less.
   33,8. מי לך כל המחנה הזה אשר פגשתי, “to whom belongs all this camp which I have encountered? Esau referred to the servants of Yaakov who had preceded him with the herds which have been described in detail as gifts which Esau had been reluctant to accept. Due to his arrogance, he had not deigned to speak to them, and therefore he had not known who they were. Now that he met Yaakov personally, he assumed that these herds had been sent by him, in view of his having previously met the angels that Yaakov had sent out. The thrust of his question was: “who is related to you who is so important that you have bothered to welcome him with such pomp and ceremony?” Yaakov replied simply that this was all in honour of his brother Esau.
   33,10. כראות פני אלוקים ותרצני, “having seen you is like seeing an angel of G’d, and for becoming reconciled with me.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Yaakov acknowledged Esau’s generosity in voluntarily reconciling himself with him.
   According to Nachmanides this was not the occasion when Yaakov mentioned any guilt at all. He simply told Esau that he would consider his accepting his gift as a source of great satisfaction, something comparable to being granted the vision of an angel. Looking at his brother’s face when it was well disposed towards him, was worth a great deal to him.
   33,11. קח נא את ברכתי, “please accept my gift.” When man sends a totally free-willed gift, מנחה, such a gift is described as a ברכה, a blessing. The reason is that he voluntarily gives away something which G’d had blessed him with. A gift which one tenders to a king, on the other hand, is called מס, “tax.”
   @ויפצר בו ויקח, “insisted, and Esau accepted.” There is a <i>Midrash</i> which explains why Yaakov made a point of having Esau accept his gift. Formerly, Esau and Yaakov had sort of divided the world into two domains, the here and now, and the hereafter. Yaakov had chosen for himself the hereafter, whereas Esau had chosen the here and now. When Esau now found out that Yaakov had acquired a substantial amount of wealth in the here and now, he was liable to demand in exchange part of the hereafter for himself. Yaakov now offered him everything in order to forestall any such claim by Esau. Esau agreed in principle, but stipulated that in the event that any of his people would want to convert to Judaism that Yaakov would accept such converts. This is the meaning of Esau’s proposal in verse 13 and 15.
   33,13. ומתו כל הצאן, “and all the flocks would die.” Yaakov did not say “and they will all die,” seeing the word “flocks” is the obvious subject, as he did not want to mention the word death in a way that could be understood as applying to the children.
   Alternately, he mentioned the צאן once more, seeing that they are the smaller animals, the goats and sheep, whereas he refrained from including the cattle in any such context. Esau knew that cattle are more hardy and that Yaakov’s excuse not to keep company with him could not be based on such a phony consideration.
   33,15. למה זה, אמצא חן בעיניך, “why do that? Let me find favour in the eyes of my lord.” Yaakov absolutely did not want the company of Esau. This too, is an aspect of מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, that the patriarchs’ mode of conduct should serve as a model for their descendants when they find themselves in similar circumstances. We are to refrain from becoming chummy with the secular authorities of the country which hosts us when we are in exile, seeing that friendliness by such rulers reflects only what they can get out of us and not what we can get out of them.
   33,17. ויבן לו בית, “he built himself a house.” It is possible that this was not an urban area and he had to build himself a house; alternately, the Torah reports that Yaakov built himself a very strong and solid house, one that could serve as a fortification against an attack by Esau.
   33,18. ויבא יעקב שלם, “Yaakov arrived completely intact, etc.;” according to some commentators the word “Shalem” is the name of a place from which Yaakov proceeded to the city of Shechem, as we are told later that the men there were שלמים אתנו, the reference being to Yaakov and his sons as residing in “Shalem which is near us.”
   Ibn Ezra writes that the word שלם is an adjective, and describes Yaakov arriving there without mishap. The Torah mentions this as a prelude to the first major upset since he left Lavan, the rape of Dinah.
   Nachmanides writes that it would be too uncharacteristic for the Torah to report that Yaakov arrived somewhere without mishap, and that Shalem is another name for the city of Shechem. As long as he had remained in Sukkot, he was constantly afraid of Esau and his heart was not at peace. Once he had arrived in the land of Canaan he knew that he would shortly be reunited with his father and that he could enlist the help of his father or that the local people would help him out of respect for his father, and that the very merit of being back in the land of Israel, the Holy Land, would work in his favour. The G’d Who had protected him against all the dangers he had faced during his long journey home, would certainly continue to help while he was on the soil of Eretz Yisrael.
   @ויחן את פני העיר. “He encamped facing the city.” He had stayed there a while and acquired property, fields, vineyards, etc. He did not want to remain a guest anywhere again. His actions served to remind his descendants in the future that they should first conquer this city before moving on to dispossess the Canaanites of their land.
   Ibn Ezra explains that the whole verse was written to compliment the land of Israel, and to tell us that anyone owning property in the Land of Israel is as if he had already acquired a share in the world to come.
   34,1. ותצא דינה בת לאה, “Dinah, daughter of Leah went out, etc.” The Torah first mentioned that Dinah was a daughter of Leah, seeing that this made her a full sister to Shimon and Levi, who avenged her disgrace. The Torah continues writing that she had been born for Yaakov, in order to tell us that her other brothers and half-brothers were also jealous on her behalf.
   34,2. וישכב אותה ויענה, “he slept with her and subsequently abused her.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word וישכב describes normal intercourse, whereas the word ויענהdescribes a more perverted method of sexual intercourse.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word ויענה as describing the pain involved in her having intercourse as she had been a virgin.
   Nachmanides writes that there is no need for all these explanations, seeing that any intercourse in which the woman is being raped is described in the Bible as עינוי, i.e. that is the meaning of the word ויעניה. In this instance, intercourse by mutual consent appears to have preceded the rape. The opposite was the case in the rape of Tamar by her half-brother Amnon. (Samuel II 13). There the rape is mentioned before the sexual intercourse. Some commentators suggest that Dinah had first been seduced, whereas Amnon never bothered to seduce Tamar.
   34,7. וכן לא יעשה, “such a thing must not be allowed to happen.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that even the gentile nations had agreed to outlaw rape. Nachmanides takes issue with <i>Rashi,</i> saying that the Canaanites had certainly practiced rape and worse sexual perversions as testified by the Torah in Leviticus 18,27. He therefore explains the words וכן לא יעשה, as referring to what was forbidden to Jews, seeing that the Canaanites did not consider it as something immoral.
   34,12. הרבו עלי מאד מוהר ומתן, “demand of me much dowry, etc.” All these conciliatory offers were designed to have Yaakov’s family agree to Dinah being married to Shechem of her own free will, seeing she was already captive in the house of Shechem, and Shechem and Chamor had no reason to fear that she would be kidnapped. They only wanted a willing bride instead of an unwilling one. This is also the reason why the Torah reports that Shechem “talked to the heart of the girl.” (verse 3)
   34,13. ויענו בני יעקב את שכם ואת חמור אביו במרמה, “the sons of Yaakov answered Shechem and his father Chamor speaking with cleverness, etc.” Nachmanides writes that although both Chamor and Shechem had addressed both Yaakov and his sons, only the sons replied, Yaakov remaining totally silent. Seeing that they felt that their father had been greatly insulted by what happened, they did not want him to get involved in the discussion at all. Nachmanides’ explanation presents us with a problem, as it appears from the plain text as if the sons of Yaakov had spoken at the instigation of their father and with his complete approval. In fact, Yaakov appears to have been fully aware of the intent of the brothers for the men of Shechem to become so weakened by their circumcision that they could be killed without putting up a fight. Seeing that the brothers said what they said in Yaakov’s presence, we must assume that their answer was inspired by their father. 
   What is difficult to understand is Yaakov’s anger at Shimon and Levi’s conduct afterwards! Furthermore, it is quite inconceivable that Yaakov would give his consent to Dinah being married to a Canaanite, especially to a Canaanite who had already defiled her before marriage! There can be no question that the entire family was united in their answer and the reason for their answer. If so, why was Yaakov angry only at Shimon and Levi?
   The only thing that was objectionable was that Shimon and Levi, in their desire to avenge their sister’s rape, vented their rage on all the citizens of the town, instead of restricting themselves to punishing only Shechem. We must understand that when the verse tells us “they answered במרמה, “with cleverness,” this did not refer to their intention at that time to kill the whole town but they contemplated one of two scenarios unfolding. 1) If the people of Shechem would agree to circumcise themselves, this would afford the brothers an opportunity to rescue their sister without encountering much opposition due to the weakened state of the males of that city. 2) If the people would refuse to circumcise themselves. Shechem would then be obliged to release Dinah. Failing his doing so, they would kill Shechem only.
   Another difficulty in the whole episode is what made the righteous sons of Yaakov spill innocent blood? Maimonides, addressing this problem, argues that mankind had been obliged to institute a proper judiciary and to try and convict people who had broken their laws by the death penalty. Whenever a person who had committed a violation of the seven Noachide laws went untried and unpunished, every member of society had the right or duty to execute such a person by the sword. Seeing that all the people of Shechem had condoned Dinah’s rape by not trying Shechem, Shimon and Levi did not do anything wrong in killing them..
   Although most of the 7 Noachide commandments are negative commandments, i.e. “don’ts,” the commandment to have a judiciary is a positive commandment, and as such the principle of the existence of the commandment is equivalent to the sinner having been forewarned and exposed himself to execution by violating the commandment does not apply here. Failure to establish courts, while a violation of the commandment, does not result in the violator becoming guilty of the death penalty. After all, the inhabitants of the land of Canaan were guilty of many severe sins such as idolatry, incest etc., but this did not authorize Yaakov’s sons to play G’d’s executioner. On the other hand, raping one of their family members was a crime committed directly against Yaakov’s family, and this is why they were within their rights, basically, to avenge this wrong when there was no court that would do so. The people of Shechem were blindly obedient to their leader, not caring that by doing so they breached the covenant G’d had made with mankind after the deluge, a covenant based on the agreement to observe the 7 Noachide commandments that apply uniformly to all of mankind. Yaakov’s anger was based solely on his sons having exposed him to the danger of being killed by hugely superior forces of the surrounding region. He also was angry at the brothers having violated their own undertaking to live peacefully with these people on condition that they circumcise their males, a condition which they had fulfilled. These people had not harmed them individually or collectively at all, and their dishonouring their promise would ruin Yaakov’s reputation in the entire region.
   34,17. ולקחנו את בתינו, “we will take our houses, etc.” They did not threaten to liberate their sister by force. The reason they did not was because they were speaking on behalf of their father.
   34,21. שלמים הם אתנו, “they are of a peaceful disposition toward us.” Chamor and Shechem made this statement as the people of their town believed that Dinah’s family now hated everyone in their town, having had visual evidence of the faces of Yaakov’s sons after the rape of their sister.
   @רחבת ידים, “the land is big enough,” according to Ibn Ezra this is a reference to the many areas in the region which offered good pasture.
   34,23. מקנהם וקניים וכל בהמתם, “their cattle, their chattels and all their livestock.” According to Nachmanides the word מקנה refers to animals which form part of the herd, and which represented the backbone of the family’s wealth. Animals that were not part of carefully supervised herds, are called בהמות, i.e. stray animals tagging along. It is also possible that the reason why Chamor spoke both about מקנה and about בהמות was to emphasise that the livestock of Yaakov’s family was extremely numerous.
   34,25. ויהי ביום השלישי בהיותם כואבים, “It was on the third day, when they were in a lot of pain, etc.;” according to <i>Rashi</i> every wound or injury is especially painful on the third day after it has been inflicted. His explanation appears to conflict with what the Talmud stated in the chapter dealing with circumcision, where the washing of the wound on the third day if it occurs on the Sabbath is permitted, adding that it is clear from this that it may certainly be washed on the first day after the circumcision. (<i>Shabbat</i>, 134)
   Some commentators hold that the Torah described the last day when the brothers could kill with impunity, as they had failed to do so on the first or second day when no resistance at all would have been forthcoming.
   Some commentators say that the inhabitants of the town were numerous, and not all of them had gone along with the request of their king and prince until the third day of their deliberations. This was the day when all the male inhabitants of the town were in great pain and could not defend themselves. There is yet another opinion according to which the brothers actually killed the men of Shechem on the first day after their circumcision, the day which was the third day after Dinah’s rape.
   35,1. ושב שם ועשה שם מזבח, “and settle there, and erect an altar there.” Nachmanides writes that he does not understand the meaning of the words ושב שם, but he considers it possible that the meaning was that Yaakov should establish a temporary residence at Beyt El before proceeding to erect the altar mentioned in the second half of the verse. The purpose of the altar would be to cleanse themselves of all the ritual impurities connected with various types of idolatry, or the state of defilement incurred through contact with the slain people of Shechem. This is based on the verse (Numbers 31,19) “and you encamp outside the encampment for seven days.” This was necessary as the legislation for such defiled persons to sprinkle water laced with the ashes of the red heifer on themselves, to purify themselves before they could re-enter the camp. had not yet been given. Perhaps G’d commanded Yaakov to shift his focus to matters of a religious nature before building the altar at Beyt El.
   35,4. ויטמן אותם, “he buried them there.” The reason that he did not burn these idols [which would have eradicated them, Ed.] was to demonstrate to the Canaanite population that they had violated the covenant G’d made with Noach after the deluge not to practice idolatry.
   Nachmanides writes that the entourage of Yaakov had not taken as loot or for any other reason, any idolatrous images, nor any chattels that had been used in idolatry so that these would have had to be destroyed utterly. They had not taken anything from Shechem until these items had first completely lost their erstwhile function as objects prohibited because of their having been used in the context of idolatry. When an idolater destroys his deities even under the influence of superior force, i.e. unwillingly, the fact that he destroyed it is sufficient to deprive them of any <i>halachic</i> restriction on account of their former use. What Yaakov did was to enable these chattels that had once served idols to qualify for sacred use on the altar. In order to achieve such status they first had to be interred. Only after these preparations had been made, could he and his family proceed to Beyt El.
   35,8. ותמת דבורה, “Deborah died, etc.” Nachmanides writes that he does not know why this piece of information was included by the Torah at this point between Yaakov naming the site of the altar Beyt El, and the blessing G’d gave Yaakov when he added the name Yisrael to his previous name. Possibly, the reason was, as our sages suggest, that the news of Deborah’s death was meant to tell Yaakov that his mother Rivkah had died, and that this explains why Yaakov called the site of Deborah’s interment אלון בכות,”the oak of mourning.” Yaakov wept tears for his mother’s death when burying Deborah. He was especially saddened by the fact that he had not been granted a reunion with her after all these years. As soon as he had stopped mourning for his mother, G’d appeared to him and complimented him. (verse 9)
   <i>Rashi</i> claims that the reason why the precise date of Rivkah’s death has not been revealed was to prevent people to use that date to curse the womb that had produced a person as depraved as Esau, although the date when Leah died has also not been revealed by the Torah. The reason why the sages did not attribute any special reason to the omission by the Torah of the date on which Leah died, was that only the fact that the Torah made a point of mentioning when a servant of Rivkah died, without also at least telling us when her mistress died, calls for further investigation.
   Nonetheless this is not a good enough reason. The Torah did not omit reporting the death of Yitzchok who had sired Esau, but even reports that Esau partook in his father’s funeral. (Genesis 35,29) It is possible that the Torah omitted a direct report of Rivkah’s death and burial as it was not surrounded by honour, seeing that her son Yaakov did not attend the funeral and her son Esau hated her, and her husband Yitzchok who was practically blind, could not perform the rites, probably was even unable to leave his house. The Torah did not want to report that the Hittite neighbours of Rivkah had to bury her. This would have drawn attention to the lack of honour bestowed on her during her funeral.
   35,10. שמך יעקב, “your name is Yaakov.” Your name is still Yaakov even though the celestial representative of Esau had changed it to “Yisrael,” it had not been that angel’s mission to change your name. However, from now on your name will be Yisrael. The meaning of the apparent repetition ויקרא שמו ישראל, “He called his name “Yisrael,” is hat this was an additional name and it was not forbidden to call him Yaakov.
   35,12. ואת הארץ אשר נתתי לאברהם וליצחק לך אתננה, “and the land which I have given to Avraham and Yitzchok I will give it to you.” Although the land had already been given to him, it had not been given to him in the form of an oath, i. e. as an irrevocable gift.
   35,13. ויעל מעליו האלוקים, “G’d rose from above him.” This verse teaches that this encounter with G’d did not take place at night, in a dream, but that the Divine Presence had manifested itself to Yisrael in a location where he was standing on his feet.
   35,14. ויצב יעקב מצבה, “Yaakov erected a monument.” According to the plain meaning, Yaakov did this now, after the latest manifestation of G’d to him.
   Ibn Ezra explains that Yaakov had already erected this monument previously, after he had dreamt the dream of the ladder. At that time he did not have oil and wine with him to anoint it as a sacred altar, something that he made up for now. It is not clear whether the word ויסך refers to a libation of wine or of water. He poured the libation over the altar in order to physically cleanse it, followed by anointing it with oil to sanctify it.
   35,15. ויקרא יעקב את שם המקום....בית א-ל, “Yaakov named the site where G’d had spoken to him Beyt El.” Although he had called this place Beyt E-l already 20 years ago when he had had the first revelation, he repeated the naming of it as up until now he had not been certain that what he had dreamt at that time had indeed been a vision and not a dream representing wishful thinking on his part.
   35,18. ויהי בצאת נפשה כי מתה, ותקרא שמו בן אוני, “it was at the moment when her soul was departing, seeing she was dying, she called him Ben Oni.” Some commentators claim that Ben Oni was named by Rachel after she had “died.” This corresponds to the plain text which first reported Rachel’s death followed by the naming of the baby. It is not unusual for a terminally sick person to pass out and create the impression that she had died, only to briefly regain consciousness before dying completely. This would explain why the Torah seems to speak of two “deaths” which Rachel experienced, i.e. “her soul departed,” and “for she had died.”
   @בן אוני. “son of my pain.” 
   @בנימין, “son of my right.”
   <i>Rashi</i> explains the name in terms of Binyamin being the only one of Yaakov’s sons who had been born on the soil of the Holy Land. This land is to the south when one comes from Aram Naharayim, i.e. it is on the right hand side of the traveler. Nachmanides objects by proving that the Land of Israel is not situated to the south of Aram Naharayim. He claims that the reason that Yaakov called this son Binyamin was because his mother had called him Ben Oni, a word having a negative connotation, so that his father gave this word a positive connotation, i.e. he did not change the name but the meaning of the name, giving it the same meaning as in Genesis 49,3 where he described Reuven as כוחי וראשית אוני, “my strength and the first of my vigor.” The word בנימין referring to the strength of one’s right hand, is therefore very appropriate [all Biblical atlases have Aram Naharayim north-east of the land of Israel, so that <i>Rashi</i> appears correct, from the point of view of Geography, though Nachmanides’ approach that Yaakov did not actually change the name Rachel gave is more appealing. Ed.] Basically, all the sons remained known by the names given them by their mothers. Yaakov simply gave the name Ben Oni a positive connotation.
   35,22. וישמע ישראל, “Israel heard about this.” According to Nachmanides, the phrasing of Yaakov’s reaction to the manner in which he reacted to his first born son’s defiling his bedroom is an example of Yaakov’s extreme humility. He could easily have banned Reuven from his house for having been guilty of such a misdemeanour, as well as having disinherited him. Instead, the Torah reports that Reuven continued to be a full member of the 12 sons, as we have been told in verse 23. In fact, the Torah goes further by writing immediately that Reuven ranked first among all his sons. (verse 24) The Torah draws our attention to this by making a single paragraph out of what normally should have been two separate paragraphs.
   Looking at the plain meaning of the text, it is possible that Reuven’s intention in invading his father’s private bedroom which he shared with Bilhah, was to prevent Yaakov siring more children with Bilhah, seeing that as the firstborn, he would receive 2 shares of the eventual inheritance, any additional children Yaakov would sire would result in his share of the inheritance becoming diminished. At the same time, he did not have similar worries about his own mother giving birth to more children, as she was beyond child-bearing age, and Zilpah might have died already. It is also possible that he was simply concerned about the insult endured by his mother who had to now take a back seat not only to her deceased sister Rachel, but even to her maidservant, when he observed that his father made Bilhah’s tent his principal bedroom. It is possible that the verse “Yaakov’s sons were 12,” was meant to alert us to the fact that he sired no more children after this episode.
   Some commentators interpret the line “Reuven went and slept with Bilhah,” to mean that now that Yaakov had lost both Rachel and Bilhah, there was no cause to worry since the twelve sons who were to make up the Jewish people had been born already. 
   Yet another explanation is that the line “Yaakov’s sons numbered 12, etc.,” means that originally there had been 13, seeing that Reuven being the firstborn had been considered equivalent to two sons. Now, in view of his indiscretion, he had lost his superiority <i>vis</i>-à-<i>vis</i> the other brothers.
   Rabbi Yehudah the pious, explains the episode as follows: at the time when Yaakov had settled in that region, Reuven left that region and set up house by himself, the reason being that he had been guilty of the above-mentioned indiscretion in Bilhah’s tent, where he had been presumed to have had relations with Yaakov’s concubine. He had done so, in order to forestall his father from doing so, now that Rachel had died. When Yaakov heard about the reason why Reuven had fled the scene, he moved his tent to Leah. As soon as Reuven heard this, he returned to the fold, i.e. “the sons of Yaakov were12.”
   Some commentators point to the wording of וישכב את בלהה instead of וישכב עם בלהה, as meaning that all Reuven had done was to put his bed next to that of Bilhah. [the expression את always denotes a lesser degree of intimacy than the expression עם. (compare Genesis 30,16,Samuel II 11,4; ) Ed.] Further proof that Reuven did not actually sleep with Bilhah, is provided by Yaakov himself in Genesis 49,4 when he describes Reuven’s indiscretion with the words: כי עלית משכבי אביך, אז חללת יצועי עלה, “for when you entered your father’s bedroom you desecrated him who ascended the bed that had been made for me.” All Reuven had been guilty of was to disarray the bedclothes, not to lie in them. He spoke about the person lying in the bed in the third person, instead of saying: “you lay in my bed.”
   35,26. אשר ילד לו בפדן ארם, “who were born to him at Padan Aram.” What is meant is that the majority were born there, seeing we have read just recently that Binyamin was born on Holy Soil in the Land of Israel 
   35,28. ויהיו ימי יצחק, וגו', “Yitzchok lived to a total of 180 years.” <i>Rashi</i> reminds us that the Torah is not obligated to narrate in chronological order, seeing that the sale of Joseph had preceded the death of Yitzchok.
   Nachmanides explains that it was an accepted custom when relating someone’s biography, to complete that person’s biography, and only then to begin to describe details of the next generation and the characters that are important during that generation. Actually, the death of Yitzchok should have been reported still earlier, just as the Torah reported the death of Avraham or other generations before proceeding to inform us about the activities of Yitzchok. The reason why the Torah had delayed reporting Yitzchok’s death until now needs explanation. We have to justify the delay displayed by the Torah in reporting Yitzchok‘s death only now as reflecting the Torah’s intent to show us that he lived to a ripe old age, long enough for his son Esau to return to the parental home and take part in the funeral of his father. There was no need to tell us that Yitzchok was buried in the cave of Machpelah, seeing that he lived in Kiryat Arba, right next door to that cave.
   36,5. את עדה בת אילון החתי, “Ada, daughter of the Hittite Eylon;” <i>Rashi</i> claims that Ada was identical with Bosmas, seeing the latter had acquired that nickname as she was in the habit of burning up a lot of fragrant incense to please the idol she worshipped.
   Nachmanides notes that <i>Rashi</i> failed to explain why Be-eri, the father of Oholiav who is called here Anah, is called Be-eri elsewhere. Furthermore, seeing that Bosmas was a daughter of Ishmael, this clearly was a proper name and not a nickname as we know from verse 3. On the other hand, the Bosmas who is described as the daughter of Eylon was nicknamed because of her burning incense frequently.
   Ibn Ezra claims that she simply was known by two names, as was her father. It is possible that the two first named women died without having had children, perhaps because they were reported of being so disrespectful to Yitzchok and Rivkah, as reported in Genesis 26,35. Esau subsequently married a sister of his deceased wife whose name was Oholivamah, daughter of Anah. But the daughter of Ishmael, a sister of Nevayot, was renamed Bosmas the name of her predecessor, as her original name has a negative connotation in Hebrew [מחלת= the sickly one, or ‘the sickness.” Ed.] Esau was very fond of her as she stemmed from his own family, (1st cousin) and was not displeasing in the eyes of his father Yitzchok.
   36,6. ויקח עשו את נשיו ואת בניו, “Esau took his wives and his children, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> alerts us to the fact that Esau’s wives took precedence over his children as opposed to his brother Yaakov, even though the Torah also mentions his wives first when his family was introduced to Esau as we know from 33,5-8. The only reason Yaakov presented his wives before presenting his children, was on account of his fear at that time, also because they were of tender age and unable to be without their mothers. Such considerations did not apply in our context here.
   Nachmanides writes that Esau’s migration took place after Yaakov had returned from Charan, and after their father Yitzchok had died. While it is true that Esau had been in Seir also during the period that Yaakov was at Lavan, as has been explained previously, (32,4), the correct sequence of events is as follows: Esau had first gone to Seir during the days of the Alufey Chori who had then resided and ruled in that region. At that time Esau, accompanied by 400 men, had invaded that region leaving his wives and family behind in the land of Canaan. It is quite likely that he conquered part of the low lying areas in that region already at that time, and that this accounts for the reference to the “land of Seir”, as opposed to the “mountain of Seir,” which also appears as שדה אדום, ”the field of Edom.” (32,4) After Yaakov had returned to the land of Canaan, Esau decided to vacate that land which his father had allocated to Yaakov as his inheritance. At that time he conducted a war against the inhabitants of the mountain of Seir Hachori, the predomi- nating tribe of the region.
   @וילך אל ארץ, “he went to ארץ.” According to Onkelos, the word ארץ is short for ארץ אחרת, “another country.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that Esau simply went in search of any country other than the land of Canaan, finally settling on the land of Seir as his new residence.
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah simply abbreviated, instead of writing וילך עשו אל ארץ שעיר, the Torah omitting details that it considered as obvious to the reader. This is especially so, since Esau’s having gone to Seir had already been mentioned in chapter 32. There are numerous such abbreviations to be found in the Torah.
   36,7. ולא יכלה ארץ מגוריהם לשאת אותם, “and the land of their sojourning could not support them (their combined wealth of livestock).” The word ארץ, “land,” is used here very loosely, the reference being to the city of Chevron and its immediate surroundings. The Torah most certainly does not wish to imply that the whole land of Canaan was inadequate for these two families and their livestock. The point was that when Esau saw that he could not remain in his home town as it did not offer a good enough economic base for him, he decided to migrate.
   36,9. ואלה תולדות עשו, and the following are Esau’s developments.” The Torah proceeds to list biological descendants of Esau born after his migration to Seir, for he himself is not reported to have sired any more children at that time. Still, the Torah relates the descendants by starting with Esau having sired Eliphaz, etc. The children of Oholivamah who had been born in the land of Canaan are also mentioned here once more. By doing so, the Torah made sure they were included in the count with their brothers.
   36,12. ותמנע היתה פילגש לאליפז בן עשו. “Timna was a concubine of Eliphaz, son of Esau.” Seeing that the Torah did not mention by name any of the mothers of Esau’s children except this one, <i>Rashi</i> was prompted to explain that Timna was outstanding, as expressed by her urge to marry into Avraham’s family, even to be married to Esau’s son as a concubine, if that was the best she could do.
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible that the sons of Eliphaz were already well known to him [i.e. he knew who their mothers were. Ed.] seeing their mothers were his real wives. On the other hand, Amalek, the son of a concubine, had to be identified clearly, else we could not have been certain who the father was. Amalek therefore was not included in Esau’s sons (grandsons) as he also did not dwell with his brothers. The Torah has commanded us not to detest the sons of Esau, and not to grab any part of their ancestral lands. This law refers to the known ancestral lands of Esau, the region of Mount Seir. The inhabitants of that region were known as Edomites. The son of the concubine did not reside in that land and was not called Edomite, and this is why there is no contradiction in the Torah having commanded us to wipe out the memory and name of Amalek.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> explains that in Chronicles I 1,39 Timna is included without hesitation as one of Eliphaz’s children, something which reveals to us that Eliphaz must have committed incest (adulterous) with the wife of Seir. When she grew up she became the concubine of Eliphaz, and that is the meaning of the words אחות לוטן תמנע, that from the father’s side she was a sister of Lotan. She is not enumerated with the descendants of Seir, as she was only a sister through the mother.
   Nachmanides does not agree that we can accept an explanation which would result in our accepting that Ezra in Chronicles counted Timna with the male offspring of Eliphaz when she clearly was a daughter and not a son. She should have been identified as Eliphaz’ daughter in Chronicles if <i>Rashi</i> is correct.
   Perhaps the Bible is not so explicit when the subject is something so well known, [that Timna was a woman. Ed.] We also find Miriam paired with Aaron and Moses in the same line in Chronicles I, 5,29 which would give the impression to the uninitiated that all three were males. The three personages are so familiar to the readers of Chronicles, that Ezra did not see the need to add that Miriam was a woman. At any rate, it is quite unlikely that Timna, not a world famous lady, would be enumerated together with the males. Perhaps we should say, in agreement with our sages, that the Timna mentioned in Chronicles was identical with the <i>Aluf</i> Timna who appears in verse 40 of our chapter, and is enumerated there as one of the sons of Eliphaz, just as the name Korach is also enumerated with the sons of Eliphaz This Korach who was the son of Oholivamah, wife of Esau, was also a <i>mamzer</i>, bastard, born from a forbidden incestuous relationship. He too was not listed with the category he belonged to.
   According to the plain meaning of the text we would have to say that Timna who was the wife of Eliphaz and bore him Amalek, became pregnant again and experienced a difficult birth as a result of which she died. The Torah did not mention the name of the baby whose birth caused her death. His father may have called that son Korach, a detail that the Torah omitted in order not to make the narrative unduly long. The major purpose of the Torah when narrating all these details was to isolate Amalek in such a way that the subsequent commandment that we are to wipe out the memory of Amalek should not be perceived as contradictory to the Torah’s injunction not to discriminate politically against the family of Esau. The Torah was not concerned with telling us who Amalek’s mother was. While it is true that when the <i>Alufim</i> are enumerated later on, the name Korach appears prior to the name Amalek although he was senior, these <i>Alufim</i> were mentioned in the order of their relative importance. This is also why Kenaz, though younger, was listed ahead of both Korach and Gaaton.
   I have to add that the verse needs to be understood as follows: “the sons of Eliphaz are Teiman, Omer, Tzfo, Gaaton, Knaz and Timna; i.e. Timna was also one of the sons of Eliphaz.” At that point, the Torah backtracks by saying that Eliphaz, the son of Esau, also had a concubine who bore Amalek for him. The name of the concubine is not mentioned. Actually, this concubine called Timna was a sister of Lotan. The reason why her name was not mentioned where you would have expected it, was that the Torah did not want to confuse the reader by listing two “Timnas” consecutively, one being male the other female. The seven sons of Eliphaz who were named here, appear later under the heading of “Alufey Esau,” ‘the “headmen” of Esau. As to the fact that this name of Timna has been exchanged when the Torah enumerates the “alufim,” this is precisely because his name was the same as that of Eliphaz’ concubine who was not considered a son of his in the regular manner. Hence he was renamed “Korach,” who had been elevated to the status of “Aluf.”
   Our sages believe that Eliphaz had slept with Oholivamah, the wife of his father, and that the result of this union was Korach.
   Ibn Ezra considers that Korach was the son of Oholivamah, wife of Esau, and that he is listed as one of her sons.
   @אלה בני עדה, “These are the sons of Adah.” .The meaning is that the majority of these listed were her sons, barring Amalek who was not hers.
   36,20. אלה בני שעיר החרי, “These are the sons of Seir, the Chori.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that the genealogy of all the people following was recorded here only in order to demonstrate the outstanding reputation of Avraham, which had caused Timna to make every conceivable effort to become related to him by marriage to him or one of his family members.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason for this chapter having been written is to separate the genealogy of Esau from that of the local inhabitants, the Chori. The Israelites received instructions from G’d concerning the descendants of Esau, but these were not applicable to the descendants of the Chori.
   Nachmanides explains that the Chori was the name of a founder of a nation which had been named after their founder-father. The nation was also called Seir, on account of the region inhabited by that nation. This latter name became associated with Esau and his descendants. The land of the Chori, which had first been inhabited by members of that tribe, was taken over by Esau and his sons. Our verse shows that the name Seir for the region concerned predated the arrival of Esau in that region. It is related to the arrival there for the first time by Esau, whom we have known from birth as איש שעיר, “a hairy man.” The name “Edom” also is traced back to Esau. The Torah makes a distinction between the inhabitants of the land Seir traced to Chori, and those traced to Esau. The difficulty with Nachmanides’ explanation is that we do find already in Genesis 14,6 a reference to “Chori in their mountains of Seir.” The chapter in question describes a situation prevailing at least 100 years before Esau was born.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word חרי as in חרי יהודה, “outstanding men of Yehudah.” (compare Jeremiah 27,20; 39,6. Nechemyah 6,17)
   36,22. ואחות לוטן תמנע. “Lotan’s sister was Timna.” It is customary for the Bible to trace the ancestry of the daughters by mentioning their brothers. Examples are: “the sister of Tuval Kayin was Naamah,” (Genesis 4,22) Actually, she should have been listed already together with the sons of Seir and Dishan, etc. (36,30). It is possible, however, that she was a full sister to Lotan, both having the same father and mother, whereas she was not a sister to the sons of Seir mentioned in verses 26-30, as she was not a daughter of the tribe of Seir.
   36,24. ואלה בני צבעון ואיה וענה, “and these are the sons of Tzivon, Veayah and Veanah, The prefixes ו in the names “Ayah,” and “Anah,” are nothing unusual. Tzivon was the third son of Seir the Chori, and he sired numerous children. The Torah narrates that Anah had discovered the mules while pasturing his father’s flocks in the desert, because it wanted to distinguish between him and another Anah, his uncle, the brother of his father Tzivon. This Anah was the father-in- law of Esau.
   @אשר מצא את הימים, “who had discovered the mules.” These animals are what we know as mules. Anah discovered this by using his intelligence, succeeding in producing offspring through pairing two different species, i.e. the horse and the donkey. This is the only known example of mating two different species resulting in offspring. His achievement was considered a feat of wisdom, as he matched two species which appeared to him to have much in common genetically, and the product was supposed to combine the advantages of a horse and a donkey.
   Onkelos translates our verse as Anah “finding courage.” He surmises that a nation known as “yemim” attacked him, wanting to steal his donkeys, while he was alone in the desert. He succeeded in saving the donkeys from the attack of these people. The word מצא would have to be understood as in תמצא ידך לכל אויביך, (Psalms 21,9) “your hand is equal to all your enemies.” Alternately, what happened was that he found, i.e. encountered these “Yemim,” and was saved (miraculously) from their attack. His fame as a warrior was established henceforth.
   36,25. ואלה בני ענה, דישון ואהלבימה בת ענה, “this is the offspring of Anah; Dishon and Oholivamah daughter of Anah.” This is the way the Bible lists names of girls, as for instance in Genesis 46,15 ואת דינה בתו, “and his daughter Dinah.” This Anah was the fourth son of Seir, being a brother of Tzivon; he is listed after Tzivon, as they are listed in order of their prominence, not their ages. He had another son, named Dishon, the same name as that of his uncle, and this son had a daughter whose name was Oholivamah, the same name as her relative the Oholivamah who was a daughter of Anah, son of Tzivon. In order to avoid confusion, the Torah writes in connection with Oholivamah the wife of Esau, that she was the daughter of Anah who was the son of Tzivon, seeing that she had been the daughter of the Anah who had discovered the mules. In other words, she was a granddaughter of Tzivon. She was not the Oholivamah who was the daughter of Anah, who was the son of Seir the Chivi, a brother of Tzivon.
   Ibn Ezra writes that “Oholivamah the daughter of Anah,” does not refer to the Anah mentioned at the end of the verse (24 as the father of Oholivamah), for if it had been, there would have been no reason to mention him once more. He must therefore be the one mentioned at the end of the first verse, and there was only one Oholivamah.
   Our sages explain that there was only one man called Anah, the result of his father Tzivon having slept with his mother. This Anah was raised in the house of Seir the Chori together with his other sons. This is why he is enumerated together with the sons of Tzivon, seeing he was his son.
   Rabbeinu Tam believes that Anah was a woman and proves it from the line “Oholivamah, daughter of Anah” (verse 13). Anah herself was a daughter of Tzivon. As to the apparent contradiction, seeing the Torah writes: "הוא ענה" which means “he is the Anah, etc.;” this means that she inherited part of Seir’s estate together with Tzivon, her uncle’s other sons. (compare Talmud <i>Baba Batra</i> 116)
   <i>Rashi</i> claims that the reason why Oholivamah is described as the daughter of Anah was because Anah slept with his mother the wife of Tzivon and that he sired Oholivamah from that union. This is why she was referred to as “the daughter of Anah.and the daughter of Tzivon.”
   36,26. ואלה בני דישון, חמדן וגו', “and these are the sons of Dishon, Chemdon, etc.” This refers to Dishon the fifth son of Seir, and it does not matter that once he is referred to as דישון and another time as דישן. These two spellings would refer to different people only if they would appear in the same verse. In that instance, the difference in the spelling would alert us to the fact that the Torah refers to two different people whose names sound alike. We encounter a similar situation in Kings I 7,40 ויעש חירום, “Chirom constructed etc,” and ויכל חירם, “Chiram completed.” In this verse the Torah had to refer to Dishon once with a letter ו and once without it, in order to make sure that we understand that these are two different people and not the Dishon son of Anah who had been mentioned before, unless, of course, he had changed his name.
   36,31. ואלה המלכים, “and these were the kings, etc.” The Torah narrates all this in order to show that Yitzchok’s blessing to Esau that he would survive by his sword was fulfilled, seeing that his descendants had overpowered the tribe of the Chori and they ruled over them and their lands for hundreds of years, as the cities mentioned are all part of the land of Edom. The Torah also informs us that the Kings of Edom were not automatically the sons of the former kings so that no dynasties had been founded.
   @לפני מלוך מלך בישראל, “before a king ruled over Israel.” This does not mean that the kings mentioned here ruled during the entire period until King Sha-ul became king (some 800 years later than the time frame during which Yaakov and Esau lived). What the Torah did mean to show was that once the Israelites had a king, the Edomites did not, so that Yitzchok’s blessing to Yaakov (when he thought that Esau stood before him) “your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves before you,” (27,29) was fulfilled. It is quite possible that the last of the kings mentioned in this chapter already died during the days of Moses, a view held by Ibn Ezra. Ibn Ezra feels that if we did not understand the history in that way, whence did Moses know the names of Edomite kings who lived long after he himself had died. 
   Some commentators hold that Moses’ prophetic insights enabled him to record the names of as yet unborn Edomite Kings. Nachmanides disagrees with such an interpretation, saying that there would be no point in Moses’ prophetic insight including such matters, moreover, if so, how many years of history beyond his death was Moses able to foresee in such detail, and when did such prophetic insight stop?
   The proper explanation is that all these Edomite kings lived before the Torah was given to the Jewish people. Many ruled simultaneously over different parts of that kingdom. [The Midianites also had 5 kings, (Numbers 31) and the Canaanites in the time of Joshua had 31 kings simultaneously. Ed.] It is also possible that each of these kings ruled only for a short period. 
   36,38. בעל חנן בן עכבור He was from the place in which Sha-ul had ruled before him. This is why no other city is mentioned in connection with him. It is also possible that the name of his city was Chanan, and that the word בעל חנן simply means that he was in authority over the city known as Chanan.
   36,40. ואלה שמות אלופי עשב, “and these are the names of he headmen of Esau.” First the <i>alufim</i> among the sons of Esau who were such in that generation are mentioned. From positions as headmen, the success of these people in war led to them or their sons becoming Kings, and in due course their pre-eminence ebbed again so that they were simply ראשים. Compare Chronicles I 1,43 -54)
   36,43 בארץ אחוזתם, “in the land of their ancestral inheritance.” The heads mentioned earlier were all brothers, the <i>alufim</i> all residing in the same town, and ruling over a single nation, or they were heads of a tribe each. The ones mentioned here were heads of the combined families of Esau, their authority extending over all the towns inhabited by Esau’s offspring. They were comparable to kings in their authority.
   @אלוף תמנע. Ibn Ezra believes that the “Timna” mentioned here was a man. It is not unusual to find men or women having the same names. Oholivamah was one such example. It is also possible that seeing the word <i>aluf</i> at this point is superfluous, we must understand the verse as follows: the headman of the family of Timna who had been a concubine of Eliphaz produced several <i>alufim,</i> their names being Alvah, and Yetet. Similarly, the family of Oholivama, wife of Esau, produced <i>alufim</i> known as Eylah, and Pinon..
   Parshat Vayeshev
   37,1. וישב יעקב, “Yaakov settled, etc.” [the author addresses the strange line “in a land in which his father had been a stranger, the land of Canaan.” Ed.]
   Seeing that the Torah previously had reported that Esau had settled in the mountains of Seir, whereas Yaakov and family had dwelled like strangers in a land in which their fathers had dwelled only as strangers, in a land which was not theirs, and the prediction to Avraham their founder that his descendants would remain strangers for 400 years in a land not theirs had been in effect for a long time already, the Torah reminds us that this prediction had been meant for Yaakov’s descendants specifically, seeing that Yaakov’s father Yitzchok had never left the Holy Land since birth. The Torah had to remind us that the land of Canaan was not yet considered a “homeland” for Yitzchok’s or Yaakov’s descendants.
   37,2. אלה תולדות יעקב, “These are the developments of Yaakov;” <i>Rashi</i> interprets these words as introducing the background to the many places Yaakov’s descendants lived and emigrated to, before they finally settled in the Land of Israel, previously the land of Canaan. The first cause for these wanderings is to be found in the story of Joseph and his brothers.
   Ibn Ezra’s commentary follows the same general approach as that of <i>Rashi.</i>
   Nachmanides claims that the expression תולדות cannot be applied to successive residences of a person or a people, but only to days, years, etc., i.e. generations, births, etc. A well known example is Proverbs 27,1 מה ילד יום, “what the day will bring” (give birth to). I believe that the correct interpretation of our verse is: “these are developments of Yaakov, Joseph and his brothers and what has been happening to them.” Possibly, just as the Torah listed the developments of Esau down to the giving of the Torah to the Jewish people, it lists what had happened to the descendants of Yaakov and all his descendants until they moved to Egypt, 70 in number.
   @והוא נער את בני בלהה. “and he was a lad keeping company with the sons of Bilhah.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets this as Joseph’s immaturity, acting childishly.
   Onkelos interprets this to mean that already from his earliest youth, Joseph preferred the company of the sons of Bilhah who looked up to him and flattered him.
   Nachmanides writes that the words והוא נער, refer to what has been written previously, so that we have to understand the sequence of the verse as follows: “these are the developments in the house of Yaakov; Joseph, who was a lad of 17 years used to tend the sheep together with his brothers.”
   Ibn Ezra interprets the verse to mean that because Joseph was still immature at 17, the sons of Bilhah made him their personal valet. The Torah suggests that if Joseph had acted as valet to the sons of Yaakov’s real wives no problems would have arisen at all. This is the meaning of the דבתם רע, the evil reports Joseph brought to his father concerning the conduct of the sons of Leah. Joseph resented being assigned to being a valet to the sons of the handmaids.
   It is also possible that due to his youth, the Torah refers to him as נער, even though physically speaking he was fully grown. We encounter something similar with Avshalom, son of David, who was also referred to as נער, not because he was so young in years at that time, but because he was younger than his brothers. (Samuel II 19,33)
   @את בני בלהה, “the sons of Bilhah, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> Joseph befriended them because the sons of Leah shunned them.
   @נשי אביו, “his father’s wives.” The Torah emphasizes that these ladies were Yaakov’s legal wives in the fullest meaning of the term. They were described as maidservants only in their status compared to Rachel and Leah, seeing that the latter were their seniors. This is why when Yaakov presented his wives to his brother Esau, and he first presented Zilpah and Bilhah, these are described as שפחות, maidservants, (33,6) seeing that in the event Esau would molest them, this would be a warning for Leah and Rachel to hide, or something. After all, Zilpah and Bilhah continued as maidservants in the employ of Leah and Rahel also after Yaakov married them. When Reuven was described as “sleeping” with Bilhah, she is also described as פלגש, a concubine, but this is only <i>vis-à-vis</i> her deceased mistress Rachel. It is quite possible that while Rachel and Leah were alive, Yaakov referred to them both as שפחות and as פילגשים, “maidservants and concubines.” 
   @את דבתם רעה, ”evil reports about them.” Anything wrong that the sons of Leah did, Joseph reported to his father.
   Nachmanides queries that if that were indeed so, the sons of the maidservants should have loved him, and if so, why did they not save him at the time when the sons of Leah were about to kill him and eventually sold him? After all, there were four of them, and if you add Reuven who, as we know, tried to save Joseph, they would have been equal in number to the other five sons of Leah? Furthermore, from the text it appears as if all the brothers, including the sons of the maidservants agreed to sell him!
   According to our sages in <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i>, Joseph reported evil deeds both of the sons of Leah and the sons of the maidservants. Accordingly, the meaning of the words את בני בלהה ואת את בני זלפה, is simply that Joseph spent most of his time in the company of these sons of the maidservants as they were so much closer to him in age. In fact, their father had commanded these sons of the maidservants to keep a constant eye on Joseph, to insure that no mishap would befall hum. They were to attend to his needs. He did not instruct the sons of Leah to tend to Joseph’s needs. Joseph brought tales of misconduct of the sons of the maidservants to his father, seeing that he had so much opportunity to observe their conduct. This is why they learned to hate him.. We hear only later, that as a result of his dreams and his telling the sons of Leah about them, the sons of Leah grew to be jealous of him and to hate him, especially when they could not help noticing how his father preferred him over them. Everyone of the brothers had his own reason for hating Joseph.
   @דבתם רעה, “reports of their wrong doing.” According to Nachmanides the word דבה always implies something exaggerated. It is therefore evil by definition.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that Joseph told his father that the sons of Leah were belittling the sons of the maidservants, that they were suspect of eating flesh from animals not yet slaughtered or dead, and that they indulged in incestuous sexual relationships. It is difficult to understand that if Joseph’s accusations were true, why he himself in the course of his life, was exposed to precisely these three potential sins. On the other hand, if Joseph’s accusations were unjustified, how could a person who is regarded throughout our history as an outstandingly righteous individual, a model of uprightness, have been guilty of defaming his brothers in such a manner?
   The answer usually given to this question is that even if his accusations had been true, he was wrong to act as a sole witness whose evidence was not supported by a second disinterested witness. The whole matter is reminiscent of a story in the Talmud <i>Makkot</i> 11A, where someone called Tuviah, had become guilty of a sin, and a single witness named Zigud testified against him and was punished for slandering him by unsupported testimony, whereas the alleged sinner went free.
   7,3. כי בן זקונים הוא לו, “for he was born to him when he was advanced in years;” according to <i>Rashi.</i>
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation of the term בן זקונים, reminding us that all of Yaakov’s children were born to him when he was advanced in years, seeing that he only married when he was already 84 years old. Issachar and Zevulun were no more than a year or two older than Joseph. Moreover, Binyamin was much younger (seven years), than Joseph, and the term בן זקונים should have been applied to him, instead. Nachmanides therefore concludes that the Torah refers to an ancient custom of fathers who were already aged selecting one of their sons to attend to their needs on a regular basis. That son then becomes known as בן זקונים. Seeing that Joseph had been selected to perform these filial duties, he no longer went with his brothers to tend the flocks when they went far away from Chevron. We may also understand Onkelos in this sense, when he translates בן זקונים as ארי בר חכים, as extraordinarily intelligent. It is interesting that the Torah applies the term בן זקונים for Joseph only in his relationship to his father, i.e. בן זקונים הוא לו, for him,” not when compared to the world around him.
   @ועשה לו כתונת פסים, “and he made for him a striped coat of many colours.” This verse teaches us how important it is for a parent not to have favourites among his children, [not to display such favoritism. Ed.] The extra cost of Joseph’s tunic, a measly 2 shekel, triggered a history of tragic jealousy, strife, near fratricide, etc. It even ultimately was directly responsible for Jews going to Egypt for a second time in history to seek relief from a famine in the land of Canaan.
   37,4. ולא יכלו דברו לשלום, “and they were unable to converse with him or about him, peacefully.” You will note that the Torah did not write that the brothers did not speak to him, but whenever they spoke, even to strangers, and Joseph became part of their conversation, they referred to him negatively.
   37,7. ותשתחוין לאלומתי, “they prostrated themselves before my sheaf.” Joseph did not say that these other sheaves prostrated themselves before him, but before his sheaf. (as opposed to his second dream). In that dream he could not have phrased it differently, saying that sun and moon bowed to “my” star, as how would he know that a particular star was his. The interpretation of this first dream is that seeing Joseph provided the grain to the brothers and all other travelers to Egypt during those years, it was as if they prostrated themselves before him. The fact that in his dream the sheaves arranged themselves around his sheaf, conveyed to the brothers that Joseph saw himself as the central figure in all this.
   37,8. המלוך תמלוך?, “are you planning to rule over us?” According to Ibn Ezra the expression מלוך refers to rule by a king with the consent of his subjects, so that the brothers asked: “do you expect us to crown you as king over us?” The expression משול refers to imposition of authority without or against the wish of those that are subject to such authority. The brothers wanted to know if Joseph perhaps thought that he could impose his will upon them.
   It is somewhat difficult to understand why the brothers accused Joseph of such plans, based simply on the fact that he had had a dream or two. Are then dreams something over which the dreamer has control? What proof did the brothers have that Joseph’s dreams reflected his innermost hopes? Some commentators attribute Joseph’s aspirations to the fact that it had become plain that their father had preferred him to all of them, something that had gone to his head and given him ideas of grandeur. The proof that Joseph indeed harboured such thoughts, lay in the fact that even his dreams reflected what he had been thinking about by day.
   @ועל דבריו, “and on account of his talk.” Joseph’s real error lay in his telling his brothers of his dreams, as if boasting of the grand future that he considered in store for himself. Had he not been telling his brothers the details of his dreams, i.e. שמעו נא החלום הזה אשר חלמתי, “listen please to this dream that I dreamt, etc.,” the entire tragic sequence of events that follow might have been avoided. He had only dreamt one dream, and already he uses it as something inflammatory, something that is bound to arouse further jealousy among his brothers. Why does the Torah refer to חלומותיו, “his dreams,” (pl;) when only the content of a single dream has been reported? (verse 8) Some commentators believe that he had had a previous dream, a dream which the brothers did not pay much attention to, seeing it was an isolated event. Once he told them the content of his second dream they became alerted to the trend displayed in this dream and revised their opinion about the first dream he had told them about, also.
   37,9. ויחלום עוד חלום אחר, “He dreamt yet another dream.” The reason why G’d did not fulfill the events foreshadowed in the dream promptly, as He did with the events foreshadowed in Pharaoh’s dream in chapter 41, may have been that Pharaoh had dreamt both dreams in a single night, whereas Joseph had his dreams on different nights.
   37,10. ויספר אל אביו, “he told his father, etc.” He had not told his father about his first dream, seeing that he was certain that he understood the meaning of his dream. Seeing that the subject of his second dream concerned his father, he told him about it.
   @ואל אחיו, “and to his brothers.” After he had told this dream to his father, he told it to his brothers in the presence of his father. His father rebuked him [not because of its content, Ed.] but in order to deflect his brothers’ fury from him.
   Some commentators ask that seeing all dreams supposedly are influenced by the interpretation given to them, (<i>Berachot</i> 58) why was this dream fulfilled altogether, seeing that Yaakov had rejected the original interpretation as soon as he heard the dream in front of the brothers? They give a very forced answer, saying that seeing Joseph had already told the dream to his father previously, and at that time his father had not disagreed with the apparent interpretation, it was now too late to do anything about it.
   Personally, I do not think that the question has any merit at all. Rather, on the contrary, the reason that fulfillment was so long delayed was because Yaakov had protested the obvious interpretation. This is further proof that the sages were correct in saying that the results of the dreams are greatly influenced by who interprets them and how. [The Talmud, on the folio quoted, illustrates the point with numerous examples. Ed.] His father’s objection to the obvious interpretation of his dream resulted in it coming true so many years later.
   @הבא נבא אני ואמך, “are indeed I, your mother etc., going to come and bow down, etc.?” How could this be seeing that your mother has died already? Yaakov was not aware that the moon in Joseph’s dream portrayed Bilhah who had raised Joseph as his foster mother. This is <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation of our verse.
   Nachmanides writes that in his opinion Bilhah had died before Yaakov moved to Egypt so that she had no opportunity to prostrate herself before her stepson. The Torah, when listing the names of who went down to Egypt, speaks of 70 souls, not including the wives of Yaakov’s sons. We are therefore forced to conclude that had Zilpah and Bilhah been alive still at that time, they would have been mentioned by name. If the Torah at that juncture (46,26) did not want to refer to them as “the wives of Yaakov,” seeing they were his concubines, this is no argument at all, seeing that we read the words נשי אביו, (37,2) and those words clearly refer to Bilhah and Zilpah. We must assume that the sun in the dream refers indeed to Yaakov, and the moon to the members of his household, including all his wives and their children, a total of 70. The eleven stars refer to Joseph’s eleven brothers bowing down to Joseph on their second trip to Egypt, before they had decided to immigrate to Egypt.
   37,14. וישלחהו מעמק חברון, “he sent him on his way after having accompanied him to the valley of Chevron.” Although, according to all our records, Chevron is situated on a mountain, as we know also from the route taken by the spies (Deuteronomy 1,24), his father accompanied him all the way down to the valley. Only after reaching the lowlands did Yaakov send Joseph alone on his fateful journey. The Torah makes a point of letting us know from where Joseph was sent on this mission (presumably on foot), so that we realize how far he had to travel, i.e. how much distance the brothers had put between themselves and their father. They had done so precisely to discourage their father from sending Joseph, assuming also that if their father would want to send him, he might demur, citing both the distance and the fact that the brothers hated him.
   37,15. והנה תועה בשדה, ”and here he was lost in the field.” He had departed from the road and entered a field, knowing that his brothers would choose the best looking pasture available.
   37,17. נסעו מזה, “they have moved away from here quite some time ago.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets the expression as not referring to physical distance, but as referring to the bonds of brotherliness. The man (angel Gavriel) did not tell him this in so many words, for had he done so Joseph certainly would not have continued on his way. The angel used a double entendre, which could be interpreted in one of two ways. Both interpretations would correspond to the truth. The principal reason our sages interpret this is that all the angel had to say was: ”they went to Dotan.” The introductory words: “they have moved away from here,” were quite irrelevant, and therefore must be intended to teach us something additional.
   37,18. ובטרם יקרב אליהם ויתנכלו אותו להרגו, “and before he could come close to them, they made plans how to kill him.” The meaning of this phrase is that the plans they made were how to kill him before he could come close to them so that they would not have to lay a hand on him. In <i>Bereshit Rabbah 84,14</i> on that verse, we are told that they released ferocious dogs in his direction. When they realized that the dogs had not attacked him, they said: “let us kill him (with our own hands).”
   37,22. אל תשפכו דם, “do not shed blood!” Reuven said that he had not objected when the brothers planned to cause Joseph’s death without laying a hand on him themselves, but he had to draw the line at their spilling his blood with their own hands. The Torah reports that Reuven’s real intention was to save Joseph altogether. He did not say “his blood,” but “blood,” in order to show his brothers that his objection was not because he loved Joseph, but because of the principle not to shed blood. The Torah narrates these words so that we can understand that when the brothers were in jail in Egypt what he referred to when he said: “did I not tell you not to spill the lad’s blood, and you did not listen to me?” In view of the brothers refusing Reuven’s plea, he changed it to: “throw him into this pit.”
   37,22. השליחו אותו אל הבור הזה, “throw him into this pit, etc.” He said: “into this pit,” because he had ascertained that that pit did not contain any harmful substances. The brothers did not heed him and threw him into a pit containing harmful substances such as snakes and scorpions, according to our sages. This is the meaning of verse 29 that when Reuven returned to the pit there was no Joseph in it.
   Nachmanides writes that according the <i>Midrash</i> that there were snakes and scorpions in the pit, we must assume that the brothers had not seen those. They must have been hiding in nooks and cracks within the pit. The fact that they did not ham Joseph before he was lifted out and sold was due to a miracle. This proves that Joseph was quite innocent, else why would G’d have extended this kind of help to him?
   I do not understand why anyone needs to resort to an explanation of this kind, for even if we do not consider Joseph as a totally innocent victim but as at least partially guilty, he was certainly not an evil person and did not deserve to die. In spite of his not being guilty of death the brothers set about killing him. The reason was that hatred distorts one’s ability to judge fairly and to apply one’s reason objectively. According to the plain meaning of the text, the words “the pit was empty,” mean that there was no accumulation of water inside the pit, for if there had been water in it, it could not be described as “empty.” 
   37,23. ויפשיטו את יוסף את כותנתו, “They stripped Joseph of his tunic.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the word כתונת as “shirt,” an undergarment. This is a difficult explanation, as the question is how they could remove an undergarment before removing his outer garment first, the famous striped coat. The answer usually given to this question is that it is normal for someone robbing someone else of his clothing to pull all his garments off him in one motion, and to then turn these garments inside out, beginning to separate them, so that the undergarment is separated first. Alternately, travelers have a habit of covering their outer garments with their undergarments as a form of protection for them while they are on the journey encountering obstacles that might damage the costly outer garments.
   Personally, I believe that the Torah speaks of only one garment, describing his fancy outer garment as also his undergarment, and the fact that he wore it visibly when planning to visit his brothers inflamed their hatred even more. 
   37,25. והנה אורחת ישמעאלים, ”and here there was a caravan of Ishmaelites, etc.” Nachmanides explains that when the brothers looked around they saw a group of people and camels in the distance whom they immediately identified as Ishmaelites, though they were still quite distant. They knew that these Ishmaelites were headed for Egypt as it was their custom to bring these various spices named in our verse to Egypt. This is why Yehudah said that seeing these people come from a distant land and are headed for a distant land, they could sell Joseph to them and this matter would never become known. When these people drew near, they realized that they were not the people whom they had thought them to be, but that they were merchants who traveled these regions all the time. These merchants had bought the spices from the Ishmaelites and had rented camels from them. They sold Joseph to these merchants, who bought him to trade him off, just as they traded their other merchandise. The caravan of Ishmaelites they had espied earlier were in the business of renting out camels, never buying merchandise for their own consumption. This is the meaning of the words: מיד הישמעאלים אשר הורידוהו שמה, “from the Ishmaelites who had brought him down to Egypt.” (39,1) Joseph was under the control of the Ishmaelites, although he was owned by the Midianites, prior to his sale to Potiphar. 
   The style of the whole paragraph i.e. the repetition of the events related therein, must be understood as once described from the Ishmaelties’ perspective, and once from the Midianites’ perspective. We encounter something of a similar nature at the very end of the Torah (Deuteronomy 34,12) ולכל היד החזקה וכל המורא הגדול אשר עשה משה לעיני כל ישראל, where all the miracles performed by Moses are attributed to him, whereas previously in Deuteronomy 11,3 all of these miracles are attributed to G’d Himself.”
   Ibn Ezra (on verse 28) says that the Midianites are called here Ishmaelites, as they are in Judges 8,24, [although Gideon had been fighting the 5 Kings of the Midianites. Ed] seeing that their founding mother was Hagar. [if she was identical with Keturah. Ed.] 
   <i>Rash’bam</i> writes that the brothers did not sell Joseph at all, but they sat down to eat, and while they were eating they saw a caravan of Ishmaelites in the distance. They then decided that after they would have completed their meal they would sell Joseph to these Ishmaelites. Before being able to do so, the Midianites arrived on the scene (the brothers not being within earshot of Joseph’s cries for mercy) and pulled Joseph out of the pit. They proceeded to sell him to the Ishmaelites. As to Joseph saying to his brothers in Genesis 45,4: “I am your brother whom you have sold to Egypt,” Joseph simply blamed what the brothers had done to him for his having been sold to Egypt. 
   Some commentators interpret the word ומדנים as not referring to Midianites, but as being a derivative of the word מדון, strife as in ריב ומדון, Chabakuk, 1,3 where it describes strife and contention. The Torah meant that the strife and contention between the brothers ultimately resulted in Joseph being sold to Egypt.
Yet another view expressed by some commentators is that the brothers sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites, but they were afraid of raising him from the pit as they themselves might be bitten by the snakes; they therefore waited until the Midianites had raised him from the pit, as the Midianites were snake charmers and could safely venture into the pit. We know about all this from the Midianites who brought their charms with them when they visited Bileam as part of the delegation from Balak. (Numbers chapter 22) Joseph wound up being owned jointly by the Midianites and the Ishmaelites
   Some commentators say that the Ishmaelites sold Joseph to Potiphar who had accused them of having kidnapped him. The Midianites guaranteed to Potiphar that Joseph was theirs to sell, and had not been kidnapped. This is why the Torah attributes the actual sale to the Midianites who acted as guarantors for the validity of the sale. The Ishmaelites are also described as selling him, as 1) they had physical possession of him, and 2) they had paid 20 silver pieces for him to the brothers. The reason why so little money changed hands was that Joseph, because of his traumatic experience in the pit, no longer looked nearly as handsome as he had before his trauma.
   @מה בצע, “what financial advantage?” There is a view expressed in the <i>Midrash (Pessikta Rabbati Parshat Ki Tissa</i>) according to which the brothers asked Yehudah to break the bread and to pronounce the blessing to G’d, לבצוע, at the meal, and he replied to them that it was most inappropriate to do so while they planned to commit murder.
   37,26. וכסינו את דמו, ”and we will conceal his blood.” According to <i>Rashi</i> these words are a euphemism for “let’s conceal his death.”
   According to Nachmanides the words may be taken at face value, as it was the custom of murderers ever since the first one, Kayin, to bury the victim under a heap of earth and thus to conceal his blood.
   37,29. וישב ראובן, “Reuven returned;” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Reuven reverted to wearing sackcloth and observing fasts as penitence over his indiscretion with Bilhah, even though he had not made a public confession until after he had heard his brother Yehudah publicly confess his sin against Tamar. (Genesis 38,26)
   @ויקרע את בגדיו, “he rent his outer garments.” When his father heard about Joseph’s apparent death, the Torah describes the rending of his garments with the words ויקרע שמלותיו, “he rent his (under)garments.” When mourning parents or children, one rends all of one’s clothing, whereas when mourning siblings one only rends outer garments. The word שמלה appears as covering for one’s skin” (Exodus 22,26)
   37,32. וישלחו את כתונת הפסים ויביאו אל אביהם, “they sent the striped coat and brought it to their father.” Either they instructed the bearer to bring it to their father, or the bearers brought it to their father without having had specific instructions.
   It is also possible that they sent the coat home, and when they came home the next time [after all, Dotan is over 70 km from Chevron. Ed.] they themselves brought it to their father. The Torah emphasizes the striped coat, as the stripes would help to identify who had worn it.
   37,33. חיה רעה אכלתהו, “a wild beast has devoured him.” He did not say that robbers had slain him, for if so they would have robbed him of his precious tunic.
   37,35. וכל בנותיו, “and all his daughters.” His daughter and his granddaughter. Some commentators say that his daughters–in-law are included in the term “his daughters.”
   @וימאן להתנחם, “he refused to be comforted.” According to the plain meaning, Yaakov could not accept words of comfort as he considered himself partially responsible for what happened, seeing that he had sent Joseph alone on a dangerous mission.
   37,36. שר הטבחים, “the minister in charge of the butchers.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that Potiphar was in charge of all the King’s livestock.
   According to Onkelos, Potiphar was the King’s chief executioner. We do indeed find the expression טביחה used in the Bible in connection with the slaughter of human beings, for instance in Lamentations 2,21. 
   38,1. ויהי בעת ההיא,,”It was at that time,” according to <i>Rashi</i> the reason why the Torah introduces this paragraph with these words is to tell us that Yehudah’s demotion from his position of leadership of the brothers and his moving away from them was because he had proposed the sale of Joseph to Egypt.
   Many commentators challenge <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary saying that 22 years elapsed from the sale of Joseph to Egypt to the eventual reunion of the family, seeing that Joseph was 17 when he was sold and 39 when the brothers and his father moved to Egypt. Seeing that only so few years had elapsed, how could Yehudah have married, sired 3 sons, married off two of them, and have married Tamar and become the father of Zerach and Peretz, and Peretz siring Chetzron and Chamul, all within such a short space of time? [seeing the last two grandsons of Yehudah are numbered among the seventy members of Yaakov’s familty who left Canaan for Egypt (46,12)? Ed]
   Ibn Ezra writes that what is related here occurred before the sale of Joseph, and that the story was interrupted in order to contrast the story of Yehudah and Tamar with that of Joseph and the wife of Potiphar. [how Joseph could control his libido, whereas Yehudah could not.] 
   38,2. בת איש כנען, “daughter of a Canaanite named Shu’a.” Onkelos translates the word איש כנעני not as an ethnic description, but as the description given to “traders.” He wants to be sure that we know that none of the brothers married a Canaanite woman. This is the reason why the Torah singled out “Sha-ul, son of the Canaanite,” in 46,10 among the sons of Shimon as an exception. This subject has already been the subject of disagreement of <i>Tannaim</i> in the <i>Mishnah</i>, Rabbi Yehudah claiming that twin sisters had been born with all of the twelve brothers, enabling them to marry half sisters, whereas Rabbi Nechemyah holds that the brothers other than Joseph, married Canaanite women. Rabbi Yehudah is forced to have the brothers marry half sisters, something permitted to Israelites before the Torah was given, whereas according to Rabbi Nechemyah we would have to presume that all these twin sisters died before their husbands moved to Egypt, as otherwise, how come they are not included in the list of descendants of Yaakov who moved to Egypt?
   If we approach the subject logically, it is hard to understand how sons of Yaakov could marry women of a cursed nation such as the Canaanites. It is therefore most likely that Onkelos was correct in translating the word איש כנעני as “a prominent trader.” This would also account for the Torah writing ‘Yehudah saw there, etc.” Had this girl been an ethnic Canaanite, what was so special in Yehudah “seeing” her? They were a dime a dozen! She struck him as not belonging to the true inhabitants of that region.
   It is possible to understand Rabbi Nechemyah as not meaning that the brothers actually married ethnic Canaanites. He may only have wanted to dispute the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah that the brothers committed what was incest in terms of Torah legislation. Not only this, but half sisters from the same mother were also forbidden even before the Torah was given. There is little doubt that among the inhabitants of the land of Canaan there were also a minority of Moabites and Ammonites who did not belong to descendants of Canaan who had been cursed.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason Yehudah had sons who were not loyal to their father and grandfather’s tradition was that he had married a Canaanite, and that this was the reason they died so young. This was also the reason the Torah criticized Shimon for having sired Sha-ul from a Canaanite mother [not necessarily his wife, Ed.]. If not for this reason, why would the Torah have singled out the maternity of Sha-ul as the only one of Yaakov’s grandchildren? According to the approach of Ibn Ezra, we would have to understand the line: “Yehudah saw there the daughter of a prominent Canaanite, etc.,” as Yehudah taking an instant liking to that woman, much as Shimshon took an instant liking to the Philistine woman in Judges 14,1 something described by the prophet Samuel as “Shimshon descended to Timnatah, where he saw a woman of the daughters of the Philistines, etc.”
   According to <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary on Genesis 50,13 וישאו אותו בניו , that “Yaakov’s sons carried his bier,” the absence of mention of Yaakov’s grandsons as pall bearers is due to Yaakov having forbidden Egyptians to be pall bearers as well as his grandsons, seeing they had been born of Canaanite mothers. He had referred at least to Shelah son of Yehudah and a Canaanite, and Shau-l son of Shimon and a Canaanite. In order not to slight these grandsons, he precluded all of them from being his pall bearers. [Tanchumah on Numbers12 explains why also Joseph and Levi were excluded from that task. Ed.]
   @ער ואונן, some commentators trace the origin of these names to ערירי and אנינות, “childlessness, and pre burial state of mourning.” They had been named so, out of deference to Yaakov’s painful memories of the son he presumed lost.
   Nachmanides explains that Yehudah called his son ער, as a symbol of awakening, עוררה, whereas his wife called the second son אונן, and the Torah did not bother to inform us why either son was named as he was. It is possible that the wife of Yehudah had a difficult birth with her second son, just as Rachel called her second son by a name that reflected the pains she experienced in order to give birth to him. The word is closely related to the word מתאוננים in Numbers 11,1, where it describes deep frustration of the people and deep dissatisfaction. Yehudah, unlike his father Yaakov, did not bother to change the name his wife had given to their son.
   According to <i>Bereshit</i> Rabbah 85,4 the name ער foreshadows that the boy would be “poured out from the world,” הוער, whereas the name אונן foreshadows that this child would bring sorrow and mourning upon himself, i.e. אנינה.
   38,5. ותוסף עוד ותלד בן ותקרא שמו שלה, “She continued to give birth to another child whom she named Shelah.” I find it peculiar that on this occasion the Torah does not mention Bat Shua’s pregnancy before mentioning that she gave birth. Perhaps we may explain this as her having become pregnant with two children at the time she conceived Onan, and that there was an interval between Onan’s birth and Shelah’s birth. This could be borne out by the wording of the verse that refers to the birth of Shelah as an “additional” birth. This would also explain the Torah speaking about Yehudah being in כזיב, The word is understood as describing “interval, interruption,” as in Isaiah 58,11 אשר לא יכזבו מימיו ‘whose waters will flow without interruption.” [how does the author explain Yehudah asking Tamar to wait until Shelah grows up before giving her to him as a wife? Ed.] In other words, Yehudah separated from Bat Shua for some time after the birth of Onan. The Torah would then be telling us that in spite of Yehudah having separated from Bat Shua after the birth of Onan, she bore him another son, something that he had not expected. According to the author, Yehudah’s stalling Tamar was only that, an excuse not to have a third son marry the same woman whose two husbands had already died.
   @והיה בכגזיב בלדתה אותו, “while he was in Keziv when she gave birth to him.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the location was called Keziv because this was where Bat Shua stopped bearing children.
   Nachmanides queries this, wanting to know why a place would be named to mark such a non-event. Furthermore, who knew at the time when Onan was born that his mother would not have any more children? No one knew this until after Bat Shua died. Some commentators say that seeing Yehudah had named his first son, his wife had named his second son. This was an accepted custom in those days. It would have been Yehudah’s turn to name the third child. The Torah explains the fact that he did not do so, by mentioning that he was in a different place at the time Bat Shua gave birth
   Nachmanides writes also that the meaning of the word כזיב indicates some disruption. The translation of לא תשלה by the Targum is also לא תכזב, “do not err in your prediction, i.e. do not deceive by being wrong.” (compare Kings II 4,28) Bat Shua giving birth in the absence of her husband was a mistake on Yehudah’s part, he should have been at her side. 
   38,7. ויהי ער רע בעיני ה' וימתיהו ה', “Er was wicked in the eyes of the Lord and He killed him.” Some scholars ask how it is possible that someone as young in years as Er could be held responsible for his deeds by the Heavenly tribunal, which supposedly does not judge anyone under 20 years of age. The forced answer given to this question is that if a youngster is intellectually developed to the level of a 20 year old, he is held responsible in spite of his being a minor in terms of years. According to what I have written earlier, about Yehudah having separated from his brothers and married prior to the sale of Joseph, it is quite possible that Er was 20 years old at the time of his death.
   Nachmanides draws attention to the fact that the Torah did not spell out Er’s sin, even though we have been told about Onan’s sin. Presumably, the words: “he was wicked in the eyes of the Lord and He killed him,” mean that he died on account of his own personal sin, and not as a punishment for Yehudah for his having sold Joseph. Yehudah was saved from his penalty for having saved Joseph’s life by the very act of selling him. Among all the families of the patriarchs the only one who had to bury his children was Yehudah.
   38,8. ויבם אותה, “and perform a levirate marriage with her.” According to Nachmanides this was an accepted custom in earlier times, long before the Torah had been given when it was legislated to perform such levirate marriages and the scope of who was qualified to enter into such levirate marriages was greatly reduced at that time. The Torah made an exception in the laws of incest, permitting a brother to marry the widow of another brother who had died without offspring, although there was an overriding law not to marry the one time wife of a brother under all other circumstances.
   38,11. שבי אלמנה בית אביך, “dwell as a widow in your father’s home, etc.” This was a rejection of Tamar as Shelah’s future wife; Yehudah had no intention of ever letting Shelah marry Tamar. 
   Nachmanides writes that he does not understand why Yehudah had to reject her in such a round about fashion; he could have simply told her to go home and feel free to marry anyone else. Furthermore, seeing that Yehudah was so concerned about Tamar having had sexual relations with someone that he was prepared to convict her of death by burning, clearly he did expect her to marry Shelah, why else maintain the fiction that she was a levirate wife in limbo, and as such forbidden to be intimate with any other man? Moreover, it is most unlikely that Yehudah had not heard that the cause of his sons dying was not Tamar but their own sins.
   I believe therefore, that Shelah was perfectly suitable to be the husband of Tamar in a levirate marriage, but his father did not want him to marry Tamar while he was still young, (immature) so that he would not commit a sin similar to those committed by his brothers. They died in their youth precisely because they were too immature, neither of them being even 12 years of age. When Shelah would reach maturity and therefore be obedient to his father’s moral and ethical instructions, he would be quite prepared to have him marry Tamar. At the time of Onan’s death, he was not even 10 years old. Tamar, who was older and had an active libido, deserved to be remarried sooner, and when Yehudah did not give him to her she interpreted this as an outright refusal, not a temporary one.
   38,12. ויעל על גוזזי צאנו, “he went up to supervise the shearing of his flocks.” The Torah describes a normal occupation of Yehudah, who frequently supervised his shearers. On one of these occasions, which Tamar was quite familiar with, she waylaid him. Alternately, the Torah describes a feast on the occasion of the completion of the shearing, and Tamar knew that Yehudah would participate. Therefore she positioned herself where he would have to pass her.
   38,14. ותתעלף, “she covered her face.” Ibn Ezra says that the meaning is that she covered her face. The expression is used in this sense in Jonah, 4,8.
   @בפתח עינים, according to Ibn Ezra this was the name of a place.
   38,15. ויחשבה לו לזונה, “he considered her as being a whore.” This was because she had chosen to sit at a crossroads 
   @כי כסתה פניה, “for she had covered her face.” Our sages say that this described her state while married, and while she was in her father-in-law’s house, so that he did not recognize her facial features.
   Nachmanides writes that the proper explanation, based on the unadorned text, is that Yehudah considered the fact that she concealed her face as proof that she was a whore, as this is what all the whores did in those days They all used to sit at road junctions where there was a lot of traffic. Their shawl would cover part of their hair and leave only a mall part of their faces exposed, revealing their throats and part of their necks. Their lips and eyes were made up. They needed to accost prospective customers, speak to them, even kiss them, so that their faces could not be fully covered by their shawls. Seeing that they did not mind engaging in relations with their relatives, they had to worry about keeping their identities secret.
   38,18.ופתילך, “and your garment.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word is equivalent to שמלתך, your “decorative garment.” [normally, as opposed to בגד, an outer garment, שמלה is understood to refer to undergarments. Ed.]
   Nachmanides disputes <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, as, if Yehudah handed over such a garment (normal usage of שמלה), he would have had to walk away naked. Furthermore, how could the Torah refer to a שמלה by the description פתיל? Besides, since when does the word פתיל occur in the plural? If you were to counter that we find this plural in connection with the commandment of ציצית, it is inconceivable that Yehudah would use a garment with sacred fringes and demean it in such a fashion. [the vowel <i>segol</i> in the word פתילך is taken by Nachmanides to indicate a plural form. Ed.]
   Perhaps he had a small cloth in his hand, something short like a פתיל, a cloth used to wind around one’s head, turban fashion, which Tamar referred to as פתיל because it was short. It is also possible that Yehudah’s signet ring had the shape of a lion, and he had pieces of short cloth that had been embossed with that ring. The staff מטה, he held in his hand in the fashion of rulers who carry a mace.
   38,24. הוציאוה ותשרף, “take her outside to be burned.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this unusual type of the death penalty as due to the fact that Tamar was the daughter of Shem whom we know as the priest of the Supreme G’d from when he blessed Avraham, as well as the fact that he was King of Jerusalem, (Genesis 14) she was subject to this more severe death penalty for adulterous conduct, as per Leviticus 21,9.
   Nachmanides questions this, saying that the legislation referred to in Leviticus is reserved for the daughter of a priest who is betrothed but not yet married properly. A widow waiting to be married to her brother-in-law, and therefore forbidden to any other male, is subject to the penalty imposed on violators of a normal negative commandment, not the death penalty. Besides, every capital crime committed by non-Jews is subject to death by the sword, never by burning.
   Furthermore, Yehudah’s statement צדקה ממני, after becoming aware of his almost fatal error, appears to reinforce Tamar’s guilt even more, a) because he, as the local leader of the region, should have lived a life completely beyond reproach, and certainly should not have slept with a whore; b) she, by engaging in extramarital relations had expressed disdain for the local authority. Keeping these two points in mind, he condemned her to death by burning. [some of these aspects are based on the opinion that Yehudah had realised that the woman he had presumed to have been a whore, was actually a virgin, something that in retrospect made him aware that his sons Er and Onan had never consummated their marriage to Tamar. The people who had brought Tamar before the tribunal had only known that she had become pregnant from someone not her husband and that she had not claimed to have been the victim of rape. Ed.]
   Looking at the plain unadorned text, we must remember that the law concerning women who had had illicit sexual relations while married, would have been handed over to her husband for him to do with her as he saw fit. Seeing that legally, Tamar was destined to be married to Shelah as soon as Shelah was old enough, she was in the category of a married woman according to local custom.
   Rabbi Yehudah the pious, explains that Yehudah did not actually condemn Tamar to be burned at the stake, but that she should be branded with a branding iron which would leave an indelible mark on her face so that she would be disgraced for all to see for the rest of her life. As soon as Yehudah found out that he was the father of the child Tamar was carrying, and that therefore she had not been a whore at all, he did not do anything to her.
   Many raise the question how Yehudah could pronounce judgment, saying: “take her outside and burn her,” seeing that according to Jewish law, a King is not subject to being judged by a court of his subjects, nor is he himself allowed to sit in judgment of anyone. In addition to this legal point, according to Jewish law, whenever a capital crime is dealt with in the court, and a vote is taken as to the guilt or innocence of the accused, the first person polled is the youngest and not the most senior, so as not to sway the judgment of the junior judges. Here we were told only about the presiding judge’s Yehudah’s vote on the subject. A third difficulty is how could Yehudah, a relative, and therefore a biased participant, be allowed to be present at these proceedings at all? [all of the preceding is of course, based on the assumption that just as the brothers observed Torah law although it was not yet revealed to them as legislation, they complied also with the wider ramifications of Torah laws as found in the written text. Ed.]
   The answers suggested to these various reservations of our sages about Yehudah’s conduct, is that the trial of Tamar was conducted by Yitzchok, Yaakov and Yehudah being the tribunal. Seeing that Yehudah was the junior member of this tribunal, we are told about his vote first, something completely in accordance with Jewish law.. 
   Another view voiced by a <i>Midrash,</i> claims that Tamar’s father, Shem, personally sat in judgment of her. With all due respect, this is chronologically impossible. A review of the relevant historical data will reveal that Shem had long been dead at that time. 
   [According to Genesis 11,11 Shem died 501 years after the deluge, i.e. in the year 2157 after the creation of Adam. The Exodus occurred in the year 2448, after the Israelites had been in Egypt for 210 years. In other words, when Yedudah came to Egypt in the year 2238 he was about 3 years older than Joseph, who we know was 39-40 years at the time as testified by the Torah. This means that Yehudah was born in or around the year 2195, 27 years after the death of Shem. Ed.] 
   As to the statement in A<i>vodah Zarah</i> 36 that the tribunal of Shem decreed that an unmarried male who has sexual relations with an unmarried female is subject to the death penalty, [seeing that for gentiles there is no other penalty, Ed.] and the origin of that law is attributed to the incident between Yehudah and Tamar, this does not mean that Shem, the founder of that tribunal was still alive, but that the academy and tribunal which he founded continued to bear the name of its founder, Shem.
   38,26. צדקה ממני, “she is correct; it stems from me.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets this statement as referring to Tamar’s statement, (words) that she was pregnant by Yehudah, (Though the words were never articulated by her)
   Nachmanides understands Yehudah as referring to Tamar’s deeds rather than to her words. She was right, whereas he was wrong in not giving her as a wife to Shelah, seeing that she had a claim on him. Shelah’s father would rank second behind his son only if his son had refused to carry out his obligation to marry Tamar.
   Some commentators feel that the words צדקה ממני, were spoken by Yehudah when he became aware that it had been he who had impregnated Tamar, and had found out in the process that she had been a virgin, and that the unnatural deaths of his two older sons had been the punishment for their failing to fulfill their duties as husbands of Tamar, and their wasting their semen. In the event that someone would claim that according to accepted norms a virgin never conceives from her first sexual experience, so how could Yehudah have impregnated her as virgin, this principle is valid only if the hymen had not previously been weakened, such as by an almost but not quite penetration, as is described as having been performed by Onan. (Genesis 38,9)
   @ולא יסף עוד לדעתה, “he had no further marital relations wit her.” There is an opinion (<i>Sotah</i> 10) according to which the meaning of the above words is that Yehudah did not stop having marital relations with Tamar. According to the opinion that the meaning of ולא יסף is “he did not continue, etc.” we must view Yehudah’s conduct <i>vis a</i> vis Tamar as reflecting the concept of קדש עצמך במותר לך, “sanctify yourself by eschewing even what is permitted to you.” Yehudah did not mean to imply that Tamar was legally out of bounds to him as a wife. Seeing he had fulfilled the commandment to be fruitful with her, he saw no point in continuing a relationship that could be misinterpreted by people who had known Tamar as the wife of one of his sons.
   38,29. ויהי כמשיב ידו, “it happened as he retracted his hand, etc.” This refers to the distance a person can withdraw his hand. If the subject of this phrase would be the infant to whom this hand belonged, the Torah should have written: ויהי כאשר השיב ידו.
   @מה פרצת עליך פרץ? “how did you burst your way out?” <i>Rashi</i> understands the expression פרץ as denoting doing something violently. Alternately, it may mean that “you have broken out of the boundary that was meant to contain you.”
   Nachmanides writes that anyone who crosses a boundary is described by Biblical Hebrew as being פורץ as G’d promised Yaakov in Genesis 28,14 ופרצת ימה וקדמה וגו', “and you will burst forth to the West, to the East, etc.” concerning his descendants. This is why the midwife, when seeing the firstborn extending his hand beyond the birth canal, exclaimed that by coming forth hand first, that “he had burst forth.” The meaning of the word עליך in our context refers to the natural boundaries that had been set for each of these infants and the order in which they were meant to be born. Some commentators explain the words: מה פרצת as similar to פרצה גדולה עשית, “you have made a great break-through,” i.e. “may it be G’d’s will that this breakthrough you have made into the world will be a good omen for your continuous further development. According to this inter-pretation, the word פרצת here is not similar in meaning to the word in Genesis 28,14.
   39,3. כי ה' אתו, “for the Lord was with him.” One reason was that Joseph invoked the name of the Lord in his daily conversation. According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, his master observed how unusually successful everything Joseph undertook turned out to be.
   Our sages interpret the word וירא, “he saw,” to mean that Potiphar observed that prior to carrying out a task Joseph invariably whispered something. He concluded that Joseph was employing witchcraft, challenging him that he had brought witchcraft with him to Egypt, something which had been banned in Egypt for a long time already. He then noticed that the Divine presence rested above Joseph, having had a dream that featured the Divine Presence as reposing above the head of an individual. This Presence appeared in the shape of a pillar of cloud, honouring the presence of a righteous individual.
   39,6. כי אם הלחם אשר הוא אוכל, “except for the food which he was in the habit of eating.” According to the plain meaning, Potiphar did not issue any instructions to Joseph concerning his duties, but he left it all to his good sense and sense of duty. He did, however, tell Joseph the kind of menu he wished to enjoy every day.
   Ibn Ezra explains why Potiphar did not charge Joseph with preparing food; the Egyptians had a different eating culture from that of the Hebrews, and they detested the manner in which Hebrews prepared their food. He did not even let Joseph touch the bread. [This editor has never understood this explanation as something pertaining to the family of Yaakov, who numbered very few, and whose cultural impact on Egypt was nil. It is more likely that all the people from beyond the Tigris and Euphrates, the Sumerians, had different food habits from those of the Egyptians, the competing major culture, and that Joseph as was obvious by his skin colour, (The Eyptians being black) was viewed as culturally basically different. The derogatory manner in which the wife of Potiphar refers to Joseph as a “Hebrew” slave, is further evidence that it was not his “Jewishness” but his being associated with the Sumerians, Accadians, Babylonians, etc., which evoked her disdain once she had been rejected as a lover. (39,14) Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that the meaning of the words ולא ידע אתו מאומה כי אם הלחם, mean that Joseph was free to take whatever was in the household and use it on behalf of his master except the bread which his master ate. This was something reserved for the master of the house. All other items in the house that were designed to enhance the residents’ quality of life were Joseph’s to enjoy. 
   @ויהי יוסף יפה תואר, “Joseph became exceedingly handsome.” According to<i> Rashi</i> the fact that Joseph enjoyed so much authority caused him to attend to his personal appearance in an exaggerated manner.
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah had to provide us with a rationale why the wife of Potiphar would want to have an affair with a slave, one from Mesopotamia, of all places. The Torah therefore explains that Joseph’s physique proved of an overpowering attraction to her
   39,8.ויאמר אל אשת אדוניוו וימאן “He refused, and said to the wife of his master, etc.” Although we are well aware that Potiphar was Joseph’s master, the Torah reports his position, in order to explain that Joseph’s refusal to respond to the advances of his mistress was based on her husband being his master, also. It was not based on Joseph finding her unattractive. He had reason to also fear the anger of his mistress, but he made plain that his fear of G’d was stronger than his fear of the results of her displeasure with him.
   39,9. וחטאתי לאלוקים, “I would commit a sin against G’d.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that basic legislation about incestuous relations including adultery applied universally, not only to Jews.
   Nachmanides writes that he finds it difficult that Joseph mentioned the sin of adultery against his own master Potiphar, which is secondary, before mentioning the sin against G’d which is primary. He answers this problem by saying that women do not perceive matters in that order. They relate first and foremost to their visible masters, their husbands, and are only marginally concerned with their sins against the Creator, who remains invisible both to them and to their husbands.
   There is also another way of answering the manner in which Joseph described the sin of giving in to the allure of Mrs. Potiphar. He did not refer to the aspect of illicit sex at all directly, other than saying that he would be committing a great wrong against G’d’s law, without implying that she would be a party to that sin. According to that approach, the words הרעה הגדולה, “the great evil,” would modify the words וחטאתי לאלוקים.
   39,10. לשכב אצלה, “to lie down beside her;” Ibn Ezra understands this as sitting beside one another on the same settee, fully clothed, engaging in idle chatter. The reason for Ibn Ezra’s explanation is that the term לשכב אצלה, is most inappropriate for intimacy involving sex, as the Torah would have used the word עמה, if it wanted to describe such an intimate physical relationship.
   39,11. ויהי כהיום, “A certain day arrived, etc.” It was as clear as day(light) that Joseph had only arrived to perform his regular work.
   @ואין איש מאנשי הבית בבית, ”and no one of the normally present people in the house was in the house on that occasion.” The unusual phrasing מאנשי הבית, meaning “of the men normally assigned to the house,” prompted the sages to say that another person was present, referring to the image of Yaakov, Joseph’s father, whose image reminded him not to fall victim to the lure of this woman.
   39,12. ויעזב בגדו בידה, “he left his outer garment in her hand.” Out of deference for her position as his mistress, he did not wrest the garment from her hands, although he was physically powerful enough to have done this.
   39,14. ראו הביא לנו איש עברי, “see here! He brought us a Hebrew man.” Mrs. Potiphar referred to the “Hebrew” as universally known antagonists of the Egyptians, a reason why the Egyptians would not acquire “Hebrews” as slaves, except to work in the vineyards and other menial occupations in the fields. They were never allowed into the homes of upper class Egyptians. Mrs Potiphar voiced her disgust with her husband who not only had taken a slave of such parentage into their house, but had even elevated him to be the most powerful person in the whole household. It was not surprising therefore that an עברי slave who had been promoted to such a position would begin to take advantage of it and treat all of us as his inferiors, abusing us, as he has just tried to do with me. She deliberately left out a direct reference to her husband, as she wanted to insure that the members of the household would support her.
   39,17. כדברים האלה, “words similar to these.” According to <i>Rashi</i>, a reference to “pillow” talk between Mrs Potiphar and her husband. She considered the timing appropriate to relate to her husband matters pertaining to what she described as Joseph’s sexual advances to her.
   Nachmanides queries this in light of the <i>Midrashim</i> that teach us that Potiphar had become impotent as a punishment for trying to indulge his homosexual fantasies by using Joseph as his partner. Furthermore, it seems unlikely that Mrs Potiphar would reveal intimate details about Joseph to her husband, details the knowledge of which would incriminate her. If she had accused Joseph of raping her, he would be guilty of execution, so why did Potiphar not have him executed? Moreover, why had she not cried out before Joseph could perpetrate his evil intention? She only raised a fuss after the event! This would give her husband the right to execute her! She only had to tell her husband that Joseph was getting ready to rape her! Perhaps both the <i>Midrash</i> upon which <i>Rashi</i> based himself, and his own understanding of the words עניני תשמיש, is not to be understood literally, but refers to Mrs Potiphar describing fondling of her by Joseph, not his sleeping with her.
   It is possible that Potiphar, in order to suppress the scandal, did not execute Joseph, as his reputation as a husband cuckolded by a Hebrew slave would have resulted in his becoming a laughing stock among his peers. It is also possible that Potiphar’s fondness of Joseph was such that he could not bear to kill him.
   Looking at the plain meaning of the text, we do not need all of these convoluted explanations (based on the extraneous letter כ in front of the word דברים), and the meaning is the same as if the Torah had written הדברים האלה, “these matters.” Alternately, the Torah hints, that as soon as Potiphar heard the story of his wife about what Joseph was supposed to have done to her, i.e. her words, not necessarily the true events, he did not believe her, having faith in Joseph’s uprightness, and, seeing that he had to save face, he incarcerated Joseph instead of executing him, thus saving face for his wife also.
   39,20. ויתנהו אל בית הסוהר מקום אשר אסירי המלך, “he placed him in the jail in which the King’s prisoners were kept.” 
   According to Ibn Ezra the term בית הסוהר is a specifically Egyptian term. This is the reason why the Torah found it necessary to explain the meaning of the term by writing that it was the place in which the King’s prisoners were kept.
   Nachmanides writes concerning Ibn Ezra’s observation that Ibn Ezra made no contribution at all with his excuse for the apparent repetition, but that the letter ה at the beginning of the word סוהר indicates that this was a very well known jail, the one specially reserved for the king’s prisoners This explains why the King’s baker and the King’s cupbearer were placed in that jail where they met Joseph. It is also possible that the wording in chapter 40,3 indicates that prisoners kept in that jail were dealt with by the King personally, and not by regular judges and courts. The Torah’s reporting that this was the jail Potiphar placed Joseph in, is an indication that Joseph was considered as a V.I.P. by his former master.
   40,2. על שני סריסיו. “at his two ministers.” The expression סריס implies: “holder of distinguished office.” This is why Onkelos translates it in this fashion. [the term is not used in that manner in modern Hebrew. Ed.]
   Some commentators understand the word here literally, i.e. “eunuchs.” The reason why these officials had to be castrated was that they performed their duties also in the palaces set aside for Pharaoh’s women.
   40,5. איש כפתרון חלומו, “each man according to its interpretation.” According to <i>Rashi</i> each man dreamt a dream that was roughly in accordance with the eventual interpretation offered for it as forecasting his fate. In other words, the cupbearer dreamt something which was enjoyable for him, i.e. he saw grapes which he could convert into wine, whereas the chief baker dreamt something that was disturbing, i.e. the bird consumed what he had meant to serve the King. Joseph interpreted the dreams to correspond to the mood that these dreams evoked in their principals. [the author’s version of <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary must have differed from that found in most of our <i>Chumashim</i> nowadays. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that such a commentary does not reflect what the chief of the cupbearers said to Pharaoh in 41,11; “we had dreamt a dream that corresponded to Joseph’s interpretation of it.” If <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation were correct, it would have diminished Joseph’s reputation as an interpreter of dream rather than have enhanced it. What the chief of the cupbearers meant to imply was that Joseph knew how to interpret the dream although on the face of it, it did not resemble the eventual interpretation at all.
   Ibn Ezra writes that each of the two ministers dreamt his own dream plus the interpretation that applied to the dream of his colleague. [there is also confusion between what Nachmanides quotes Ibn Ezra as saying, and the version found in recent, amended versions of Ibn Ezra’s commentary by Asher Weiser. Ed.] Ibn Ezra’s major point [according to Nachmanides as per version in Rabbi Chavell’s edition] is that as opposed to Solomon’s statement in Kohelet 5,2 each party dreamt a precise forecast of his fate, there was no extraneous matter in the dream that would have confused the potential interpreter. [Rabbi Chavell quotes our author‘s interpretation of Ibn Ezra. Ed.]
   40,6. וישאל את סריסי פרעה אשר אתו במשמר, “he enquired from Pharaoh’s ministers, the ones in the same jail as he, etc.” We would have expected the Torah to write: “וישאל אותם,” he asked them.” The only reason why the Torah chose more cumbersome wording is to tell us of the praiseworthy conduct of Joseph who, although he found himself in the presence of two prisoners vastly superior to him in personal power even while in jail, and moreover, in the jail of his former master Potiphar, who by now hated him, i.e. people who could have ordered his execution without worrying about their being held accountable, nonetheless had the courage to interpret their dreams, although at least one of them would be frustrated with his interpretation. He had confidence in his wisdom, for if the chief of the bakers had been pardoned, he would surely have hung Joseph for having made him deathly afraid for a number of days.
   40,8. פותר אין אותו, “there was no one who would interpret it.” There was no one in the whole world that knew how to interpret it.
   Alternately, these ministers had sent messengers to a number of well known dream experts, both within the jail and beyond, and none of those had any explanation to offer.
   @הלא לאלוקים פתרונים, “is not the subject of interpreting dreams something reserved for G’d? Ibn Ezra says that Joseph meant that G’d exclusively, knows of the interpretation that will come true in the future. Only He knows the future and sees fit to reveal some of it to whosoever needs to know it. Joseph continued: “if I explain the dream to you in a manner that will please you, or even in a manner which will not reflect its true meaning, this will not affect your future fate at all.” He may have said this to them in order to encourage them to tell him their dreams, or as reinsurance so that they would have no reason to punish him if it was found that he erred in his interpretations.
   Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation of our verse in his opinion, is that Joseph explained to them that for all the dreams which defy our ability to interpret correctly there is an explanation which G’d knows of, and this is a knowledge that He has granted to some people to share with Him. If he were to offer an explanation for their dreams, it would be the result of knowledge granted to him by G’d. If they were to tell him the details of their dreams, perhaps G’d would enlighten him concerning the meaning.
   40,10. והיא כפורחת, “and it seemed to be blossoming, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> this means that it seemed to the cupbearer in his dreams if the vines were blossoming.
   Nachmanides queries that if we were to base this interpretation on the presence of the כף הדמיון, the prefix letter כ, which is a frequent phenomenon, and it is used here because everything that one sees in a dream is not real but only imaginary, then the proper place for this letter would have been at the beginning of the image, and the Torah, instead of writing והנה גפן, “behold there was a vine,” should have written והנה כגפן “and behold there was something like a vine, etc.” In his opinion, the reason the Torah writes the letter כ only when it does, is to portray the development of this vine into fruit and ultimately wine which is offered by the dreamer to Pharaoh’s lips, as something occurring with unreal speed. It is this element that prompted Joseph to foresee fulfillment of the message contained in the dream not as occurring three months or longer after the vine begins to blossom, but as occurring within three days. 
   40,14. כי אם זכרתני אתך, “if only you will remember me, etc.” according to Nachmanides Joseph asks the cupbearer to remember him after he had been reinstated and then bring him to Pharaoh’s attention as another innocent sitting in jail, something he would consider an act of loving kindness on the part of the cupbearer.
   Another possible explanation of the phrase is that Joseph pleads with the cupbearer to remember him as if he were still in his presence, i.e.אתך. [otherwise the word אתך appears as somewhat redundant. Ed.]
   Yet another possible meaning is that Joseph said: “the favour you can do me after you have been reinstated and you reminded yourself that I had predicted your reinstatement, is to plead my case before Pharaoh, seeing that I, like yourself, am in jail due to trumped up charges against me.”
   Still another possibility is that Joseph did not ask the cupbearer to plead his case before Pharaoh but only to mention his name to Pharaoh, and Pharaoh who knew Joseph from the days when he was prominent in Potiphar’s household, would realize that his sitting in jail proved that he was actually free from sin, as otherwise his master would have executed him.
   40,15. כי גנוב גנבתי, “for I have been twice kidnapped, etc.” Not only was I kidnapped from my homeland, but here too I have not committed any wrong that would justify my being in jail.
   40,16. מארץ העברים, “from the land of the Hebrews.” Clearly, Joseph did not speak about a state ruled by Hebrews, but he used this adjective to recall that he was descended from Avraham who had been the first עברי to take up residence in the land of Canaan after leaving Mesopotamia.
   40,16. כי טוב פתר, “that he had interpreted the dream positively;” the fact that Joseph predicted fulfillment of the dream within three days convinced the baker that he was telling the truth as otherwise he would be proven a liar within such a short span of time.
   @סלי חורי, “baskets of patisserie.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the word חורי as describing the kinds of baskets, i.e. wicker work.
   Rabbeinu Saadyah Gaon explains the word חורי as referring to bread made of white flour, a delicacy reserved for kings. Linguistically, the word would be related to חיור, “ (Arabic word?)
   40,19. ישא פרעה את ראשך, “Pharaoh will raise your head.” The meaning of the word ישא when used in conjunction with the cupbearer is not the same as the same word used by the Torah (Joseph) in connection with the chief of the bakers. In the case of the former, it denotes a promotion, as when the Children of Israel were to be numbered in Exodus 30,12 כי תשא את ראש וגו'. Numbering people means each individual has a distinct value on its own, not only as a member of a larger number. In our context, the meaning of the word נשא as “raising” applies equally to “raising” someone’s head by hanging it from a gallows, instead of by promoting the owner of the head.
   40,23. ולא זכר שר המשקים, “but the chief of the cupbearers did not remember.” The repetition means that he neither remembered Joseph by mentioning him, nor even by recalling him in his heart. Some commentators claim that the word וישכחהו is meant to tell the reader that the cupbearer did not fail to remember Joseph because of hatred, but only because he really forgot him.
   Parshat Miketz
   41,1.ויהי מקץ שנתים ימים, “it was at the end of two years.” Pharaoh’s dream occurred two years after the reinstatement of the chief of the cupbearers. Although the Torah did not specify when the two years which it describes as having ended commenced, it is reasonable to assume that they commenced at the time the cupbearer had been released. The Torah implies that although the time had come then for Joseph to be released also, the fact that he pinned his hopes on the goodwill of the cupbearer whose good fortune he had foretold caused G’d to keep him in jail for another two years. As a result, he spent a total of 12 years in jail. He had served in the house of Potiphar for only one year. We arrive at this conclusion by the verse which says “the blessing of G’d was on the house of the Egyptian both in the field and in the house, the field being a reference to the summer, and “the house” being a reference to winter, the season when most people in temperate climates spend most of their time indoors. He had already been in jail for 9 years before the king’s prisoners joined him there. This is clear from the verse (Genesis 40,4) “they had been in jail for one year.” (a reference to the two ministers.) These ten years were followed by another two years that ended at the beginning of our portion.
   This account is difficult to reconcile with a statement in the <i>Midrash Hagadol</i> on Genesis 40,1 that the cupbearer and the chief baker sinned [in the sense that the Satan encouraged them to sin, Ed.] in order that they should have reason to bemoan their own fates instead of slandering Joseph, etc.” If the <i>Midrash</i> is correct, it is strange that they were not jailed many years previously. Perhaps one could say that though both the cupbearer and the chief baker committed a variety of sins against their king much earlier, the identity of these sinners had not been discovered until much later so that they were not jailed until Joseph had already been in jail for nine years.
   @מקץ, <i>Rashi</i>, following Onkelos, translates this as “at the end.” The reason he interprets the word as meaning “at the end,” is so we should not misunderstand its meaning to be “at the beginning,” as in Deut. 14,28 מקצה שלש שנים, where it means “the beginning of the third year.”
   @שנתים ימים, “two years;” seeing that the word שנתים means “two years,” why did the Torah add the superfluous ימים “years?” Some commentators explain this as meaning that here the Torah speaks of solar years instead of lunar years, as in ימים תהיה גאולתו, “it is to be redeemed within a year.” (lunar year of 12 months.) (Leviticus 25,29). This is supported by the words עד מלאת לו שנה תמימה, “until he has completed a full year” (Leviticus 25,30) Other commentators understand the phrase as referring to two of three ימים that Joseph spoke of in interpreting the dreams of the cupbearer and chief baker.
   @ופרעה חלם, “and Pharaoh had a dream.” The prefix letter ו at the beginning of the word ופרעה, is an oblique confirmation of the statement by our sages that G’d does not set in motion an important sequence of events without first consulting with the Heavenly Tribunal and revealing it to His prophets. Joseph, supposedly, also dreamt Pharaoh’s dream. We are therefore encouraged to treat this paragraph as a continuation of the preceding one by means of this letter ו, although on the face of it, it would appear to introduce something not connected to what immediately preceded it. [the Talmud does not include Joseph in its list of 48 prophets and 7 prophetesses. Ed.]
   @והנה עומד על היאור, “and here he was standing over the river (Nile)” According to <i>Rashi</i> no other river has ever been referred to as יאור.
   Nachmanides disagrees, saying that the river Tigris has also been described as יאור as we know from Daniel 12,6 where the word יאור cannot refer to the Nile but must refer to the Tigris. We also find that Onkelos translates the word יאור simply as נהרא, “river.” If it were a designation that applies exclusively to the river Nile, Onkelos could not have chosen the word נהרא to describe it. The word יאור is a derivative of the word אור, light, and we also find the word אור describing גשם, rain. (Job, 37,11 יפיץ ענן אורו, “the cloud spreads its rain). <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i>, 26,7 (quoting Rabbi Yochanan) states that wherever in the Book of Job, Elihu speaks of אור, he refers to rainfall. Perhaps this is all connected to the vapours rising from the streams and rivers, eventually producing rain. [the author must consider the “atmosphere” as another term describing light in the sense of daylight (seeing that we have daylight even when the sun does not shine, and as proof he considers the rainbow as part of this “atmosphere.” [Seeing that the author engages in speculation, I have added my own so as to make his speculation more plausible sounding, even if not scientifically correct. Ed.]
   41,2. הנה מן היאור עולות שבע פרות, “and here seven cows were rising from the river.” Seeing that the Egyptians drink the waters of the Nile, and that river is the key to their enjoying a bountiful harvest or famine, the cows in Pharaoh’s dream are portrayed as “rising from out of the river.” The cows themselves symbolize beasts working the land, whereas the kernels in the second part of the dream portray the eventual harvest. Had Pharaoh only been shown cows in his dream, one might have been tempted to understand them as symbols of nations which Egypt would subjugate. This is why also the kernels were included in his dream. On the other hand, if Pharaoh had been shown only the kernels this would not have sufficed as the repetition of the dream was vital for its proper interpretation.
   Nachmanides writes that the phenomenon of extra-ordinarily bountiful harvests for seven consecutive years which Joseph predicted was experienced only in Egypt and not in the surrounding countries. This is why the Torah emphasizes (verse 29) שבע גדול בכל ארץ מצרים, great abundance of food in the whole land of Egypt.” The famine predicted by Joseph, however, included all the surrounding countries, all the trading partners of Egypt. Seeing that the seven good years occurred only in Egypt accounted for the fact that the surrounding countries had not laid in any supplies of non perishable food in anticipation of the famine to come.
   41,3. ותעמודנה אצל הפרות, “they were standing next to, etc.” They stood right next to one another, as a sign that there would be not much interval between the seven good years and the famine following. Although Pharaoh had not even bothered to tell Joseph this detail (compare verses 18-20) There were sufficient hints in the story (his dream) as Pharaoh related it to Joseph to convince Joseph that the years of plenty would be immediately followed by the years of famine. The way the starved looking cows swallowed the fat cows leaving no trace of even having ingested them, alerted Joseph to the detail hinted at by the Torah’s report of the dream.
   @ותאכלנה הפרות, “the cows devoured, etc.;” this was an indication that the years of famine would completely neutralize the blessing of the seven good years; it alerted Joseph to the need to forestall this disaster by collecting non perishable food and storing it so it could be easily accessed when the time came. He impressed upon Pharaoh the need for draconian measures in order to ensure that the years of drought would not destabilize the country and his rule on the throne. Joseph’s advice to Pharaoh does not commence until when he suggests collecting and storing the surplus food of the seven good years. <i>Rashi</i> (verse 30) is not correct when he explains the manner in which the good years will be forgotten as part of Joseph’s advice. Joseph, concluding from the unchanged appearance of the starved looking cows that the impact of the seven good years would be forgotten, makes this part of this explanation to Pharaoh.
   41,6.צומחות אחריהן, “were growing forth after them.” Pharaoh did not actually see these kernels growing in his dream. They were already fully grown when they appeared in his dream. The language used was only meant to show the fact that the good kernels were followed immediately by the windblown ones. The windblown kernels are not described as having all grown on a single stalk, suggesting that each successive one was forecasting that the famine would get worse from year to year
   41,7. ותבלענה, “they devoured, etc.;” use of the word ותאכלנה has been avoided by the Torah here. The reason is that this word is inappropriate for kernels which were the subject in our verse, as opposed to verse 4 where the consuming of cows is described as their being “eaten,” ותאכלנה. The word ותבלענה is parallel to כבלע את הקודש in Numbers 4,20. In practice, the windblown kernels grew and enclosed the good ones until the latter were as if they had never existed.
   Some commentators understand the word ותבלענה as literally meaning that the windblown kernels devoured their healthy counterparts. If so, the expression בליעה instead of אכילה, needs further elaboration.
   On the words וייקץ פרעה והנה חלום at the end of our verse, <i>Rashi</i> comments that the Torah merely indicates that this was the end of the dream
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah informs us that Pharaoh was preoccupied with his dream even after having awakened, i.e. realizing that what he had seen was not reality. He was wondering whether he would have a third dream that might enable him to make sense of the first two images. When he finally arose in the morning without having had an additional dream, he became very agitated. This is why the Torah continues with: “it was in the morning, and he proceeded to call in the necromancers of Egypt and all its wise men.” This is quite different from what we are told in Daniel 2,1 about Nevuchdnezzar’s dream. That King’s anxiety is described as ותתפעם רוחו, a more intense kind of agitation and trepidation than that which bothered Pharaoh. Nevuchadnezzar called in the potential interpreters still in the middle of the night, not waiting until a normal hour in the morning.
   @והנה חלום, “and, behold, it had only been a dream.” From the use of the singular “a dream,” although Pharaoh had seen two distinctly separate visions in his dream, the Torah hints that he himself realized that it had all been part of a single dream, as Joseph was to confirm to him later. The words ואין פותר אותם לפרעה, mean that not even a single one of the necromancers and the wise men had suggested interpretation that appealed to Pharaoh.
   41,8. ותפעם רוחו, “his mind was agitated.” He had not forgotten what he had dreamt, as had Nevuchadnezzar. There had been no need for Nevuchadnezzar at the time to recall what he had dreamt as it foreshadowed events long in the future, and no one would have believed Daniel’s interpretation; he was not promoted to a position of prominence on account of his coming up with the interpretation but because he had been able to tell the king what he had dreamt, something the king had been unable to recall until reminded by Daniel. (Daniel chapter 2) In our situation here, it was enough for Joseph to offer the dream’s meaning, as he placed its realization as beginning almost immediately.
   Some commentators claim that the reason Joseph was believed was precisely because the dream had not been forgotten. Had it been forgotten, any reconstruction of the dream by an interpreter would have to rely on the words of the interpreter, as no one could know if he spoke the truth. 
   41,9. את חטאי, “my sins, etc.” he used the plural form in describing his sin, as he had also been guilty of forgetting the promise he had made to Joseph, something he should have kept at once. 
   41,10. פרעה קצף, “Pharaoh had been angry, etc.” It is bad form to call the king by his name, hence one refers to him in the third person even while in his presence. The word “Pharaoh” is not a proper name but a title accorded to the ruler of Egypt.
   @אותי ואת שר האופים, “me and the chief of the bakers.” Although the cupbearer had already said ויתן אותי, “he placed me, etc.”, he repeated the words אותי ואת שר האופים, omitting the reference to the jail being under the control of the chief executioner, so that it meant that he and the chief of the bakers were in the same part of the jail together. Had they not been treated alike in the jail, Joseph’s prediction of freedom for one and death for the other would not have been remarkable. The fact that these two ministers were assigned the same part of the jail made Joseph’s prediction doubly remarkable. Joseph realized that one of the two had not committed a crime that would qualify for the death penalty.
   41,13. אותי השיב על כני, “me he restored to my position,” according to the plain meaning the word השיב refers to Pharaoh as being the one who restored the cupbearer to his former position. Other commentators consider Joseph as the subject of the word השיב, seeing that we have a tradition that the words of the interpreter determine the meaning of the dream, (<i>Berachot 55)</i> i.e. that Joseph’s interpretation set in motion the release of the cupbearer. Accordingly, Joseph had held the fate of both the chief of the bakers and the cupbearer in his hands when he offered his interpretation.
   41,14. ויריצוהו מן הבור, “they rushed him from the pit.” In view of the earlier statement that Joseph had the run of the whole jail, and that the warden did not interfere with anything he did, (39,21-23) it sounds strange that Joseph had to be rushed from “the pit.” We may assume that when the warden heard that Pharaoh had sent for Joseph, he did not know if this portended something positive or negative. In the event that it spelled doom for Joseph, the warden did not want to appear as if he had favoured a prisoner slated for execution. Therefore, upon receiving the king’s summons, the warden first placed Joseph into the pit appropriate for all the other prisoners. In retrospect this was most appropriate, as it means that Joseph who had been incarcerated in a pit before the warden decided to make use of his intelligence, would now rise overnight from the lowest of the low to the second highest office in the world, i.e. viceroy to Pharaoh the world’s most powerful ruler. The fact that Pharaoh had exhausted all other means of having his dream interpreted satisfactorily, also contributed to the almost unbelievable reversal of his fortune. 
   41,16. בלעדי, אלוקי יענה את שלום פרעה, “this is not up to me; may G’d provide a reply which will put Pharaoh’s mind at rest.” Ibn Ezra says that seeing Pharaoh had asked Joseph to interpret the dream, Joseph told him that the interpretation was not up to him, but that it was up to G’d. He was confident that G’d would put Pharaoh’s mind at rest when he would hear the interpretation.
   One could also understand Joseph’s words to simply mean that there is a greater interpreter of dreams than he, namely G’d, with whom the dream originated. He wished and prayed that G’d would put Pharaoh’s mind at rest. Seeing that Joseph had given G’d credit by prefacing his interpretation with the word בלעדי, “it is not up to me,” this word is repeated when Pharaoh appoints him to high office and adds that without Joseph’s approval, בלעדיך, “without your (approval) no one will lift a foot in this country. (verse 44).”
   41,23. צנומות, according to <i>Rashi</i> the word means, “stone-hard,” meaning that it is completely dried out from seed as translated by Onkelos. נצן לקין.
   Nachmanides questions how one can speak of נץ when the subject is kernels, a stage when נצים, blossoms, have long disappeared. Pharaoh had not seen any of these growing stalks of grain in a stage of budding, blossoming. He had only seen them after their growing process had been completed and the kernels were either full and healthy looking, or dried out, windblown, proof of harvest failure. Therefore, he explains the word צנומות to mean “split open into many small sections”. A similar word is commonly used to describe bread which has shrunk due to being dried out, פת צנומה. Such bread remains are sometimes placed in a bowl, so that when mixed with milk or some other liquid it can be made edible again. The word נצן is also understood as meaning something hollow, empty, lacking earth, i.e. the word is the opposite of מלאה, full. The husks were not full of wheat kernels as they should have been.
   When the Torah reports the dream objectively, [not as remembered by Pharaoh, Ed.] it said of Pharaoh והנה עומד על היאור, “and here he was standing above the river.” When Pharaoh relates the dream to Joseph, he does not describe himself as having stood above the river, but as having stood on the banks of the river, על שפת היאור. This was Pharaoh’s way of paying tribute to the river which was the mainstay of Egypt’s economy, so much so that Pharaoh worshipped the river as a deity. Describing himself as “standing above the river,” would have been an insult to the river in Pharaoh’s eyes. This consideration also explains why in the Torah’s report, both the good cows and the starved-looking cows are described as “rising from the river,” whereas in Pharaoh’s report the good cows are described as “rising from the river,” whereas the poorly looking cows are simply described as “following behind them,” and no mention is made of the word “the river.” The river must not be perceived as the origin of anything negative. It is always a source of blessing in the eyes of those who worship it as a deity. Pharaoh also described the appearance of the good cows as “of healthy flesh and of well formed shape,” whereas the Torah’s report describes them as “of beautiful appearance and healthy flesh,” in that order. We find similar minor variations in the description by Pharaoh of the poorly looking animals, and the objective description by the Torah of the same phenomenon. Joseph points out to Pharaoh that he had not told him precisely what he had seen, but had given him an edited version. Nonetheless, he says,” it is all one dream,” [even if you have tried to confuse me by not relating it accurately, Ed.] The interpretation of the dream, i.e. what it portends, is not affected by the changes you have made in how you related it. When Pharaoh heard that Joseph had first hand knowledge of his dream not from his mouth but from a higher source, he was dumbfounded and convinced that he had truly received a message from G’d, one that had required a man of Joseph’s caliber to reveal its meaning to him.
   41,27. יהיו שבע שני רעב, “will be seven years of famine.” Joseph commenced his interpretation by mentioning the famine which it predicted, although in the dream the seven good years appeared first. He did so, seeing that Egypt was a land blessed with an abundant food supply, one which was taken for granted by its citizenry, and therefore mentioning it first would not have served as a warning signal. After all, G’d would not have sent Pharaoh a message advising him that seven good years were in store for his country. The principal message of the dream was to beware of the forthcoming famine and not to be lulled into a false sense of security by the seven good years. Another reason why Joseph zeroed in on the seven years of famine was that the accuracy of his interpretation could not be ascertained until then. Nobody would have cheered Joseph for predicting seven years of plenty.
   41,32. ועל השנות החלום אל פרעה פעמים, “and concerning the basically same dream having been sent to Pharaoh twice, etc.” Actually, the dream had been repeated in a different variation only once, so why did Joseph speak of it having been repeated twice?
   Nachmanides explains that Joseph referred to it having been repeated a second time during the same night, not on successive nights, as is the custom with dreams that are intended to impress the dreamer with their message. G’d could have let Pharaoh have the dream with the cows on one night, and repeated it with the dream about the kernels on the following night, making two dreams of it. The fact that G’d did not wait, and let Pharaoh receive both parts of the message in the same night, was a sign that whatever the dream portended would occur in the immediate future. 
   An alternate meaning could be that Joseph meant the changes Pharaoh had made in his dream when telling him, i.e. השנות from שנוי, change, and Joseph’s ability to detect that Pharaoh had made such changes, was proof that Joseph had interpreted the dream correctly. 
   41,33. ירא פרעה איש נבון, “let Pharaoh see (find) a man of insight and understanding, etc.” a leader who is able to run the state in a manner which will assure adequate bread for each of its citizens in accordance with the size of their respective families, dependents. He should also possess חכמה, the wisdom to store and preserve the surplus of the good years so that they would not rot before the seven years of famine commenced. Clearly, this would not be a task for a single individual but would require a number of officials, פקידים, for each region of Egypt. Joseph intended that he should be the man Pharaoh would appoint, that is why he defined the job in a manner that fitted his proven qualifications.
   41,34. וחמש את ארץ מצרים, “and divide Egypt into 5 regions;” some claim that the meaning is that Pharaoh should impose a 20% tax, payable in produce,” this tax to be used as food storage in anticipation of the years of famine. Pharaoh would use the accumulated quantity to distribute seed to the farmers for planting. In return, Pharaoh would own one firth of the soil of Egypt in perpetuity.
   41,35. אוכל בערים, “food in the cities, etc.,” so that it need not be brought from a distant central depot. This would also have the psychological advantage of putting local residents’ mind at rest if they knew there was a local food storage depot nearby.
   41,38. הנמצא כזה?, “can someone like this one be found elsewhere?” The reason why Pharaoh felt he needed the consent of his ministers before appointing Joseph to such a position was the well-known animosity harboured by Egyptians generally against any Hebrew (Mesopotamians). The appointment to a position with such wide-ranging powers was something extraordinary even if Joseph had not been a slave and a Hebrew to boot.
   41,39. אחרי הודיע אלוקים אותך כל זאת, “seeing that G’d has informed you of all these details, etc.” Pharaoh refers to the fact that Joseph’s interpretation of his dream seemed so amazingly logical and believable, so much so that it appeared to the listener as if it had already come true; It is also possible that Pharaoh referred also to the previous interpretation Joseph had given to the cupbearer, so that the words כל זאת seem amply justified. 
   @אין נבון וחכם כמוך, “there is no one as wise and understanding as you.” In this instance the attribute נבון is mentioned before the attribute חכם, whereas in Deuteronomy 4,6 the nations of the world as described as describing the Jewish people as חכם ונבון, i.e. in the reverse order of these attributes. In this instance, insight was the first attribute required in order to understand the dream, whereas wisdom was required in order to deal with the challenge presented by fulfillment of the dream. When it comes to understanding words of Torah, the first requirement is חכמה, a certain amount of common sense, before one penetrates below the surface of what the text conveys to us.
   41,40.על פיך ישק כל עמי , “and by your word will all my people be fed.” Some commentators understand this to mean that no one will be allowed to bear arms, נשק, without Joseph’s approval. Others understand the verse literally, in the sense of נשק meaning “to kiss.” It would then mean that the whole population would pay homage to Joseph by kissing his hand.
   41,42. ויסר פרעה את טבעתו, “Pharaoh removed his (signet) ring;” having this ring in one’s possession was proof of one’s high office, a position which enabled the holder to neutralize any decree or legislation by withholding his stamp.
   41,43. במרכבת המשנה, according to <i>Rashi</i> this is a reference to the carriage traveling immediately behind that of Pharaoh himself, the second most important one in the kingdom. משנה therefore refers to someone known.
   Nachmanides writes that the word משנה is an adjective, defining the rank of the carriage, as in the expression כהני המשנה, or משנה התורה הזאת, or משנה למלך, “second in rank after the king.” Here it would describe the carriage reserved for the king’s deputy. Another carriage was known as the first alternative, and yet another as the third alternative.
   @ויקראו לפניו 'אברך!', ”they would call out on his approach “bend your knees!” Everyone within range would have to bend down at the approach of Joseph’s carriage. Alternatively, the word is not derived from ברך, knee, but from ברכה blessing, and would mean that the people within sight of Joseph’s carriage passing were required to bless him.
   41,44. אני פרעה, “I am the nominal ruler, Pharaoh;” Pharaoh meant that seeing every ruler of Egypt was named Pharaoh to indicate his rank, henceforth the only reminder of his rank would be his name. He would be king in name only.
   41,45. ויקרא פרעה שם יוסף צפנת פענח, “Pharaoh named Joseph Tzofnat paneach, “the one who reveals what was hidden.” It was customary to give special names to the king’s ministers, names that related to their office, their accomplishments, etc. We find that Daniel was renamed Belteshezzar when appointed to office (Daniel 1,6).
   @ויתן לו את אסנת בת פוטיפרע...לאשה, “He gave him Ossnat, daughter of Potiphera as a wife.” He did not give him as a wife the daughter of a member of the Egyptian political hierarchy, but the daughter of Potiphar, Joseph’s former master. This was a politically inspired move, designed to stifle any protest movement that might be sparked by Potiphar resenting that his former slave had now become the economic czar of the empire, with power over life and death. Seeing that he made Joseph Potiphar’s son-in-law by this astute maneuver, he was certain that the former master would now boast about being Joseph’s father-in-law.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> also agrees that the man called here Potiphera, was the one that used to be Joseph’s master and is known to us as Potiphar. The name change reflects that he had become castrated. The description by the Torah of the position of this man as “the priest of On,” prompted <i>Rashi</i> to give this commentary, as the word און is an expression of “greatness, strength,” as we know from Yaakov describing his first born son Reuven as ראשית אוני, “the first product of my virility” (Genesis 49,3). In his capacity as the chief executioner, Potiphar occupied a position of power.
   Nachmanides writes that the attribute כהן און, indicates that as a result of his castration Potiphar felt very embarrassed and decided to devote the rest of his life to a monk-like existence in a Temple, far from the eyes of the world. It is quite possible that the word “On” is the designation given to the specific deity whom Potiphar worshipped as a priest. The description of Yitro as כהן מדין, similarly describes the deity that Yitro used to serve in his position of priest. Our sages illustrate this when they said that he would offer fatted calves to this deity. (compare <i>Yalkut Shimoni</i> Judges 1) Some commentators claim that Potiphar took refuge in a monastery out of fear that Joseph would revenge himself on him for having thrown him into jail.
   41,46.ויצא יוסף , “Joseph went forth.” This refers to Joseph’s reputation which spread all over the land. The word ויצא is used in a similar context in Ezekiel 16,14 ויצא לך שם בגוים, “your fame went forth among the nations.” Alternately, Joseph went on a whirlwind tour of Egypt, a country that he had been totally unfamiliar with up until then. 
   41,47. לקמצים, “by the handful.” <i>Rashi</i> translates it as “handful over handful.” Other commentators understand this as what the farmers did with the crop, i.e. they hoarded and stashed it away in anticipation of the eventual famine.
   Onkelos understands the expression as meaning “to store underground,” in line with excavations in the earth which are performed in order to store and preserve valuables, which are referred to as קומצין in Yonathan ben Uziel on our verse. [the Hebrew קומץ, i.e. the hollow of the hand enclosed by the middle three fingers, is also used in Aramaic as describing hollow areas, such as holes in excavated earth. Ed.]
   41,48. ויקבוץ את כל אכל, “he collected all the (surplus) food, etc.” Ibn Ezra is quick to point out that Joseph, of course, did not collect all the food, for had he done so the people would have died. The word כל is not always to be understood literally, as for instance in Genesis 41,56 וכל הארץ באו מצרימה, where it does not mean that the population of entire surrounding countries all came to Egypt. 
   Nachmanides writes that Joseph first collected all the harvest, and released it in the form of rations per family. This is the meaning of the verse 41,35 “let them gather all the produce of the good years that are now coming and stockpile grain under Pharaoh’s authority, etc.” According to this verse, when the time came, Joseph collected every kind of crop including dried fruit, in order to have a stockpile and to prevent waste, [and eventual profiteering. Ed.] It is quite possible that Joseph paid cash to the farmers who handed in their crops in order to encourage them not to hold out on him. By doing this, the entire crop became legally Pharaoh’s, and was not only on loan to him. When the time came, Pharaoh could charge a higher price when the Egyptians bought it back, as no doubt prices had risen considerably by then, driven by international demand.
   41,50. וליוסף יולד שני בנים בטרם תבא שנת הרעב, “And two children had been born for Joseph before the years of famine commenced.” From this verse our sages learned that it is forbidden for a person to indulge in marital relations during a famine. This raises the question how Levi could have ignored this ban [in effect already during the deluge in the ark, Ed.] since we have a tradition that Yocheved was not born until the family of Yaakov had reached the boundary of Egypt. Whence would Levi have known when the famine would end, and when the family would be moving to Egypt where the family would be amply provided for? We must assume that Joseph knew that his father’s family was not personally affected by the famine; besides Jews do not need to refrain from practicing reproduction only because the gentiles are short of food. If Joseph did refrain from indulging in marital relations it was because as a member of the Egyptian nation he had to share their hardship and be seen to do so. Moreover, at the beginning of the famine Joseph had no idea if his father was personally affected by the famine, so that he was duty bound to share the hardships endured by other members of his own family.
   41,54. ויהי רעב בכל הארצות, “The famine was in all the countries, etc.” The Torah refers to all the countries bordering on Egypt. The famine most certainly did not spread world wide, for if it had been that widely spread, most human beings would have perished by it.
   41,56. וישבר למצרים, “he sold to the Egyptians.” This means that he first sold to the Egyptians before selling to foreigners.
   41,57. כי חדק הרעב, “for the famine had become very severe.” Joseph did not start selling until the famine had really become severe, He did not sell because the people had come to Pharaoh to complain, but because he convinced himself that the shortages had become real, and they did not hoard their private stocks.
   42,1. וירא יעקב, “Yaakov saw, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that the origin of the 5 senses, hearing, seeing, smelling, etc., are all located next to one another, as we know from when Yitzchok spoke about ראה ריח בני, “Look, the smell of my son, etc.” (Genesis 27,27) [He referred to the pleasant sensation of light, a sensation as pleasant as a pleasant fragrance. Ed] seeing he himself was already blind at the time. The names of the senses themselves may on occasion be used interchangeably, so that in our verse the true meaning of the word וירא is: “he heard,” as we know from Yaakov’s own lips in the very next verseהנה שמעתי כי יש שבר במצרים, “here I have heard that there is food for sale in Egypt.” If he had already “seen” it in the literal sense of the word, why would he have to repeat: “I have heard,” a far less reliable source of information?
   @למה תתראו?, “Why are you looking so irresolute?” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Yaakov rebuked his sons for giving the impression to the surrounding people that they had so much food stored up that they could afford to sit still without traveling to Egypt to try and supplement their supplies.
   Nachmanides writes that the words quoted here by the Torah as Yaakov having addressed to the brothers, were said to them in the presence of Ishmaelites and Edomites, make little sense, as why would Ishmaelites and Edomites be in the land of Canaan in the first place? Furthermore, if <i>Rashi</i> means that Yaakov admonished his sons in public (for show) why did <i>Rashi</i> not mention that he did so in front of the local inhabitants? He would certainly have had reason to do so in order not to arouse the jealousy of his neighbours! Had that impression been allowed to spread, all his neighbours would have invited themselves to eat at Yaakov’s table! He therefore instructed them to go down to Egypt in order to preserve the food supply they still had. Then he told them to buy additional supplies in order to forestall death through hunger after their supplies ran out.
   Alternately, the word תתראו, is short for למה תתראו במקום זה “why do you display such indecision by remaining here, instead of getting going to buy supplies?” “You should have started to move as soon as you heard that grain was for sale in Egypt.” Yaakov and family already found themselves in imminent danger of starvation.
   Some commentators understand the rebuke as “why do you quarrel as to who is to go to Egypt to buy food, I want all of you to go.” Yet another interpretation of the question למה תתראו, views it as a rebuke of their acting as if it were below their dignity to personally go to Egypt like the common people and to beg to be allowed to buy grain there. After all, they were the elite of “Canaanite” Society, akin to aristocracy! Their indecision was reinforced by their reluctance to send others on their behalf and to subject these others to the potential dangers of the journey.
   42,6. הוא המשביר לכל עם הארץ. “He was the seller of grain to the entire population of Egypt.” It sounds extremely strange that the viceroy, and de facto ruler of such an empire, should personally engage in grain sales, and in retail quantities at that! This is why some commentators understand the expression as that Joseph gave the order to open his silos for public sales of grain.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, Joseph personally, checked out all the travelers from foreign countries who had come to the border in order to buy grain in the land of Egypt. He instructed his officials how much to sell to any city, etc. When the sons of Yaakov arrived at the boundary of Egypt, they represented a delegation empowered to buy on behalf of their whole region.
   42,7. ויתנכר להם, “he misrepresented himself to them.” According to<i> Rashi,</i> the word is derived from נכרי, “stranger, alien.”
   Nachmanides explains that as soon as Joseph spotted his brothers and recognized them, he was afraid that they in turn might recognize him; this is why he disguised himself with a different type of turban, one which covered most of his forehead; or, he disguised his manner of speech including his stern demeanor, so that they would not be alerted to his true identity. This is why he subjected them to the third degree kind of interview, acting as if they had been the first people ever to come from Canaan to buy grain. From their answers he became progressively more certain that they were indeed, his brothers. This is the reason why the Torah repeats: ”he recognized them.” According to Ibn Ezra, the first statement “he recognized his brothers”, refers to them collectively, whereas after questioning them he recognized each one individually.
   @והם לא הכירוהו, “but they did not recognize him.” Joseph had left his father’s house before he had grown a beard, and in the meantime his beard had materially changed his facial features. Although we must assume that Issachar and Zevulun who were hardly older than he had also not had a beard at the time when he left his father’s house, the fact that he had identified eight of the ten brothers who had had beards before he left home, made it easy for him to also recognize the other two. Furthermore, he enjoyed the advantage of having known with certainty that his brothers would come to Egypt to buy grain. He therefore kept a special watch for their arrival. The fact that Pharaoh had changed his name also made it more difficult for his brothers to suspect that someone by that name was their brother. In addition, Joseph now spoke Egyptian whereas they spoke Hebrew.
   42,9. ויזכור יוסף החלומות אשר חלם להם, “Joseph remembered the dreams he had dreamt concerning them.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> this means that he considered his dreams a having come true.
   Nachmanides not only does not agree, but, on the contrary, he feels that the Torah reports that Joseph’s dreams now revealed themselves to him as not having come true. When Joseph now saw his brothers he recalled all of his dreams and realized that not a single one had come true as yet. According to his interpretation of his dreams, all the brothers would bow down to him, whereas now only ten brothers had done so, something that had not been part of any of his dreams. In his second dream, not only his brothers were shown as bowing down to him. The main reason Joseph accused the brothers as being spies was because Binyamin had not come with them, and he wanted to devise a stratagem whereby at least the first of his dreams would come true henceforth. This is why he insisted on their bringing Binyamin down with them. If he had revealed himself to them already now, fulfillment of his dreams might 
   never occur in accordance with what he had expected. Once the first dream of his had come true, Joseph manipulated things in such a way that the second dream could come true also, by instructing the brothers to move to Egypt, both they, their families and their aged father. If Joseph had not believed that his dreams were meant to be of a prophetic nature, and would come true, he would have been guilty of a grievous sin for not having revealed his whereabouts to his father who was grieving over him all these years. He had also caused Yaakov distress in not having allowed Shimon to return with the brothers on their first trip. Even allowing for the fact that Joseph thought that his brothers deserved some discomfort and worry in return for what they had subjected him to, how could he not have had pity on his father who had been so depressed for all these years, not knowing what had become of him! We can only justify his conduct throughout as an attempt not to preempt what had been decreed. [כל הדוחק את השעה, השעה דוחקת אותו “anyone who tries to pre-empt pre-ordained events= will experience that he himself will be pre-empted by other events to his detriment.” (<i>Berachot</i> 64.) Ed.] It is also possible that a major consideration in Joseph’s conduct was to examine whether the brothers’ hatred of him was based on his being a son of Rachel, jealousy of the sons of Leah on their mother’s behalf, or, whether it had been directed only at him, and he himself had brought it upon himself. To this end, he had them bring Binyamin to Egypt, planted the goblet in his sack to see if the sons of the other wives of Yaakov would now abandon their half brother, the remaining son of Rachel, or if they would all as one close ranks around the supposed “thief.”
   All of Joseph’s considerations were bound up with his exceptional gift of interpreting dreams. If it were not so, it would be most difficult to understand why, even after having attained high office, he still did not inform his father of his whereabouts, and the fact that he was alive. When he had interpreted the dream of Pharaoh successfully and been rewarded accordingly, why did he not at least send a letter to his father? By that time he had had every reason to believe that also his own dreams would come true, including the one in which his father bowed down to him?
   @מרגלים אתם!, “you are spies!” This was not a trumped up accusation, taken out of thin air. The arrival of Joseph’s brothers through ten different border checkpoints was certainly something suspicious, although the Torah did not bother to spell out this detail in its narrative. When they told Joseph that they were all the sons of one father but had not traveled together, as Joseph knew, this was an incriminating factor. We can reconstruct part of the dialogue between Joseph and his brothers. First they had been found entering through different gates, and then they suddenly claimed to all belong together. Such conduct begs further examination of their true intent. In addition, their garments revealed them to be people of prominence and wealth. Joseph was entitled to wonder why such people subjected themselves to a lengthy journey just to buy grain, instead of leaving this chore to one or more of their many servants. It is also possible that the brothers were among the first grain shoppers from the land of Canaan, and this prompted Joseph to question them more thoroughly than travelers arriving later.
   42,11. כלנו בני איש אחד, “we are all the sons of the same father.” They answered the question why all of them had come, saying that they were brothers, and that their father did not want them to separate from one another. It is also possible that they answered that the reason why they had all come was due to the severity of the famine, and their fear that Joseph would sell only to one family head at a time. Moreover, had they sent their servants, they could not be sure that these servants would not sell of part of the purchase at higher prices to people who had not taken the trouble to journey to Egypt. The brothers may even have assumed a provocative posture, telling Joseph that he could examine them minutely as they were so sure of being upright and that they were well known as such in their hometown, in Chevron.
   42,15. כי אם בבוא אחיכם הנה, “unless your other brother comes here.” The reason Joseph was not suspecting them of bringing some other individual, claiming that he was their brother, was that all ten of them had features which showed unmistakably that they were closely related to one another.
   42,17. ויאסוף אותם אל משמר, “he put all of them together in jail.” This was intended to instill fear in them. He also wanted to demonstrate that he was a G’d-fearing individual so that when he eventually released all but one of them it was so that their families should not suffer hunger and deprivation merely because of a suspicion he had that they were spies. He also wanted to see if they would leave one of them as a hostage. Seeing that they would not agree to this voluntarily, he first jailed all of them.
   42,21. אשר ראינו צרת נפשו בהתחננו אלינו, “when we saw the anguish of his soul when he pleaded with us, etc.” Although the Torah had not written about this, it is impossible to imagine that Joseph did not plead for mercy with his brothers when they threw him into the pit. The Torah condensed the scene in order not to unnecessarily portray the brothers as heartless monsters.
   @ולא שמענו, “and we did not listen.” They now realized that their cruelty deserved harsh punishment, much more so than the sale of him to the Ishmaelites. Reuven told them that he had already told them at the time not to become guilty of a sin against the “child.” Reuven had argued that Joseph’s conduct stemmed from youthful immaturity, and not from a thirst for power over his brothers. Now, they are being paid back by G’d not only for their cruelty, but also for his death, i.e. “his blood.” In G’d’s eyes, although they had not killed him with their hands, they had still been the cause of his death. He had probably not been able to perform the duties a slave has to perform just because he had been physically still a child.
   42,24. ויקח מהם את שמעון, “he took Shimon away from them.” Actually, he should have taken Reuven, seeing that he was the oldest. Usually, the oldest is taken as hostage for the younger ones. Seeing that it had been Reuven who had saved him from imminent death at the time, Joseph kept Shimon as hostage.
   42,27. ויפתח האחד את שקו, “the one opened his sack;” Noachmanides writes that the emphasis on האחד, “the one,” means that the other brothers did not bother, at that stage, to open their sacks and to examine their contents. They waited till they had arrived back at their father’s house. Perhaps the reason why this one brother opened his sack (the one containing fodder) may have been that his donkey was relatively weak and needed something more than straw to keep up its strength. 
   Onkelos who translated the word אמתחת as טוענא, a carrying bag, wants to tell us that the most commonly used container to carry and transport loads was called שק, sack, whereas containers containing personal effects, such as are carried in briefcases nowadays, were called אמתחת, travel bag. Well to do travelers frequently had several of the latter. Sometimes these travel bags were also used to balance the loads carried in sacks. It was therefore surprising to find one’s money in a sack intended to carry grain, rather than in one of the travel bags. In our example the אמתחת appears to have been carried inside the sack of grain, at the op of it, as a security precaution, maybe. The very term אמתחת may imply that this bag had compartments, and that different objects would be enclosed in different compartments.
   A simpler explanation is that the brother who opened his sack did so in order to give fodder to all their donkeys.
   My father, blessed be his memory, the רא'ש, says that the brother referred to as “the one,” was Levi, who though normally inseparable from Shimon, was now “alone,” seeing Shimon had been detained by Joseph in Egypt. Seeing that Levi was leading two donkeys, his own and that of his brother Shimon, as he already had occasion to dip more deeply into the sack of Shimon, he found the money at the bottom. The other brothers, each of whom had only one donkey to feed, had not yet had to dip so deeply into their sacks. 
   42,32. שנים עשר אנחנו בני אבינו, “we are altogether twelve sons of our father.” When repeating their conversation with Joseph to their father, they were careful to omit the word עבדיך, “your servants,” which they had used then, and which unwittingly included their father in their reference to their being his servants. Had they not omitted mentioning this, their father could have accused them of already having described Binyamin as Joseph’s servant, also, and thereby admitting that he had the right to demand Binyamin’s presence the next time they came to Egypt.
   @האחד איננו, והקטן את אבינו היום, “the one is no longer, and the youngest is with his father at this time.” When addressing Joseph they had presented the situation in reverse order, i.e. הקטן את אבינו היום והאחד איננו. The reason why they did not repeat the conversation to their father verbatim, each word in its proper sequence, was because the very manner in which they presented the situation made Joseph ask, justifiably, “if the youngest is at home, where is the other brother who is unaccounted for at this time?” By slightly misrepresenting the conversation they had had with Joseph, they managed to portray him as overly inquisitive without their having given him any cause for this.
   42,34. ואת הארץ תסחרו, “and then you may freely wheel and deal in the land.” Although we cannot find that Joseph had said these words to them, they may be justifiably inferred from the tenor of their interview with, or interrogation by Joseph. Sometimes the Torah abbreviates its narrative of events.
   Alternately, the brothers may have misquoted Joseph for the sake of family harmony, in order to secure their father’s permission to let Binyamin go to Egypt with them on their next journey, as it was their intention to return to Egypt immediately in order to secure the release of their brother Shimon. At that point they did not spell out that Shimon had not been detained as an honoured guest but as a prisoner, as they were sure this would be an additional reason for Yaakov not to risk Binyamin by allowing them to take him along. [it is interesting to see how the Torah draws attention to the fact that at the beginning the brothers did not even tell their father that Shimon was imprisoned. In verse 29 the Torah had said that the brothers reported to their father all that had happened to them in Egypt. When detailing this, the imprisonment of Shimon is not mentioned, begging the question why the brothers did not include this in their report. Ed.]
   42,36. ויאמר ראובן אל אביו, “Reuven then said to his father, etc.” The reason why Reuven spoke up first was because he had not had a part in the sale of Joseph. 
   @את שני בני תמית, “you may kill my two sons, etc.” some commentators who cannot believe that Reuven could make such a statement, [as it is commonly understood, Ed.] prefer to understand the word תמית as a feminine mode of the future tense, meaning “may be killed by a force which is feminine, i.e. מגפה, a plague.” 
   Nachmanides understands what Reuven said as similar to when Yehudah said that if he would fail to bring Binyamin back alive and well that he would consider himself as remaining guilty of a sin against his father for the remainder of his life (both on earth and beyond) (43,9). Reuven chose different words to convey a similar meaning, i.e. “you would be morally entitled to kill two of my sons if I were to fail you so tragically as not to bring him back alive and well.” Even though Reuven had four sons, he meant to tell his father that the loss of one son, Binyamin, would be tantamount to he, Reuven, losing two of his sons. Yaakov did not reject Reuven’s offer because he considered him foolish and rash, but he placed more confidence in Yehudah’s ability and personality. Yehudah had waited with applying pressure to his father until their food supplies had almost run out, and his refusal would put the whole family at risk.
   43,4. נרדה ונשברה, “let us go down and buy grain, etc.” The extra letters ה at the end of נרדה and נשברה respectively, are meant to indicate that the brothers were willing to travel to Egypt repeatedly in order to buy supplies, but that they would not even go a single time unless Yaakov now sent Binyamin with them.
   43,11. מעט צרי ומעט דבש, “a little balsam and a little honey.” In order that you should not give the impression that you are wealthy.
   43,14. ושלח לכם את אחיכם אחר, “so that he will release your other brother to you.” According to <i>Bereshit Rabbah, 82</i> the word אחיכם in our verse refers to Joseph, whereas the word אחר refers to Shimon, seeing that while praying, Yaakov had avoided concentrating on a specific one of the brothers, thus leaving open the possibility that Joseph might still be alive. 
   Nachmanides, approaching the verse by concentrating on the plain text, פשט, writes that the words are all meant to apply to Shimon. The reason that Yaakov did not refer to him by name was that he was out of favour on account of his having initiated the killing of the male population of the city of Shechem and the plundering of it. It seems clear that if Shimon’s family had not needed bread desperately, Yaakov would not have allowed Binyamin to travel to Egypt and he would have made no attempt to obtain his release at this time.
   <i>Bereshit Rabbah 82</i> also sees allusions to the eventual exile in this verse, and when Yaakov speaks about the “G’d Shaddai invoking the attribute of mercy when the brothers would face the האיש,” this is a veiled reference to the Almighty. After all, one of the attributes of G’d is that He is איש מלחמה, “a Man of war.” The words ושלח לכם את אחיכם would refer to the return from exile of the lost Ten Tribes, whereas the words אחר ואת בנימיןrefer to the tribes of Binyamin and Yehudah. The words ואני כאשר שכולתי שכלתיrefer to the destruction of the first and the second Temple, respectively. The thrust of the whole episode, according to the <i>Midrash,</i> is that what is being narrated here is a preview of the Jewish historical experience in years to come, i.e. מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, the experiences of our forefathers, the patriarchs and their families, foreshadow the course of Jewish history, and their exile, especially by the descendants of the Edomites.
   @אני כאשר שכולתי שכלתי, “and as for me, as I have been bereaved, I shall be bereaved.” <i>Rashi</i> comments that what Yaakov meant was that he would feel conditionally bereaved of Binyamin until the brothers’ safe return from Egypt just as he was feeling bereaved concerning Joseph and Shimon.
   Nachmanides writes that Yaakov, resignedly, said that the brothers could not make him feel any more bereaved than the feelings of bereavement he had already experienced and suffered. If fate were to cause him further bereavement, he would not have to come to terms with it as a novel experience.
   43,18. ולקחת אותנו לעבדים ואת חמורינו, “and you may take us and our donkeys as servants.” They were worried- apparently disproportionately so, about their donkeys, as without their donkeys they had no means of transporting the grain they had bought to the land of Canaan. 
   43,20. בי אדוני, “please Sir;” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word בי as introducing a plea, an entreaty. Nachmanides disagrees, and considers the word as an outcry at being dealt with unjustly. He therefore understands the words as repeating the brother’s viewing the man in charge of Joseph’s residence as his master both in his personal estimation as well as in the estimation of that official himself <i>vis</i>-à-<i>vis</i> others. He describes his own station as well as that of the official; just as the official’s status is after all the king’s servant, so are they..
   Ibn Ezra claims that the Torah chose to record an abbreviated version of the conversation, similar to Samuel ! 25,24 בי אני אדוני העון ותדבר נא, “let the blame be mine, my lord, but let me speak, etc.” Here too, the brothers said: ‘you may do with what you like, etc., but please hear us out.”
   43,23. נתן לכם מטמון, “has given you a treasure;” possibly someone had hidden a treasure in the cushion of his sack, and he kept this in the cellar of his house with other sacks. When he left the house he forgot it so that you have become the beneficiaries.
   Nachmanides writes that Joseph’s official’s words, were intended only to reconcile the brothers to the fact that they had found their original money. Nobody in his right mind could ascribe the fact that all ten brothers had found precisely the same amount of money in each of their sacks to fate. Clearly, someone had deliberately placed those sums of money there. The truth is that anything hidden, concealed, unaccounted for, is called מטמון, the root of the word deriving from טמן, hide, secrete. All the grain buyers kept their money at the bottom of their sacks, and when the seller filled the sacks with grain he would first empty these sacks of the money at the bottom. This was an everyday occurrence at all the markets. Since the grain was sold in units of so many bushels per sack, every sack contained an equal amount of money at the bottom. The seller did not pour the grain into the sacks in the presence of the purchaser, every transaction being based on mutual trust. The queues of purchasers were long, the confusion and pressure considerable, so that the fastest most efficient way had to be devised to serve as many customers per day as was possible. Keeping all this in mind, what the official said to the brothers did not sound quite so implausible. When there were so many people to whom this money could have belonged, and there were no identifying marks on the money, the rule was: “finders keepers.”
   43,27. השלום אביכם?, “is your father well?” Joseph referred to Yaakov.
   @הזקן, “the old man?” This was a reference to Yitzchok [who had been alive when Joseph had been abducted. Ed.]
   43,28. שלום לעבדך לאבינו, “your servant, our father, is well.” They spoke only about Yaakov seeing that “הזקן” Yitzchok had died during the many years Joseph had been away from home. One does not answer a question dealing with something distressing.
   43,29. וירא את בנימין אחיו בן אמו, “when he saw Binyamin, brother by his mother, etc.” Binyamin’s features reminded him of the looks of his mother sufficiently to recognise him by the resemblance. [Binyamin had only been 6-7 years old when Joseph had been sold. Ed.].
   43,34. וישתו וישכרו עמו, “they drank with him and became drunk.” Joseph had planned to make them drunk so that they would not examine their sacks and bags before leaving, as they would be bound to do so as not have anything planted on them as had happened the first time. When they awoke late in the morning, he urged them to make haste and leave.
   44,1. כאשר יוכלון שאת, “as much as they could carry.” This means that Joseph gave them more than the rations allowed other purchasers.
   @וישם כסף איש בפי אמתחתו, “he placed the money of each brother at the top of his travel bag;” in full view of each one of them. He explained to them that his master was aware that they had been dealt with unlawfully and violently, and as compensation, he was returning their purchase money. If he had just put it back as he had done the first time they would have been able to argue when the goblet was found that this was merely a replay of what had happened to them the first time. Now they were aware that the money had been replaced, just as they were aware that their donkeys had been loaded with much more grain each than the first time they had come to Egypt. Their suspicions had therefore been laid to rest completely, and they would be dumbfounded when the goblet would turn up in Binyamin’s travel bag. This could not be explained away as a treasure that was left behind by someone.
   44,4. הם יצאו את העיר, לא הרחיקו, “They had left the city, and had not traveled a great distance, etc.” The words את העיר mean the same as מן העיר, from the city. Alternately, the meaning of the phrase is “although they had departed they had not yet traveled far from the city.” The reason was that that the pursuers could not afford to let them get far away before arresting them, as they were known to be brave warriors and once outside the urban area they would simply kill their pursuers in self defense. 
   44,5. הלא זה אשר ישתה אדוני בו?, “is this not the goblet which my master is in the habit of drinking from?” He did not mention the word “goblet” to them, but he described the situation as if they all understood that they collectively had stolen the goblet and it was only a question of who had hidden it amongst his possessions. In their response to the accusation, the brothers said that they had no idea what he was talking about. Why would anyone of them be interested in stealing either silver or gold from the house of the pursuer’s master?
   @והוא נחש ינחש בו, “and he (Joseph) makes a practice of divining secrets by means of it?” All of Joseph’s diviners and wise men had told him that it was these men who had taken the goblet, and this is the reason why he had pursued them in preference to other possible suspects who had been entertained at his house. Some commentators understand the word בו as referring to this goblet that Joseph himself was in the habit to divine secrets from.
   Ibn Ezra explains that Joseph had used the goblet as a test of the brothers’ honesty, and to this end he had pretended to divine from it and had left it unsupervised to find out who of them would steal it.
   44,9. אשר ימצא אתו מעבדיך ומת, “whoever of your servants it will be found with shall die.” They were so certain that none of them had stolen it that they could safely make such a statement as decreeing death on the thief if he were one of them. However, afterwards, when the goblet had been discovered in the travel bag of Binyamin, they no longer mentioned the death penalty but offered themselves collectively as slaves to Joseph. 
   44,10. גם עתה כדבריכם כן הוא, “I also accept your arguments now.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this phrase to mean that although, according to logic, the brothers’ argument makes sense, he, Joseph, would make an additional concession by holding only Binyamin responsible. 
   Nachmanides writes about this that the words:גם עתה, “now also,” are not compatible with <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary. He therefore explains that although, seeing that the brothers had said that they knew nothing about the theft of the goblet, even assuming that Binyamin had stolen it, that he would have accepted their argument and not held them responsible at all. However, seeing they had already tied their fate to that of their younger brother, they had, in effect, punished themselves by volunteering to be slaves to Joseph. If, as they said they knew nothing about all this, they should be free to go, whereas Binyamin is guilty of death. If they did have knowledge of all this, why should only Binyamin be punished by death and not they also? Their suggestion that no one should be punished by death, and they should all become slaves certainly was inappropriate. The words גם עתה refer to the brothers’ original statement that did make sense, namely that the person in whose possession the goblet would be found would deserve to die. The fact that they now changed their opinion about who should be punished and how, only lent support to the suspicion that they had all known about the theft of the goblet. He would therefore do them a favour by reverting to their original suggestion that only the person with whom the goblet had been found would be considered guilty, and would suffer the penalty his own brothers had decreed for him. However, he would not insist on the penalty in full, and be satisfied to keep Binyamin as a slave. Joseph was not interested in the thief dying, but in his making restitution for his thievery, something that would best be achieved through his labour as a slave for Joseph.
   Alternatively, the words כן הוא mean the same as כן יהיה, it shall be thus, i.e. the judgment will not be in accordance with your proposal.
   Some commentators understand the words as a question, expressing surprise. He meant: do you really think that you can get away with a perversion of justice as you now suggest?” “No way, but….” Another approach goes as follows: “I accept your argument that you have proved your honesty by having brought back the money you had found in your sacks. But this argument applies only to nine of you. Binyamin never brought back any money, seeing he had not been here before; neither did Shimon, seeing that he had never left Egypt before. In light of this, I will detain the one with whom the goblet has been found, seeing he had no record of proving his honesty.
   44,13. ויקרעו שמלותם, “they rent their garments, etc.” This was an illustration of the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, that the punishment fits the crime. The brothers having sent the blood-drenched coat of Joseph to their father at the time, had caused their father to rend his garments as a symbol of anguish and mourning. Now these same bothers had occasion to do the same. 
   44,15. האלוקים מצא את עון עבדיך, “the Lord has found out the guilt of your servants.” They did not refer to anything they had been guilty of recently, but to their guilt in having sold their brother 22 years ago.
   44,17. הוא יהיה לי עבד, “he shall be my slave.” The word <i>eved</i> should have been vocalized with a <i>segol,</i> both under the letter <i>ayin</i> and under the letter beyt. The reason why the letter <i>ayin</i> is vocalised with the vowel <i>kametz,</i> normally reserved for when the word appears at the end of a phrase or sentence, is that Joseph hinted by means of this that Binyamin’s status as Joseph’s personal slave would be far superior to that of regular slaves. He would be treated as if he were royalty.
   Parshat Vayigash
   44,18. ויגש אליו יהודה, “Yehudah approached him closely.” Originally, Yehudah had thought that Joseph wanted to condemn Binyamin to death. If that had been the case, he would not have an opening to substitute his life for that of his brother. Now that he had heard from Joseph’s own lips that he intended to keep him as slave, he felt that by offering himself instead, he might persuade Joseph that his offer had merit. 
   @ידבר נא עבדך דבר, “allow your servant to say something.” He meant that he would offer a short plea, and that Joseph should not consider his plea as something tiresome.
   @כי כמוך כפרעה, “for you are for all intent and purpose equal to Pharaoh.” He meant that he revered Joseph in a manner similar to the reverence shown Pharaoh himself. Alternately, he implied that Joseph should keep his word just as it was expected from a ruler of Pharaoh’s stature that he keeps his word. Binyamin was supposed to have come to Egypt merely to prove that he was a brother of his and that the brothers had not lied when they mentioned him as having remained behind in the land of Canaan to tend to their aged father’s needs.
   44,19. אדוני שאל, ”my lord had inquired, etc.” Nachmanides writes that he does not understand what Yehudah had meant to accomplish by making such a long speech. Even recalling Joseph’s words of why he wanted to see their younger brother, this surely had not implied that if that brother would commit a criminal act he should go unpunished! All the more so will he deserve to be punished if this brother became guilty of stealing the goblet from the ruler of the country! As long as Joseph had not known anything negative about Binyamin he had welcomed him most cordially and even invoked G’d’s blessing on him (43,29). He had recompensed the brothers for having put them to so much trouble by giving them as much grain as their donkeys could carry, had wined and dined them and showered them with gifts. What could Yehudah have hoped to accomplish by arguing? The only thing he could possibly achieve was to appeal to Joseph’s sense of mercy and pity. Yehudah’s premise was that Joseph was a G’d–fearing man, seeing that Joseph had made that point when keeping only Shimon as a hostage instead of keeping them all and sending one brother to get Binyamin from the land of Canaan.
   Yehudah’s major argument was to convince Joseph that they had put their lives on the line in order to get their father’s permission to allow Binyamin to travel with them, and that failure to bring him home healthy and well would be like condemning them collectively to death, as well as to hasten the death of their father, something they could not bear to watch. Had it not been for Joseph’s threat to deny them and their families further food supplies, an indispensable lifeline during such a famine, their father would never have consented to allow this remaining son of his favourite wife to be separated from him. If Joseph’s concern was to secure for himself compensation for the theft by way of personal services to be provided for him, he Yehudah, could provide such services better than his brother Binyamin.
   Alternately, Yehudah may have reminded Joseph simply that it was appropriate for him to stand by his word that he only wanted to set his eyes upon Binyamin. He implied by what he did not spell out, that he considered the matter of the goblet as merely a pretext, a manipulation in order to justify keeping Binyamin with him. He could not risk saying something like this to Joseph’s face openly.
   44,20. ואחיו מת, “and his full brother is dead.” According to <i>Rashi</i> fear prompted him to lie and to declare his brother Joseph as “dead.” Even so, it is hard to understand how he dared refer to Joseph as dead when previously he had only described him as missing, i.e. האחד איננו, (42,13).
   44,21. ואשימה עיני עליו, “so that I may see him with my own eyes.” This expression is usually meant to convey a benevolent interest in the person one wishes to see. A well known example of this meaning is found in Jeremiah 24,6 ושמתי עיני עליהם לטובה, “So that I may look upon them favourably.” A similar verse with the identical expression is found in Amos. Even though in our verse the word “לטובה”, “favourably,” had not been spelled out by Joseph, it was reasonable for the brothers to understand Joseph’s request in that manner. Yehudah made no reference to Joseph having (in retrospect) imprisoned Shimon without cause, as the brothers had proved that they were not spies. He omitted this reference either because of fear, or because of good manners.
   44,22. ועזב את אביו ומת, “if and when he leaves his father, the father will die.” Some commentators understand Binyamin as being the subject of the word ומת, meaning that Binyamin would die if separated from his father.
   44,27. אתם ידעתם כי שנים ילדה לי אשתי, ”you know that my wife bore only two sons for me.” The reason that Yehudah quoted his father as saying: “my wife bore two sons for me,” was to justify his statement that the failure of Binyamin to return home unharmed would cause his premature death. [they had described themselves as 12 brothers, all the sons of the same father. The loss of one, or even two, would not appear to Joseph as such a catastrophe. When he would hear that the dead brother and Binyamin were the only ones from their mother, he would begin to better understand the trauma involved. Ed] The word אשתי was meant to make a clear distinction between פילגשי, “my concubine.”
   44, 31.והורידו עבדיך את שיבת אבינו ביגון שאולה, “and your servants will be guilty of causing our aged father a sorrowful death.” It is possible to explain this whole line as a figure of speech, i.e. a tongue in cheek accusation of Joseph by Yehudah as causing their father’s premature death if Binyamin were not to be allowed to return to Canaan.
   44,32. כי עבדך ערב את הנער, “for, I, your servant, have guaranteed the safe return of the lad.” He explained to Joseph that their father, although all of them were in danger of starving, had been holding out, not giving his permission for Binyamin to travel until Yehudah had guaranteed his safe return. This would explain why he, more than the other brothers, had taken it upon himself to now be the spokesman of all of them.
   Alternately, he wanted to explain that there was no element of trickery in his wanting to substitute himself as slave for Binyamin, such as that he thought he would be more capable of escaping from Egypt than his younger brother.
   @אם לא אביאנו אליך, “if I will not bring him back to you.” He did not now add the words: “and I will place him before you in an upright position,” as he had said to his father at the time. Had he mentioned this aspect of Yehudah’s guarantee, Joseph might have challenged him saying: how did you know that he would be alive at the time of your return? To his father he had said at the time that seeing they were fulfilling the commandment of honouring their father’s wishes, their mission was bound to be crowned with success, as we have a tradition that emissaries engaged in fulfilling a commandment will not be harmed either on their way out or even on their return journey.
   45,1. ולא יכול יוסף להתאפק לכל הנצבים, “and Joseph could no longer restrain himself in the presence of all the courtiers around him.” According to <i>Rashi</i> what bothered Joseph was that all the Egyptians would become privy to matters which were private between him and his brothers. He did not want to shame his brothers publicly when he would reveal himself to them, and unavoidably their part in his having been brought to Egypt in the first place would come to light.
   Nachmanides makes the point that whenever the expression התאפקות occurs it denotes the strength of character of the person so described. The people surrounding Joseph had been so moved by Yehudah’s words that they appealed to Joseph to respond by releasing him. The pressure became so great that even steadfast Joseph could no longer withstand it. He therefore ordered everybody out of the hall in order to continue the dialogue with the brothers (Yehudah) in private. A soon as the Egyptians who had been present left the hall, Joseph broke out in tears, and weeping, something which the Egyptians now outside could not help overhearing. The meaning of the word ויקרא in our verse is not a simple ”reading” or instruction, without the subject raising his voice especially, but Joseph raised his voice angrily in ordering all the Egyptians surrounding him out into the courtyard.
   45,2. העוד אבי חי?, “is my father still alive?” Even though he had asked them the same question already in 44,27 and the brothers had answered in the affirmative, his question now concerned the state of his health, not the mere fact that Yaakov was still alive. The word חי therefore has to be equated with בריא, healthy.
   It is also possible that he did not really ask this question in order to receive additional information, but merely to have an opening to speak to the brothers, instead of as until now, about “your father,” but about “my father,” i.e. their common father. This was a ploy to establish close personal contact with his brothers.
   45,4. גשו נא אלי, “please come closer to me.” He now changed his demeanour and spoke to them as an equal, in a friendly manner.
   It is also possible that he did not want to remind them aloud of the fact that they had sold him, and therefore he made them approach him closely so that he could whisper to them. He did not want the people in the courtyard to overhear this part of their conversation.
   According to<i> Rashi</i>, the reason he wanted them to approach him closely was to show them that he was circumcised, just like them, to prove that he was who he had just said that he was. I do not think this would have proved anything as all the male descendants of Yishmael were also in the habit of performing circumcision on themselves, albeit at the age of 13. Moreover, according to the <i>Midrash</i>, the Egyptians had adopted the rite of circumcision at the advice of Joseph.
   45,6. כי זה שנתים הרעב, “for these two years of famine, etc.” He reminded them of the years of famine that had already passed, and that they had already consumed all their reserves although there were five more years of famine in store for the country. How could they have hoped to survive the next five years if G’d in His providence had not sent Joseph ahead of them to Egypt in order to be able to provide for his family? 
   45,10. וישבת בארץ גושן, “and you can reside on the province of Goshen.” Joseph knew full well that his father would not want to reside in Egypt proper, in the capital; this is why he assigned to province of Goshen to his family.
   45,11. פן תורש אתה וביתך, “lest both you and your family will become impoverished.” When he had uttered the same concern to his brothers directly, he had phrased it more crassly, warning them of the imminent danger of dying from the famine. When speaking to his father, he used more diplomatic, inoffensive wording.” (compare verse 7 “in order to keep you alive.”)
   45,12. כי פי המדבר אליכם, “that it is I who am talking to you.” He emphasized that as of now he was addressing them directly, in Hebrew, not through an interpreter, as he had been doing up until he had revealed himself.
   Nachmanides writes that the fact that Joseph suddenly admitted being able to speak Hebrew would not prove that he was their long lost brother. The fact that he mentioned his real name to them, plus the details of how he had been sold were far more potent arguments to establish his true identity in their eyes.
   Personally, (still Nachmanides writing) I believe that the true interpretation of what Joseph is saying in our verse is: “your own eyes as well as the eyes of my brother Binyamin are living testimony to my august position here in Egypt, and in my capacity of your brother and the de facto ruler of Egypt, I command you to move to Egypt and to join me here. The only reason I command you to tell our father of my position here and the esteem in which I am held, is to persuade you to come here so that I can provide for you during the remaining years of the famine. If I did not entertain feelings of love and fondness towards you, there would be absolutely no reason for me to speak to you in this fashion.”
   45,16. באו אחי יוסף, “Joseph’s brothers have arrived;” he had always told Pharaoh that he had a number of brothers who occupied distinguished positions in the land of Canaan, and that he had been kidnapped from there. Now, when the people in Pharaoh’s entourage heard about the arrival of Joseph’s brothers, they rejoiced, as it confirmed Joseph’s status prior to his appointment, something that had been somewhat clouded up until now.
   45,17. טענו את בעירכם, “load your beasts.” Rabbi Joseph Kimchi claims that this must not be understood as a command by Pharaoh that the brothers should load their beasts, after all, had he not himself specifically provided the brothers with wheeled transportation, wagons which could transport much more at a time than their beasts? What Pharaoh meant was that the brothers should prod the beasts pulling the wagons to proceed with all possible speed. The expression טענו occurs in connection with people who have their swords girded around their waist in Isaiah 14,19.
   45,19. ואתה צוית, “and you, Joseph, consider yourself commanded, etc.” The reason Pharaoh used such imperial language was that he was aware that Joseph would never take any liberties with property which was not legally his own; he was afraid that Joseph would not want to send anything to his father which belonged to the Egyptian state. By instructing him to take these wagons he would remove any doubt in Joseph’s mind that he was exceeding his authority in allocating these carriages as vehicles to transport his family.
   45,20. ועיניכם אל תחוס על כליכם, “do not begrudge any chattels you leave behind.” He knew how frugally his father lived, and how he would not let anything go to waste. This is why he instructed his brothers to ignore such considerations when it came to their moving their belongings to Egypt.
   45,22. לכלם נתן לאיש חליפות שמלות, “he gave each one of them a change of clothes.” This was in replacement for his having been the cause of their rending their garments.
   @ולבנימין נתן שלוש מאות כסף, “and to Binyamin he gave 300 pieces of silver;” seeing that the penalty for someone who sells his slave to a gentile outside the land of Israel is subject to a fine of up to 10 times the value of the slave in question, Binyamin was entitled to be 300 pieces of silver better off than his brothers, seeing that an average slave is worth 30 pieces of silver. Although Joseph assessed his brothers a penalty of 300 pieces of silver each, all of which should have gone to Binyamin, he gave Binyamin only 300 pieces of silver. 
   @וחמש חליפות שמלות, “and five changes of clothes.” (new outfits). One outfit matching what he had given to the other brothers. The other four were gifts (as opposed to compensation), one outfit each from himself, his two sons and his wife.
   45,23. ולאביו שלח כזאת, “and to his father he sent the following:” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the word כזאת here is short for כחשבון הזאת: “the following amounts.” What did these “amounts consist of?” 10 donkey loads, etc., etc.
   Nachmanides feels that the word כזאת refers to the food for the extended family of Yaakov, which would sustain them on the journey to Egypt. He had, after all, provided his brothers with rations to sustain them on their homeward trip, also. (verse 21). The Torah mentions to Joseph’s credit that he did not only give them the supplies in question but also the means of transporting them, i.e. donkeys and she asses.
   According to Ibn Ezra the word כזאת refers to the quality of the new clothes Joseph handed out, i.e. the best quality available in Egypt.
   Some commentators claim that Joseph did not send Binyamin back with the other brothers, and they prove their point by the fact that he sent only ten donkeys to his father and not eleven. In other words, Joseph gave each of the ten brothers a donkey that would be led by him; if Binyamin had also returned to Canaan he would have had to give them eleven donkeys. Some say that this is no proof as Joseph simply did not want to burden Binyamin with the task of leading a donkey all the way back to Canaan.
   45,24. אל תרגזו בדרך, “do not engage in recriminations while on the journey.” He told them not to be concerned over the fact that they, as opposed to everyone else, traveled in style, equipped with luxuries at a time when the rest of the population had to make do with a very austere lifestyle due to the famine. He assured them that potential robbers and men of violence would be in awe of him when they found out that they traveled under Joseph’s special protection.
   45,26. ויפג לבו, “his heart stopped beating;” according to <i>Rashi</i> this means that his heart refused to accept this as true.
   According to Nachmanides the word is similar to the word ביטול, as in Lamentations 2,18 אל תתני פוגת לך, “give yourself no respite.” The word פוג always means that something active suddenly ceases to be so and becomes inert, like dead. Yaakov’s heart became cold and his blood circulation stopped. This is a well known phenomenon when someone suddenly receives unexpected good news and is overwhelmed by it. Yaakov fainted and lay on the floor as if dead. The Torah reports that it took Yaakov a long time to recover from his shock and to believe what the brothers had told him. The standard remedy used to bring someone who fainted at the receipt of good news to recover from his fainting spell, is to dance around him and make noise and display joy and elation. When the brothers repeated their conversation with Joseph, and when upon opening his eyes he beheld the carriages Joseph had sent, he began to believe them and to react accordingly.
   45,27. וירא את העגלות, “he saw the carriages, etc.” then he believed the brothers as he told himself that no one else but a ruler would have been able to send these carriages out of Egypt, and all these precious gifts of food, etc. in the midst of a famine, except if it had been with the full consent of the government. Once he felt joy in his life once more, the holy spirit that had been absent since Joseph’s disappearance overcame him again
   According to the <i>Midrash</i> which understands the gift of carriages as a reminder by Joseph to his father that after all these years he had not forgotten that the last subject in which his father had instructed him had been the subject known as עגלה ערופה, the heifer which is killed by the judges of the Supreme Court in expiation of any indirect guilt in a unresolved murder on holy soil, we must understand our verse in terms of the two principles known as יש אם למקרא, ויש אם למסורה, that (normally) the unusual spelling of a word draws attention to a double meaning intended by the author. No one would argue that the carriages had not been sent for transporting Yaakov and family. But these “carriages” had an additional significance. This is why the Torah, instead of describing them as having been sent by Pharaoh, describes them as having been sent by Joseph, a slight but significant inaccuracy. It was to alert Yaakov that his son had not forgotten, in spite of his position at the Egyptian court, what had been the last lesson his father had taught him before he had sent him on the errand to see how his brothers were doing in Shechem. [in this instance it is not the spelling but the change in the description of the sender of the carriages. Joseph had actually sent heifers, עגלות, also, a double entendre of the word עגלות. Clearly, these had not been intended to pull the carriages. Ed.] Some commentators believe that the brothers did not transport grain in carriages but on their donkeys, [in small quantities. Ed] for if they had transported wagon-loads of grain, it would have looked as if they were depleting Egypt of its reserves of grain. In order to do this, special permission from Pharaoh himself was needed.
   45,28. רב, עוד יוסף בני חי, “it is much; my son Joseph is still alive!” Seeing that at first he did not want to believe them, he asked after the original owners of the עגלות, only to be told that just as a ship is steered by a captain, so the owner of these carriages, i.e. Joseph, is still very much alive. [who else but the “captain,” i.e. Joseph, could have sent all this to Yaakov? Ed]
   46,1. ויזבח זבחים, “meat-offerings of thanksgiving.” For having arrived at Beer Sheva with all his family without mishap.
   Alternately, these offerings were because he set out once more to leave the Holy Land and he was not certain that G’d approved of what he was doing. He used the offerings hoping to receive guidance from the Almighty. As we shall see, he received such approval, plus the assurance that in Egypt his descendants would develop into a numerous nation, but that he himself would be buried in the grave of his father and grandfather in the Holy Land.
   46,2. ויאמר יעקב, “Yaakov said, etc.” even though G’d had told him that in the future he would no longer be called Yaakov but Israel, this change of name was not the same as that of Avram’s name being changed to Avraham. Avraham had undergone a name change in honour of changing his religion, becoming circumcised and simultaneously becoming JEWISH. This was not the case with Yaakov who had been born Jewish. While it would have been inappropriate to continue to refer to Avraham by his former name, in fact it would have been insulting, this consideration did not apply to the name Yaakov.
   Furthermore, if Yisrael had never again been called Yaakov, people would have thought that the stigma attached to the name Yaakov, i.e. the crooked one, had been justified at the time he had been known as such.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah reverted to calling him Yaakov at this stage, was to hint that once in Egypt, his task would no longer be to contend with the heavenly representatives of the spiritually negative forces, such as the angel representing Esau in heaven. From now on he would be basically in the house of slavery, as effective from now the years of exile G’d had predicted at the covenant of the pieces to Avraham had begun. This condition would continue until G’d would redeem the Jewish people from there and lead them to the Holy Land. If, nonetheless, the Torah in verse 5 begins to list the names of בני ישראל, “the children of Israel,” and not as we might have expected “the children of Yaakov,” even though it was these who traveled to their exile, it was to assure them that paradoxically, the Jewish people’s developing into a numerically strong nation was a process that would take place in the very land where they would be cruelly suppressed and tormented. Verse 5 was a look into the future, whereas our verse deals with the present, i.e. a period when Yaakov, their patriarch, would in a manner of speaking become a symbol and would inspire them by what he had already accomplished on earth, not by what he still had to accomplish. [Here I have sermonized a little, expanding on Nachmanides. Ed.]
   46,4. אנכי אעלך גם עלה, “I will also be the One Who will bring you up.” The verb עלה has been repeated here alluding to the statement of our sages that יעקב לא מת, that “Yaakov never died.”
   Some commentators understand the word אעלך as parallel to אל תעלני בחצי ימי, Psalms 102,25, where it means that David prays that he should not be allowed to die, -i.e. to ascend to the heavenly regions of after life- while he had lived only part of his allotted span on earth. [David wanted to experience the triumph of G’d on earth before leaving the earthly domain. Ed.] G’d told him that he would die while Joseph would survive him, and that is the meaning of “Joseph will place his hand on your eyes,” in our verse.
   Still another interpretation understands the word אעלך as referring to Yaakov’s soul whom G’d, personally, will accompany to the celestial regions, while his son Joseph, would perform the earthly rites connected with the passing of his father from life on earth.
   46,5. וישאו בני ישראל את יעקב אביהם, “The children of Israel carried their father.” This was the occasion when they repaid him for the time at the Yabbok when he had carried all of them across the river. (Genesis 32,25) 
   46,7. ובנות בניו, “and the daughters of his sons.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the “daughters” mentioned here are Serach, daughter of Asher, and Yocheved, daughter of Levi.
   Nachmanides writes that the expression בנותיו presents a difficulty, seeing that according to Scripture, Yaakov had only one daughter, Dinah. Why then would the Torah speak about בנותיו, “his daughters” (pl.)? We must remember that it is the style of the Torah to treat subjects (such as offspring, children) in the plural mode, as for instance ובני דן חושים, “Dan’s sons were Chushim.” (verse 23) He had only that one son, and no daughters. Or, for instance, ובני פלוא אליאב, “and the sons of Phallu were Eliav.” There is therefore no reason to wonder why the subject of “daughters” should be treated differently. The same applies to the plural mode used for granddaughters, the only one being named in the text being Serach. Yocheved was not mentioned directly, although the Torah speaks about 70 souls of Yaakov’s descendants arriving in Egypt, whereas only 69 (including Joseph and his two sons) have been named.
   Some commentators explain the plural mode as references to daughters-in-law. Many people refer to their daughters-in-law as “daughter.” 
   46,10. ושאול בן הכנעני, “as well as Sha-ul, son of the Canaanite.” 
   Ibn Ezra explains this puzzling statement by saying that this grandson of Yaakov was the only one born by a Canaanite mother, as none of his other sons married girls of Canaanite parentage.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains the phenomenon as an allusion to this Sha-ul being a son of Dinah who had been raped by the Canaanite Shechem. If so, we are confronted with another difficulty, i.e. how could Shimon marry a sister by his own mother? According to a <i>Midrash</i> [I have not found such a version. Ed.] the problem is resolved as it is presumed that Dinah’s fetus grew predominantly in Rachel’s womb. [The Torah reports Leah only as having “given birth” to Dinah, not as having been pregnant with her. (Genesis 30,21)]
   46,17. וסרח אחותם, “and their sister Serach.” Some commentators claim that seeing the Torah did not use the customary “and Search, his daughter,” as for instance “and Dinah his daughter,” but defined her as someone’s “sister,” that this is proof that Serach had not been sired by Asher at all, but had been born to his wife. This view is also held by Onkelos in his translation of our verse, where he adds the word: “his wife.”
   I fail to understand the validity of such a commentary as how could she then have been included in what were specifically described in verse 5 of our chapter as “the names of the descendants (biological) who made up the Children of Israel who arrived in Egypt?” The end of the chapter repeats “all the people who were biologically related to Yaakov’s offspring, etc.” We can only explain all this by again referring to the style of the Torah when narrating such details, i.e. that daughters are lumped together with their brothers when the Torah relates family relationships. Another prominent example of the style of the Torah in this regard is the line:ואחות לוטן תמנע, “Lotan had a sister named Timna.” The Torah does not describe Timna’s father as having a daughter by that name.
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that according to the view of the sage that the brothers all married half sisters who were born as twins with their male counterparts, that now, at the time when the family moved to Egypt, they were not enumerated in the list of seventy descendants as they had all died before this point in time.
   Nachmanides writes that we do not need to fall back on such an unlikely scenario as the brothers all having married half sisters by the father who had died before they could have reached the age of 40 or so, but that the meaning of Rabbi Yehudah (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 84,21) who claims that Yaakov’s sons married their “sisters” who had been born as twins of their brothers, is that their names had not needed to be listed, except with the words מלבד נשי בני יעקב, “not including the wives of Yaakov’s sons,” adequately covered the subject. If the sons of Yaakov had indeed married Canaanite women, why would the Torah in Genesis 37,33 mention these women as Yaakov’s daughters? Unless they had been biologically related to Yaakov, such as being twin daughters, there would have been no point in referring to them in this entire chapter. Their names were not mentioned in this chapter just as they had not been mentioned at the time they had been born. The main purpose of the Torah listing the incredibly small number of people who came to Egypt with Yaakov, i.e. 70, was to show that these formed the nucleus of a great nation which developed into millions, counting wives and children who were minors, by the time they left Egypt 210 years later. It was in order to alert us to this miraculous population explosion of the Jewish people while they were on Egyptian soil. Man and wife are considered as one unit, as only as a pair can they sire offspring.
   46,18. אלה בני זלפה, “These are the sons of Zilpah;” Although it is the Torah’s style to list the names of the children of Yaakov’s principal wives, Leah and Rachel, together, as was done in <i>Parshat Vayishlach</i>, and as occurred when they received their respective blessings in <i>Parshat Vayechi</i>, here when the main consideration is numbers, the Torah listed Zilpah’s offspring before that of Rachel as the latter produced only 14 of the 70, whereas Ziplpah produced 16. Since she had been mentioned as part of the שפחות, handmaids, the Torah adds the title נשי יעקב, “Yaakov’s wives” in order to accord them the honour they deserve.
   46,27. כל הנפש לבית יעקב, “all the persons who were part of the house of Yaakov;” when you count them individually you will find that there are only 69 and not 70. Some commentators claim that Dinah had a son by Shechem, and that while he is included in the total 70, he is not included as an individual having a name.
   Other commentators claim that the lineכל נפש בניו ובנותיו עם יעקב 33, indicate that Yaakov himself is included in the count of 70 seeing that it first says ואלה שמות בני ישראל הבאים מצרימה, “these are the Israelites who arrived in Egypt.” When the Torah enumerated the 66 יוצאי ירך יעקב, the persons that emerged from Yaakov’s loins, he himself is obviously not included as he could not have been his own offspring. (verse 26)
   Some commentators are not at all perturbed by the round number 70 being used although there were only 69, seeing that there are numerous examples throughout the Bible in which round numbers are used, although when you examine them in detail you will find that they are just that, “rounded off” numbers.
   Personally, I do not know what all the fuss is about. Why could these commentators not have been satisfied with the solution provided for us by our sages in earlier periods that Yocheved was conceived in the land of Canaan but not born until the family was just at the border of Egypt, בין החומות, between the walled fortifications, as they phrase it. [at this point the author voices sharp rebuke at Ibn Ezra saying that Nachmanides already refuted all that he said on the subject. Ed.]
   46,29. ויעל לקראת אביו גושנה, he went up to meet his father, to the province of Goshen. Some commentators say that the Goshen mentioned here is the same as that mentioned in the Book of Joshua 10,41, [that Goshen is described as near Givon], and that seeing that the land of Israel is located at higher altitudes than all other countries according to our sages, the Torah describes Joseph as traveling “up,” i.e. uphill. [why would Yaakov’s journey then have been described as a descent, seeing that one look at the map would convince us that as his last stop was Beer Sheva, he too would have had to continue from there uphill. Ed.]
   We do not consider this explanation of the word ויעל as appropriate at all. The province of Goshen was situated within Egypt proper, though at a higher level than the Nile delta which was practically at sea level for many kilometers starting with the capital. As to the apparently contradictory line in 46,31 where Joseph, leaving his father, speaks about “going up to Pharaoh etc,” has to be understood in terms of his stepping into his chariot, just as getting out of a chariot is described as “descending” from it, so entering it again as described as “ascending” into it.
   It is also possible that the correct interpretation of these terms עליה and ירידה respectively, is that Joseph said: “I will go to Egypt, (capital) and ascend to the palace of Pharaoh, which was built on a hill, overlooking the surrounding area, and inform him, etc.” It is even possible, though unlikely, that the land of Egypt proper was on a higher plateau than the province of Goshen, which was closest to the Mediterranean sea, in which case the word ויעל in our verse would refer to Joseph ascending his chariot before beginning his journey.
   @וירא אליו, “he appeared to him;” according to <i>Rashi,</i> Joseph appeared to his father and fell around his neck and wept still, are to be contrasted with Yaakov’s reaction; he did not fall around Joseph’s neck and did not kiss his son until he had finished reciting the prayer קריאת שמע. 
   Nachmanides writes that he does not know why the expression וירא “he appeared,” has been chosen by the Torah to describe this meeting, seeing that it is quite obvious that when two people meet so closely that they embrace each other, as here, that they appear to one another. Furthermore, Joseph’s whole behaviour does not seem appropriate. He should have first prostrated himself and have kissed his father’s hands. Furthermore, the word עוד does not mean a surfeit of something, but something in addition to what had already been there before. Seeing that Joseph had not fallen around Yaakov’s neck before, the word עוד in this connection is hard to understand.
   The correct meaning of the phrase is that Yaakov’s eyes were heavy from old age, which made it difficult for him to recognize Joseph, or that seeing that Joseph had been in a rush to welcome his father he had been wearing royal attire and some sort of headgear totally unfamiliar to Yaakov, so that even if he would have recognized him in ordinary garments, he did not associate the figure approaching him in Royal Splendour as being his son. Therefore, when upon Joseph approaching real close and Yaakov finally recognizing him, i.e. “he appeared to him,” he fell around his neck and, in addition to this, wept while doing so. He had been weeping over the loss of Joseph for many years, only this time he wept from joy. Joseph, on the other hand, although he had been told that his father was well, when he saw him, he received a shock so that he began to weep in spite of the reunion. It is a moot point who of the two wept more and longer.
   46,32. והאנשים רועי צאן, “and the men are shepherds by vocation.” He did not mean to say that the brothers themselves were shepherds, but that they were experts in sheep and cattle raising as their vast wealth consisted primarily of flocks and herds, while their servants did the actual minding of the beasts.
   46,34. כי תועבת מצרים כל רועה צאן, “for every cattle and sheep raiser was pursuing a career despised by the Egyptians.” He would keep them apart from the Egyptians as they were anathema to them.
   Some commentators, on the contrary, consider that the Egyptians especially esteemed cattle men and men raising sheep as it would not make sense that Joseph should present his brothers before Pharaoh in a manner which would make him despise them. The reason that Pharaoh assigned the province of Goshen for them to dwell in was precisely because he considered them a very valuable asset to the Egyptian economy so that they deserved to live in the economically most prosperous part of the country. The word תועבה, abomination, does not refer to the brothers’ vocation, but to the deities whom the Egyptians worshipped.
   47,2. ומקצה אחיו לקח, “he took from his stronger brothers.” The word קצה is derived from קצין, officer, strong man, as for instance in Isaiah 41,9 ומקצות הארץ קראתיך, “and I called unto you from the corners of the earth.”
   47,4. כי אין מרעה לצאן אשר לעבדיך, “for there is no grazing land for the flocks and herds of your servants.” Nachmanides writes that he is puzzled by this reason given by the brothers for having come to Egypt. After all, there was no grazing land in Egypt either during the famine, and both man and beast survived only from stored surplus of prior years. Possibly, the most intense famine raged in the land of Canaan, and the people there were reduced to eating grass, so that there was really nothing left for the beasts to feed on. Seeing that people received regular food rations in Egypt they had not needed to deny their beasts the grass in the fields. Alternately, there would be some grass around the many ponds in Egypt and in the Nile delta near the banks of the tributaries of the Nile river.
   47.5. אביך ואחיך באו אליך, “your father and your brothers have come to join you.” This may be an introductory remark by Pharaoh before offering the brothers and their father the hospitality of the land of Egypt. [otherwise it is banal, as the facts were well known. Ed.] Alternately, it is an introductory remark to “your brothers have come to convince themselves with their own eyes of your rise to greatness in this land. They are now planning to look to you for sustenance.” Pharaoh then proceeds to instruct Joseph to indeed treat his brothers with largesse.
   47,6. ושמתם שרי מקנה על אשר לי, “appoint them as the ministers in charge of all my livestock.” Ibn Ezra understands the term מקנה here as animals such as horses, the type of animals owned by Royalty. Pharaoh, personally, did not own flocks of sheep, etc.
   47,10. ויברך יעקב את פרעה, ”Yaakov blessed Pharaoh.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this “blessing” as extending greetings. 
   Nachmanides writes that it does not appear reasonable to him that a commoner is in the habit of enquiring after the good health, etc., of a reigning monarch. It is assumed that a king enjoys such, as a matter of course. We are told in <i>Shabbat</i> 89 there are no servants who offer this type of greeting to their masters, their masters being presumed to enjoy amenities denied to people of a lower social stratum. [when Moses arrived at the seat of G’d’s throne, he supposedly found G’d preoccupied with decorating the letters of the Torah with crowns. When he remained silent, dumbfounded, G’d asked him whether in his part of the universe it was not customary to extend greetings? Moses replied with the above quotation. Ed.] Nachmanides therefore concludes that Yaakov extended a real (literal) blessing to Pharaoh. It was customary for aged people to do so, as the very fact that they attained old age was perceived as proof that they themselves were blessed, and that therefore a blessing by them was of special value. Yaakov’s first blessing was in respect of earthly possessions, including good health, whereas his blessing before leaving the presence of Pharaoh was the promise that the waters of the Nile would once again overflow their banks and irrigate the farmland of Egypt.
   47,8. ויאמר פרעה כמה ימי שני חייך?, “Pharaoh said to Yaakov: ‘how old are you?’” It is puzzling why Pharaoh suddenly displays such interest in Yaakov’s age. At the same time, it is puzzling why Yaakov, instead of simply telling Pharaoh his age, prefaces his answer with a description of the quality of his life before revealing the quantitative aspect of it. Yaakov meant to explain to Pharaoh that if, contrary to norm, he appeared far older than his actual years this was due to the many trials and tribulations he had experienced in his years on earth. When Yaakov had arrived in Egypt and his sons had described themselves as coming לגור בארץ, to sojourn for a while, this created the impression that Yaakov expected to be around on this planet for quite some time yet. Pharaoh was therefore almost bound to ask him how old he was already, seeing that he had such plans for the future. Yaakov reassured him, that as of this day he was far younger in terms of years, than had been either his father or his grandfather at the time of their respective deaths. The fact that Yaakov really intended to return to Canaan after the famine would have passed had really thrown Pharaoh for a loop.
   According to the <i>Midrash,</i> G’d reacted angrily when He heard that after having been saved by Him miraculously a number of times during his life, Yaakov had the nerve to complain about the quality of his life on earth up until then in the presence of Pharaoh. As a result, Yaakov’s lifespan was reduced by 33 years when compared to the 180 years his father Yitzchok had lived. The number 33 corresponds to the number of words in our verse.
   47,11. ויושב יוסף את אביו ואת אחיו ויתן להם אחוזה, “Joseph settled his father and his brothers in the land of Egypt, and he allocated to them freehold property, property that could be transferred to their children upon their death.” He did not want them to have the status of aliens, tourists, transients, etc. He gave them vineyards, houses and fields, all with Pharaoh’s permission, seeing they themselves had only asked permission to be resident aliens for a while. Pharaoh had told Joseph to make full citizens of them.
   47,14. וילקט יוסף את כל הכסף, “Joseph collected all the money,” the Torah reports some of Joseph’s astuteness as a ruler, as well as his fairness and faithfulness in that whatever he collected he handed over to Pharaoh’s treasury. He did not amass a private fortune of his own.
   47,15. ויתום הכסף מארץ מצרים, “Egypt completely ran out of money,” money stopped circulating as there was too little of it both in Egypt and in the land of Canaan. The reason why the Torah had to mention that money had also run out in the land of Canaan was that the Egyptians said to Joseph: “seeing that there is no point in your waiting for more buyers from the land of Canaan, as they have no money with which to buy, you might as well introduce a new bartering system in Egypt. If you keep waiting for customers and we die in the meantime, you will be left with tons of supplies and no one who will buy it from you. The disappearance of money from circulation occurred gradually, beginning with the poor running out of cash first. The words ויתם הכסף describe a state when even the wealthy people had no more ready cash.
   According to the <i>Midrash</i> Joseph had been equipped with a degree of prophecy so much so that he knew how much money every person still possessed. He used this knowledge to charge higher prices to the rich and lower prices to the poor, in order to preserve a certain degree of equality amongst the population when it came to obtaining the necessities of life.
   47,18. ויבואו אליו בשנה השנית, “They came to him in the second year, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> the verse speaks about the second year of the famine, even though Joseph had spoken about another 5 years of crop failures, (45,11) However, as soon as Yaakov arrived in Egypt, a miracle happened and the blessings returned as a result of his presence.
   Nachmanides writes that although Joseph’s prediction of seven consecutive years of famine did not come true, no one used this as an excuse to call Joseph a liar or a false prophet. The reason was that they noted that the famine continued in the surrounding countries, so that it was clear to them that special circumstances had arisen when Yaakov went down to the Nile and suddenly the waters of the Nile rose to welcome him. Pharaoh himself had witnessed this phenomenon. He showed it to his servants and they realized that Yaakov’s blessing had been effective. We must therefore understand Joseph’s pledge to support his brothers economically as being meant for the normal years to follow, a pledge which was to be valid for at least as long as his father would remain alive. In fact, Joseph continued to support his brothers financially even after his father’s death (50,51) 
   Even considering all this, if all this is true, then Pharaoh’s dream had not been interpreted correctly seeing that Pharaoh had not really been shown the decree nor how it could be changed.
   There is an interesting <i>Tossephta</i> in <i>Sotah</i> according to which Rabbi Yossi said that as soon as Yaakov died, the famine resumed in Egypt. There is also a statement in the S<i>ifri</i> according to which Yaakov’s blessing to Pharaoh consisted in the promise that the famine would cease forthwith. Nonetheless, seeing seven years of famine had been decreed in the dream, these did in fact occur, at intervals, after Yaakov’s death. Rabbi Shimon protested such an interpretation, saying that it does not confer glory on either G’d or His righteous people on earth if the promise (blessing) of a צדיק remains effective only during his own lifetime. In response to this Rabbi Eleazar, son of Rabbi Shimon (ben Yochai) said that he prefers the interpretation of Rabbi Yossi to that of his own father, as it is a greater sanctification of G’d when people observe that as long as a <i>tzaddik</i> walks the earth there is visible blessing on earth thanks to his merit. The very fact that the blessings on earth we due to the presence of <i>Tzaddikim</i> at that time, becomes manifest when these blessings cease as soon as the <i>Tzaddik</i> leaves this earth. The fact is that there are 5 more mentions of famine in Egypt scattered throughout the Bible; these five years of famine completed those predicted by Joseph but interrupted by the blessing of his father Yaakov when he went to see Pharaoh. 
   [by the way, the clue Yaakov had found in Pharaoh’s dream that gave him the opening for this blessing was that the parched ears of corn symbolizing the years of famine, did not grow on a single stalk, whereas the good ears of corn all grew on a single stalk, suggesting that the good years would be consecutive. Ed.] 
   Ibn Ezra claims that here we are speaking about the first 2 years of the famine after Yaakov’s arrival in Egypt. We find support for this in the <i>Midrash</i>, which states that the famine ended thanks to the merit of Yaakov. It is also possible that the division was four years of famine at once, and three years at a later date, but of far less severity.
   Nachmanides writes that he finds these interpretations as unsatisfactory, for if that had been so the Torah herself would have referred to some of these events explicitly.
   At any rate, the meaning of the text read straightforwardly is that Joseph collected all the available money during five years of the famine, but seeing that during those five years no new elements developed, the Torah did not refer to those years individually, but treated them as if they had been a single year. When a new development occurred, i.e. the people for the first time confronting Joseph, the Torah resumes the thread of the narrative. What is related now actually occurred during the sixth year of the famine. At that time Joseph handed out grain and took cattle and beasts of burden as payment for this. When the people came back again in the following year, the second of the last two years, he acquired their land on behalf of Pharaoh and made sharecroppers out of all of them. When he began to hand out seed for sowing it became clear that this had been the last year of the famine.
   47,19. קנה אותנו ואת אדמתינו בלחם, “acquire us together with our land in return for bread!” They asked Joseph to also acquire their bodies as slave labour, and this is confirmed when Joseph told them in verse 23 that he had indeed acquired both their soil and their bodies on Pharaoh’s behalf. Seeing that this has all been spelled out by the Torah in unmistakable language, what do the words in verse 20: “Joseph acquired all the soil of Egypt on Pharaoh’s behalf,” add to the information we have already received? In fact that verse seems to contradict what we read in both verse 19 and 23 in that it speaks only of soil and not bodies having been sold. The reason for the insertion of this verse was to show that although the Egyptians were willing and eager to even sell their bodies, Joseph did not acquire their bodies,- as he considered the personal freedom of the body of a human being as of paramount importance- but he established a system of share-cropping, the former landowners being legally obligated to work the lands in question on behalf of Pharaoh, but sharing in the success or failure of the annual crops to the extent of 80%. When he did say to them in verse 23 “here I have acquired you,“ he refers to the entitlement to their labour, not to their bodies being owned, and subject to resale to other human beings, (as was the custom in the United States until1866)
    
   Moreover, Joseph’s concern for “human rights” was such that instead of allocating to Pharaoh 80% of the fruits of their labour he allocated only 20% to Pharaoh, the remainder belonging to the farmer who had worked the land. The expression קניתי “I have acquired you,” is justified as the farmers were not allowed to leave the land or offer their labour to someone else.
   @והאדמה לא תשם, “and the land will not become waste.” Neglect of the land now would result in the land becoming permanently unable to grow crops. In light of this it is not surprising that the farmers said to Joseph (verse 25): “you have kept us alive; let us find favour in your eyes and we will gladly be slaves to Pharaoh.”
   47,22. רק אדמת הכהנים, “only the land-holdings of the priests, etc.” Some commentators believe that Joseph favoured the priests because his former master Potiphar was now a priest in the monastery of On.
   Other commentators attribute Joseph’s showing preference to the priests to the tradition that it had been the priests who had to sit in judgment deciding if the accusation of Potiphar’s wife that Joseph had attempted to rape her was true or not had ruled in Joseph’s favour basing themselves on the manner in which his garments had been torn. Had the tears occurred in the frontal part of the garments this would have been incriminating. The fact that the tears were in the rear indicated to them that Joseph had fled from her and not <i>vice versa</i>. You need not consider the statement in our verse that there was a special law for the priests as contradicting the tradition we just quoted, seeing that this very law had been introduced by Joseph.
   Some commentators do not understand the word כהנים as referring to a religious order, but as a description of the local aristocracy, whom Joseph exempted from these new laws restricting land ownership to a numerically insignificant number of people.
   47,24. וארבע הידות יהיה לכם, “and the other four fifths will be yours.” One quarter of the crop was intended to provide seed for next year’s crop; another quarter was intended for consumption by the farmer and his wife, yet another quarter for the farmer’s resident helpers other than his immediate family, and one quarter for use by the children.
   47,25. החייתנו...והיינו עבדים לפרעה, “you have saved our lives, and we have becoming willing slaves of Pharaoh.” The emphasis on the unnecessary word לפרעה was a blunt hint to Joseph that whereas they were willing to become Pharaoh’s slaves, they would not have been willing to become Joseph’s slaves. 
   Parshat.. Vayechi
   47,28. ויחי יעקב, “Yaakov lived (peacefully), etc.” The descent of Yaakov to Egypt is meant to be reminiscent of the third exile of the Jewish people, the exile under Roman domination, as the sons of Yaakov had brought about their exile in Egypt themselves through having sold their brother Joseph to Egypt. Yaakov descended there under the impression that he would be saved there due to his beloved son occupying such an illustrious position in a country that was not severely damaged by the famine. The brothers themselves had declared that they had only come to Egypt for a brief stay, expecting to return to Canaan as soon as the famine had come to an end. In the event, this is not how things worked out, the exile in Egypt dragged on for one reason or another, and even Yaakov himself was only brought back to the land of Israel after he died, and even that only because Joseph told Pharaoh that his father had made him swear not to bury his remains in Egypt. While it is true that he was buried with great honour and the elite of Egypt participated in his funeral, his death put an end to any chance of the brothers returning even if they had wanted to.
   Something very similar happened during the later years of the Hasmonean reign when two brothers vied for the position of King, and the one who did not succeed by his own strength, called in the Romans to support him politically and militarily. They did, but they never left the country again after King Agrippas took refuge with them. Eventually, due to famine in Jerusalem after years of siege, the defenders of Jerusalem were captured and until this day we are enduring this ”Roman” exile. In contrast to previous exiles, we have no idea when this exile will come to an end. Who knows how far off is the day when the tables will be turned and we will go up to Jerusalem and offer offerings of thanksgiving, and all the nations will witness the redemption of the Jewish people.
     <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason why this portion has not been separated from the previous portion by even the space of a single letter, is to allude to the fact that as soon as Yaakov had closed his eyes for the last time, the ability of the Jewish people to look into the future with any sense of confidence and assurance had vanished. This remained true although, according to tradition, the Egyptians did not commence any repressive measures against the Jewish tribe until after the last one of the brothers had died. The enslavement commenced immediately after the death of the last surviving brother 
     Another approach to the peculiar lack of the separation of the previous portion in the Torah from this one, is that before the Torah had commenced with the chronology of the years of the life of Yaakov who was 130 years old when he came to Egypt, now the Torah relates that he had 17 years left to live out his life while in Egypt, and the Torah did not want to interrupt its chronology. [Joseph spent the first 17 years of his life under the care of his father, whereas his father spent the last 17 years of his life under the care of Joseph. Ed.]
   47,29. ויקרבו ימי ישראל למות, “As Israel’s time to die approached, etc.” These words do not refer to the sickness from which Yaakov died eventually, but they refer to a period when Yaakov began to experience the weakness which is common to people whose strength begins to ebb prior to their death. At a later stage, when Yaakov actually took sick and Joseph was told about it, he rushed to see his father and obtain his last blessing as well as to obtain blessings for his sons.
   @ויאמר..שים נא ידך תחת ירכי, “he said: ‘please place your hand beneath my loins.’” Here the Torah does not continue with reporting that Joseph did as requested, as it had done when Avraham made a similar request to Eliezer when he sent him to look for a wife for Yitzchok. Here the Torah did not want to spell out this detail, preserving the element of delicacy of this procedure.
     Some commentators, claiming to interpret the plain meaning of the text, say that the request to place his hand under Yaakov’s loins did not refer to an oath, seeing that Yaakov requested the oath at a later stage (verse 31). 
     They say that Yaakov requested Joseph to take over the position known in Talmudic parlance as עובי הקורה, “center post,” i.e. the position of head of the clan with all the attendant responsibilities.
     @ועשית עמדי חסד ואמת, “and perform for me a true deed of loving kindness.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the term “true loving kindness” is always used when the party performing the deed in question entertains no expectation of being rewarded for it in this life. The question raised against this interpretation is that we see that Yaakov immediately recompensed Joseph by giving him the city of Shechem over and above the normal portion allocated to the tribes of Ephrayim and Menashe. The answer given is that we are to read the line as: “you will do with me something which would be a true act of kindness when performed for other מתים, dead people who cannot reciprocate in kind.” However, in my opinion the question is not even in place, as nothing was further from Joseph’s mind than expecting a reward. Yaakov’s giving Shechem to Joseph was entirely free-willed, not in the nature of a reward at all.
     47,30. אנכי אעשה כדברך, “I shall do as you have said.” I will carry out your instructions. Alternately, the meaning is that Joseph conveyed to his father that he would do what he had asked him to do because he himself would do the same when the time came, and he too would ask his brothers and children to ensure that he would eventually be interred in the Holy Land. Both Yaakov and Joseph made his son/brothers swear, even though Yaakov had already had a direct assurance by G’d before he came to Egypt that He would accompany him back to his grave in the land of Canaan. He also had no reason to doubt Joseph’s sincerity and uprightness. He wanted Joseph to render an oath so that he could use this as an argument before Pharaoh in case the latter would object to the fact that someone who had been able to stop the famine, would not be honoured by the Egyptians by being given a burial and a monument in that land. In the event, Pharaoh did give permission, stressing that it was Joseph’s duty to honour his oath to his father. (50,7)
     47,31. וישתחו ישראל על ראש המטה, “Israel prostrated himself at the head of the bed.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the Presence of G’d usually positioned itself near the head of the bed of the sick person. This is difficult according to the view we quoted earlier, that at this point Yaakov was not yet sick, so that we would have to say that at this point Yaakov was sitting on his bed and he prostrated himself as a mark of gratitude to Joseph for having agreed to honour his wish. His gratitude was expressed to G’d Who had given him a son who, in spite of his elevated position, honoured his father’s every wish. It is also possible that he literally prostrated himself before Joseph, thus fulfilling the last detail in Joseph’s dream about the sheaves.
     48,2. ויתחזק ישראל, “Israel strengthened himself;” in order that the blessing he would bestow would be that of a healthy human being.
     48,4. ויאמר אליו הנני מפרך והרבתיך וכו', “He said to him: here I am about to fructify you and to multiply you, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that Yaakov reminded Joseph that at the time when G’d had said to him that he would be the founder of nations and communities of nations (35,11), he had only had 11 sons, so that part of the blessing had not yet been fulfilled. He therefore directed that the as yet unfulfilled part of that blessing should be applied to Joseph and his sons. This is also the reason why he mentioned Rachel’s death at this juncture. Seeing that the missing part of the blessing could not have applied to any further children whom Rachel would have, it must apply to existing children, and he chose to channel this blessing to Joseph and his children.
     It is also possible that seeing he had allocated to the two sons of Joseph territory in the land of Israel on the same basis as that of Reuven and Shimon, i.e. as that of his actual sons, he mentioned that he had received the authority to make such allocations from G’d Himself.
     48,5. אפרים ומנשה כראובן ושמעון יהיה לי,” Ephrayim and Menashe will be to me just as Reuven and Shimon.” It appears from <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary that the division of the land in the days of Joshua was not based on the actual claimants, the sons of Yaakov still being alive at the time, but it was based on a principle known as גלגול, re-incarnation. It did not matter therefore, that Yaakov appeared to have compared the younger son Ephrayim, to Yaakov’s eldest, Reuven. Ephrayim and Menashe were to be “tribes” in name only, they did not replace the concept of “the tribe of Joseph.” [the cut off point for being included in the original family of Yaakov was the date of their arrival in the land of Egypt. Seeing that both Ephrayim and Menashe had been born prior to Yaakov’s arrival, even though they had been born on the contaminated soil of Egypt, enabled Yaakov to confer the status on them that he is about to bestow. Ed.]
     Nachmanides questions the wordsעל שם אחיהם יקראו בנחלתם, “they will be included under the names of their brothers in their inheritance,” claiming that these very words indicate that the “name” is of the essence, not as <i>Rashi</i> suggests that they were “tribes” in name only. Besides, Nachmanides holds that the land division under Joshua was not based on the original Israelites who had left Egypt being considered as having been resurrected, and the size of the land holdings being based on the size of their families at that time, but that each tribe received the same size of territory in the Land of Israel, although the parcels were not of equal quality as farmland, etc. When the Torah had instructed that the more numerous tribes should receive larger portions of land, whereas the less numerous ones would receive a smaller share, (Numbers 26,4) this referred to the basic family units within the tribe, not to the tribes themselves. These family units were based on the state of affairs of the families when they left Egypt. [if, due to the sin of the spies and the death decreed on that whole generation, taking possession of the land had not been postponed by 40 years, a whole generation, there would not have been a problem in understanding the instructions of the Torah. Ed.] It is therefore quite easy to understand that the tribal portions allocated to Ephrayim and Menashe by Yoshua equaled those of Reuven and Shimon.]
   48,6. אשר הולדת אחריהם, “whom you have sired after them;” according to the past tense used here, it is quite possible that Joseph had begotten more children after Menashe and Ephrayim. The reason why the Torah had not spelled this out is because they would inherit with their brothers, not separately. The fact that this is the likely explanation is supported by the fact that Yaakov continued at length with: “and now, your two sons who have been born before I came down to Egypt, etc.” This appears to support the theory that Joseph had indeed had other children, and that these were born to him after the famine had ceased.
   Alternately, the words אשר הולדת could be understood to mean אשר תוליד, “whom you will beget;” we have numerous examples of a past tense being used where we would have expected a future tense. The fact that we do not hear about other children does not prove that there were none. At any rate, Yaakov may have told Joseph what the status of such children would be in the event they would yet be born for him.
   48,7. ואקברה שם, “and I was forced to bury her there.” Nachmanides questioned what <i>Rashi</i> explains here, i.e. that Yaakov apologized to Joseph that he had not even been able to transport the remains of Rachel the short distance to Beyt Lechem so that she would be buried on holy soil. Nachmanides feels that the text does not only not support this, but supports the very reverse, that Rachel, though not buried in a cemetery, was indeed buried within the boundaries of Eretz Yisrael. Why else would Yaakov have said that Rachel had died suddenly, “in the land of Canaan?”
   Yaakov’s apology concerned the fact that he had not buried Rachel in the cave of Machpelah in Chevron, not that he had buried her outside the boundaries of the Holy Land. He emphasizes that although he had not been able to bury her in Machpelah, at least he had been able to bury her inside the Holy Land. He had not been able to abandon his entire family and carry the remains of Rachel all the way to the cave of Machpelah. He himself was likely to be buried outside of the Holy Land unless he could arrange before his death to have his remains transferred, as he was about to request from Joseph. If, at the time of Rachel’s death he would have moved his entire camp with him to the cave of Machpelah, a journey which takes a half a day for a single traveler would have consumed many days and would have been a great indignity for the remains of Rachel as he had no means to embalm her and to prevent her body from decomposing in the interval. Joseph had been fully aware of the circumstances of his mother’s death, as well as the fact that Yaakov could not have buried the remains of two sisters both of whom had been his wife, in the cave of Machpelah. The reason why he buried Leah in that cave was that he had, after all, married her first. Rachel died in “Ramah,” hence רמת רחל,” part of the territory of Binyamin after the distribution of the land by Joshua.
   Our sages who explain all this allegorically, say that Rachel had to die when she entered the Holy Land, in order that Yaakov not become guilty of being married to two sisters both of whom were alive, something that the Torah had forbidden. Yaakov received instructions from on high to bury Rachel where he did, so that her spirit, in due course, could petition G’d when her “children,” would be taken into captivity by the Babylonian general Nebuzaradan. Some commen-tators say that Yaakov explained to Joseph that the reason he had buried his mother on the way to Efrat was that this was within the tribal territory of one of her sons, whereas had she been buried in Machpelah, she would not have been interred in soil belonging to her offspring. Burying her in earth that would belong to the descendants of Leah would not have been something compatible with her dignity.
   48,8. ויאמר מי אלה, He said: “who are these?” According to the plain meaning of the text, Yaakov’s eyesight was failing to the extent that he no longer recognised his grandchildren, especially those who did not live in Goshen.
   48,9. בני אשר נתן לי אלוקים בדה, “they are my sons whom the Lord gave me here.” There had been no need for Joseph to tell his father that these children had been born in Egypt, for Yaakov was not only aware of this but had already referred to them in verse 5 as the two sons who had been born for him in Egypt. The whole point Joseph was making was that these were the sons who had been given to him by G’d even before his father had come to Egypt. Yaakov had said that he considered them as his own sons, (not only as his grandchildren)
   48,10. וישק להם ויחבק להם, “he kissed and embraced them.” Man is not blessed with the presence of the Divine (spirit) unless he is in a state of joy, happiness. This is why being kissed and embraced by his father enabled the blessing to take hold on Joseph and his sons.
   48,11. לא פללתי, “I had not dared to expect.” I had not even entertained such a thought in my heart. The word is derived from פלילים, criminal judgments.
   48,15. ויברך את יוסף, “He blessed Joseph.” Although, literally speaking, as we can see, he blessed Joseph’s sons, when the sons are blessed this is a great blessing for their father. Seeing that Joseph had only these two sons, Yaakov invested all his blessings in these two sons, thereby blessing all of Joseph. Even if Joseph were to have more children in the future, their blessings would be derived through the blessing now given to Ephrayim and Menashe.
   48,16. המלאך הגואל אותי, “the angel that has redeemed me, etc. Some commentators understand this as a reference to G’d Who had shepherded Yaakov by means of an angel, seeing that no angel has independent powers such as attributed to him by Yaakov here. There is little doubt that the words המלאך and האלוקים which are used interchangeably (here 15 and 16) refer to the same Divine manifestation, but when viewed by the immediate recipient of the miraculous providence of G’d, appear as a more immediate Divine providence than when viewed by bystanders, who did not experience this on their own bodies. [my wording, but I trust the author’s meaning. Ed.]
   @ויקרא בהם שמי ושם אבותי, “and may my name and the name of my forefathers be declared upon them.” Ibn Ezra explains that Yaakov wishes that the Jewish people be known as “the children of Ephrayim,” just as they are known as “the children of Avraham Yitzchok and Yisrael.”
   Nachmanides disagrees, seeing that the verse addresses itself to both Ephrayim and Menashe, even though Ephrayim may have been mentioned ahead of his senior brother. History shows that although traditionally, the Jewish people have been referred to as “Ephrayim,” by some prophets, Menashe has never been used as an alternative for “the seed of Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yisrael.” Perhaps what Yaakov meant was that the Jewish people appear collectively as “the house of Joseph” in a number of prophecies by our prophets. The plain meaning of the blessing appears to be that just as the descendants of Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yisrael are blessed and assured of eternal continuity, so Yaakov wishes that the same may apply to the seed of both Ephrayim and Menashe, individually, as tribes.
   48,17. וירע בעיניו, “Joseph was displeased by his father having placed his right hand on Ephrayim;” perhaps Joseph loved Menashe better seeing that he was his eldest son, and that it bothered him that his father appeared to ignore this point. Perhaps he only thought that Yaakov had done what he did mistakenly; and as soon as he heard that his father had done so intentionally he was reconciled to the holy spirit which guided his father’s hands.
   48,18. לא כן, “not so,” some people claim that Joseph certainly did not say to his father outright that he had not acted correctly, but that the words meant that he, Joseph, had been mistaken when he had thought that his father had erred. Nonetheless, Joseph told his father that he preferred for him to place his right hand on the firstborn Menashe.
   48,20. ויברכם ביום ההוא, “He blessed them both on that day;” the words “on that day,” are important, seeing that Joseph pressured his father to place his right hand on Menashe and to bless him first. The Torah clearly shows that Yaakov resisted this pressure and did not want to remove his right hand from the head of Ephrayim. Not only that, but when Yaakov eventually pronounced the blessing, he made a point of naming Ephrayim first in his blessing so that when the parents of Jewish children would bless their children in the future they would always mention Ephrayim first when wishing that their children model themselves after these two sons of Joseph.
   @בך יברך ישראל, ”when the Jewish people bless their children they will do so by referring to you, Joseph, to your well turned out children.” They will express the fervent hope that their own children would turn out as successfully.
   48,22. ואני נתתי לך שכם אחד על אחיך, “and I have allocated to you one additional portion in excess of that of your brothers;” this was a reference to the birthright. Joseph became the official firstborn of Yaakov, and that is why his two children each received a share of the holy Land, just as Yaakov’s own sons. According to <i>Rashi,</i> Yaakov referred to the birthright that he had purchased at the time from his brother Esau, as a result of which, he, Yaakov, was entitled to an extra share in the inheritance from his father Yitzchok.
   I must confess that I do not understand <i>Rashi’s</i> words here. Yaakov did not give Joseph the birthright he had taken away from Esau, but he gave him the birthright he had taken away from Reuven, as is spelled out when he blessed the other sons, and when referring to Reuven, (49,4) that Reuven had desecrated him when he entered his bed-chamber,.claiming it as his abode. The birthright had been transferred from Reuven to Joseph as penalty for the act of desecrating his father. Furthermore, how would the fact that Yaakov had personally taken the city of Shechem from the Emorite have any bearing on his deal with Esau that acquired Esau’s birthright for him? He had been forced to justify giving this extra portion of land to Joseph by making reference to the fact that it had not come to be his through inheritance passed on, but through personal acquisition when he had risked his life for it in war.
   Nachmanides explains the words אשר לקחתי מיד האמורי,in this paragraph as meaning that the words refer to the time when the land of Israel would be conquered by the sword. Yaakov, already now, tells Joseph that his sons, i.e. the tribes of Menashe and Ephrayim, who would be in the forefront, especially Machir ben Menashe, as we know from Numbers 32, 33-42. According to Nachmanides the promise of בקשתי ובחרבי would be fulfilled in the future when the tribe of Menashe would conquer distant parts of the east bank of the Jordan, such as Gilead, etc, as described at the end of <i>Parshat</i> Mattot. The reference to these weapons were only allusions to the fact that actual fighting would have to take place to secure the land of Canaan as the homeland of the Jewish people for all times. חרב and קשת, sword and bow, are presumed to be symbolical references to the battles against Sichon and Og, both kings of the Emorite tribe. These battles were the fiercest of the conquest of the land of Israel, although they were fought for land on the east bank of the river Jordan. Joshua 11,19 himself testified that not a single city in the land of Canaan made a peaceful surrender to the Jewish army in order to emigrate and save their lives. When Yaakov used the expression לקחתי, “I have taken,” he refers to his moral and legal right to engage in that battle against a people who -according to United Nations statutes- had been rightful owners of the land they dwelt on. Yaakov may very well have done what a number of prophets did when they wanted to make similar points regarding the legality of Israelite expansionary wars. They took arms symbolically, and shot them at imaginary targets, to explain to the king that what they had done symbolically, it was up to the king to do in practice.(compare Kings II 13,16-17).
   49,1. אשר יקרא אתכם באחרית הימים, “what will happen to you in the latter days.” At this point Yaakov wanted to reveal to his sons details about the ultimate redemption of the Jewish people, but this vision was withheld from him by G’d, so that he had to make do with allusions to earlier events, although he managed to insert hints of what was to happen still later. The words עד כי יבא שילה, are proof of this.
   49,3. ראובן בכורי אתה, “Reuven you are my firstborn, etc.” Yaakov meant to imply that due to his being the biologically first born, he should normally have been accorded a preferential rank, as is customary for firstborns, such as being the family’s priest, as well as its leader in secular matters. However, on account of the unfortunate incident in Genesis 35,22, he had disqualified himself for such preferential treatment. When he demonstrated an inability to control his biological urges, something Yaakov compares to the unstoppable tendency of water to flow downhill, he proved unfit for the task normally allotted to firstborns in those days.
   An alternate explanation of the line בכורי אתה כחי וראשית אוני יתר שאת, is: “you were my firstborn as long as you were reminiscent of the first product of my virility. At that time you possessed the advantage known as יתר שאת, the word meaning the same as in Job 13,11 הלא שאתו תבעת אתכם, “will not his height terrify you, etc?” The expression ויתר עוז refers to superior physical power, such as is useful in battle. You possessed this advantage only as long as you fulfilled the function of the firstborn. Since this task has been transferred to Joseph, you no longer possess it, as elaborated on by <i>Rashi.</i> You forfeited your advantages.
   49,4. אז חללת יצועי עלה, “then you desecrated Him Who abode on my bed.” According to our sages, Yaakov referred to Reuven having desecrated the Presence of the Divinity, which was ever present near his father’s bed.
   Another explanation: your פחז, i.e. “your haste,” which was comparable to the ease with which water gushed forth from a spring, caused you to forfeit your advantage, for in your haste to ascend my couch you desecrated it thereby.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word עלה here as meaning “disappeared, withdrew,” as if the Torah had written עלה מעלי, “distanced himself from me.” He quotes David in Psalms 102,25 אל תעלני בחצי ימי, “do not let me die when only half my allotted lifespan is over.”
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi views the paragraph as a blessing (just as the others) each of the sons receiving a blessing compatible with his personality. He includes the wish that just as he is willing to forgive Reuven for his indiscretion, so may the Lord also forgive him this sin. As a result you will be able to display the natural advantages common to a firstborn. The word שאת appears in the context of forgiveness, (Genesis 4,7 with Kayin). Yaakov described Reuven’s inability to control his libido as comparable to water gushing forth. The episode was understood by Yaakov to have been a momentary failure of reason controlling natural urges, resulting in his couch being desecrated. The word עלה belongs to the words פחז כמים instead of being part of חללת יצועי.
   49,5. כלי חמס מכרותיהם, “their occupation with weaponry is stolen.” Onkelos understands the word מכרותיהם as similar to מגורותיהם, “places where they sojourned,” meaning that both Shimon and Levi had (stolen?) weapons from their uncle Esau and they used them to perpetrate acts of violence in the land they sojourned in. 
   Other commentators feel that the expression כלי חמס defines their lifestyle, i.e. wherever they sojourned they used strong-arm methods to get their way and to secure their livelihood.
   Still other commentators understand the word מכרותיהם as derived from מכירה, “sale,” Yaakov saying that these two brothers had figuratively speaking “sold themselves” to the use of violence, similar to Judges 5,18 עם חרף נפשם למות, “a people that mocked death.”
   49,6. בסודם, “to their counsel,” a reference to the deceitful answer they gave to Shechem and Chamor in the matter of Dinah’s rape and how to compensate for this.
   @ובקהלם, “and in their congregation, etc.” a reference to the plot to kill the male inhabitants of Shechem.
   @כי באפם הרגו איש, “for in their anger they killed a man.” A reference to the inhabitants of Shechem.
   @וברצונם עקרו שור, “and it was their wish to uproot an ox.” Onkelos translates the word שור as סנאה, “the hated one.” It is similar to the word שור in Genesis 49,22 where it means “wall.” After they had killed the inhabitants of Shechem they climbed its protective wall.
   An alternate explanation understands שור as an allusion to חמור, Chamor and Schechem, the leaders of the town of Shechem. The ox is considered the largest of the domesticated animals, as we know of the description פרות הבשן, Amos 4,1, where the prophet describes the people oppressing the poor in such terms. It is also possible that the word איש describes all the people killed in Shechem, and that after having killed the males they plundered their belongings, and that Yaakov describes that with the words עקרו שור, “they uprooted all their belongings, their valuables.”
   49,7. אחלקם ביעקב, “I will separate them within Yaakov;” this happened indeed. The ancestral portion of the tribe of Shimon was completely enclosed by the territory of the tribe of Yehudah, whereas the ancestral portion of the tribe of Levi did not exist as such at all, but there were 48 cities allocated to that tribe which had been chosen by G’d to be the spiritual mentors of the people, and whose cities also served as alternate cities of refuge for people who had killed human beings through carelessness.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains that Shimon and Levi who had demonstrated brotherly love by their jealously avenging the honour of their sister Dinah, employing weapons of war in their pursuit of the perpetrators, were now blessed by Yaakov. He said that when they used such weapons, which are normally cursed weapons, in their rightful anger, as a result of venting their anger in a noble cause, they would henceforth be deprived of such emotions that normally are considered as negative virtues. The word ארור, describes a deficiency, lack of virtue. By distributing them among the various tribes, Yaakov hoped to infuse rightful anger when the occasion would arise also in the hearts of the other tribes.
   Some commentators hold that Yaakov even wished to share some of this rightful anger and apparently unbridled behaviour demonstrated by these two sons of his, and they understand the word תבוא in אל תבא נפשי in the same sense as Leviticus 22,7 ובא השמש וטהר, where it means that as soon as the sun sets the priest in question is purified, that he too wishes to be purified by having a share in the righteous anger displayed by Shimon and Levi on the occasion in question. I do not believe that such an explanation is tenable, for if it were, how will these scholars explain the words ובקהלם אל אל תחד כבודי, “may my honour not be considered as at one with theirs?”
   49,8. יהודה אתה יודוך אחיך, “as far as you, Yehudah are concerned, your brothers will have to admit to you, etc.” They will acknowledge you as already foretold in your very name, for they will realize that your hand will vanquish the neck of your enemies thereby saving them.
   49,9. מטרף בני עלית, “you my son, removed yourself from the prey.” The reason the simile of טרף, prey, is used by Yaakov, is that it is appropriate for someone described as אריה, lion. You got up and removed yourself from treating Joseph as “prey.” The word טרף here is to be understood as a transitive verb.
   Some commentators understand the word as an intransitive verb, so that the words מטרף בני עלית would be an allusion to David (re-incarnate of Yehudah) standing by the lion that had become his prey. He had succeeded in killing a lion and a bear, which gave him the courage to engage in battle against Goliath. (compare Samuel I 17,34) David’s victory over Goliath was the foundation of his subsequent greatness.
   @כרע רבץ כאריה, “He will kneel and crouch like a lion.” It is the nature of a lion that after having secured its prey it kneels and crouches, stretching out and not leaving that spot even if danger appears to threaten it. Here too, Yaakov alludes to David, who after securing prey, did not flee the site out of fear of a counter attack (avengers).
   Some commentators see in the words מטרף בני עלית, a description of how the Jewish people after vanquishing their enemies will arise, and assume a posture of fearlessness, unconcern. [as opposed to Yaakov who, after Shimon and Levi killed the male inhabitants of Shechem, worried about retribution by the surrounding Emorites. Ed.]
   49,10. לא יסור שבט מיהודה, “The rod will never leave Yehudah, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra this means that even before having been crowned king officially, already when Israel would be in the desert, the army group featuring the tribe of Yehudah will march at the head of the people.
   @עד כי יבא שילה, “until Shiloh emerges,” a reference to David who will be the first king establishing a dynasty; the מחוקק mentioned in our verse refers to the scribe recording the king’s edicts. The expression מבין רגליו, is a description of how the scribe holds the book in which he writes between his legs, seeing that he sits at the feet of the ruler whose decrees he records for publication and for posterity. The word שילה means “his son,” based on the word ובשליתה יוצאת מבין רגליה ובבניה אשר תלד in Deuteronomy 28,57, which means “the afterbirth which issues from between her legs and the babies she bears.” 
   Nachmanides queries this commentary which is attributed to Ibn Ezra, saying that Yaakov could not have referred to David, claiming that the word שבט, “scepter” cannot be used except in conjunction with a crowned head. He supports this with several quotes from Scripture, stating that until David’s advent to the throne, no one from the tribe of Yehudah had possessed such a symbol of authority. The promise of the scepter of Royalty not departing from Yehudah, is not meant to suggest that it will never depart from Yehudah, i.e. the dynasty of David. It could not mean that as the Torah has stated specifically in Deuteronomy 28.36 that יולך ה' אותך ואת מלכך אשר תקים עליך אל גוי אשר לא ידעת, “that the Lord will lead you and the king you appointed over yourself into exile to a nation whom you have never heard of.” In other words, not only the people but also their (former) king will experience exile in a foreign land. Clearly, when in exile, they will not have a king of their own ruling over them, whether Davidic or otherwise. What Yaakov meant was that as long as there would be kings in an independent state of Israel, such a king would be from the tribe of Yehudah through his illustrious scion David. Jerusalem would not be ruled by a king from some other tribe.
   @עד כי יבא שילה. A reference to David’s son (offspring), i.e. the Messiah.
   @ולו יקהת עמים, “to whom the gathered nations will belong.” The Messiah will rule over all of them. We have here a clear statement that Yaakov “crowned” Yehudah as authority over the other brothers, assuring him of eventual rule over the entire Jewish nation. 
   This raises the question of why Sha-ul who was from the tribe of Binyamin was appointed king over Israel at all? We must remember that in G’d’s and Samuel’s eyes, the very demand for a king at a time when the judge and Seer Samuel led the Jewish people successfully in war and peace, was anathema to G’d. Samuel, i.e. G’d, therefore did not want at that time to appoint a king from the tribe of Yehudah, the very tribe who once it supplied a king would at the same time have founded that king’s dynasty, as predicted by Yaakov here. Even if Sha-ul had not sinned by failing to completely wipe out Amalek, his dynasty would have extended only over his own tribe, not over the whole people of Israel. He might possibly also have ruled over the tribe of Ephrayim. The Kings who ruled over the ten tribes all did not do so with G’d’s approval, i.e. they violated Yaakov’s last will and testament by doing so, and even the Hasmoneans who were otherwise fully traditional and meticulously observant but arrogated the mantle of Royalty to themselves, were punished by their family being completely wiped out, as stated by our sages. Their sin was that they made the scepter depart from the rightful claimants, a scion from the house of David. As a symbol of all this, only kings descended from David had ever been anointed with the oil of anointing described in Exodus 29,7 and elsewhere.
   <i>Rash’bam</i> explains the words לא יסור שבט מיהודה to mean that the position of authority accorded by his brothers to Yehudah will not be usurped until Yerovam and ten tribes secede from the Davidic dynasty at Shechem, (very close to Shiloh, compare Kings I chapter 12) Shiloh and Shechem are names used interchangeably This becomes clear in Joshua 24,1 and the whole paragraph following. Joshua’s referring to the people standing in the presence of the Lord, i.e. near the Tabernacle which was in Shiloh, makes all this very plausible.
   Yet another explanation of the words לא יסור שבט, understands the following words עד כי יבא שילה, as a description of the “sun” represented by Shiloh, the presence of the <i>Shechinah,</i> i.e. the Tabernacle, at that time. Only then would the kingdom (and dynasty) of David the scion of Yehudah truly begin to assert itself as we know from Psalms 78,60 ויטוש משכן שילו, אהל שכן באדם, “He forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent He had set among men.” 
   Yet another approach to our verse understands the words to mean that Yehudah’s authority and preferential status as first among the princes and leader in the battle formations of the Jewish army will last until Joshuah will erect the central Tabernacle at Shiloh [for the first time in a permanent location, Ed.] From then on, all the people will congregate around that Tabernacle in equal measure so that Yehudah will no longer need to be “first” in the sense of providing inspiration for the remainder of the nation.
   @עד כי יבא שילה, the words עד כי are to be understood in a sense similar to Genesis 28,15 כי לא אעזבך עד אשר אם עשיתי את אשר דברתי לך, ”and I will not abandon you until I have carried out all that I have said to you.” The meaning of that line is not that after G’d had fulfilled the promise made to Yaakov in the dream of the ladder He would abandon him, but that after that stage had been reached Yaakov would be able to manage on his own. Similarly, after Shiloh, Yehudah, i.e. its scion David, would proceed to grow in importance and following without overt intervention by G’d.
   @ולו יקהת עמים, “and nations will flock around him.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the word יקהת refers to an assembly of people. Other commentators understand the word as referring to people subordinating themselves. Still another view understands the word as describing people disciplining themselves and willingly accepting commands. Yaakov predicts that other nations will accept the rule of Yehudah upon themselves without challenging any of it.
   49,11. אסרי לגפן עירה, “he will tie his ass to a vine.” Seeing that grapes will be in such abundant supply he will not worry that by tying his ass to a vine the ass would be tempted to eat the grapes.
   @סוסה, “his garment.” The letter כ at the beginning of this word has been omitted. Alternatively, the word is derived from מסוה, the cloth Moses wrapped around his forehead so as not to frighten the people by the rays of light his face emitted upon his return from the mountain. (Exodus 34,33)
   49,12. הכלילי עינים מיין, “red-eyed from wine;” due to the large quantities of wine he consumes his eyes will reflect the redness of that wine. Similarly, the amounts of milk consumed will be reflected in the whiteness of his teeth.
   Other commentators understand the word שנים as referring to the crags of a rock, suggesting that milk will be flowing from between crags in the rocks.
   Still other commentators interpret the word חכלילי as a comparative mode, meaning that the eyes will be even redder than wine, and the teeth even whiter than milk.
   Nachmanides says that the meaning is exactly the reverse, i.e. citing Ezekiel 23,40 כחלת עיניך, “you daubed your eyes.” The letter ל was repeated here, something not unusual. The message Yaakov conveys is that whereas normally women daub their eyes with a bluish coloured cosmetic, Yehudah will employ reddish looking cosmetic for that purpose. Similarly, whereas others whiten their teeth by applying cosmetics, Yehudah will use milk instead. The entire verse is a euphemism for the abundance of both wine and milk that Yehudah will experience in his territory. The wine will drip from his eyes like tears, so that envious youngsters will have to use cosmetics constantly in order to compete.
   49,13. זבולון, Zevulun is the only one of Yaakov’s sons not mentioned in order of his seniority vis-à-vis his brothers. His name was mentioned ahead of its proper place in order for the name of his brother Yissachar to appear in between his name and that of Dan. The reason is that his ancestral heritage was situated between that of Dan and Yissachar. 
   @והוא לחוף אניות, “and he will border seas.” There are many locations in the sea itself which do not qualify as anyone’s heritage.
   49,14. רובץ בין המשפתים, “crouching between boundaries.” Some commentators equate the word משפתים with “loads,” i.e. משואות, that the ass crouches with loads that it is carrying on either side of it. The ass is not allowed the luxury to lie down and rest, but has to snatch brief moments during which to renew its strength while crouching. The intensity with which the members of the tribe studied Torah was compared by Yaakov to this simile.
   49,15. ויט שכמו לסבול, “so he inclined its shoulder to bear the burden.” The burden referred to is the task of teaching the Israelites the Torah. At the same time for the Israelites on their part, the tribe of Yissachar became a tax burden, מס עובד, as they had to look after these Torah teachers financially while coming to Yissachar’s territory to study Torah.
   Some commentators understand the words ויהי למס עובד as meaning that these Torah teachers were relieved of the duty of actively doing army duty during wars, paying a tax instead, so as not to appear as freeloaders. Alternatively, it describes a tendency by these members of Yissachar of paying off potential invaders rather than to engage in physical confrontation with them.
   49,16. דן ידין עמו, “Dan will avenge his people.” The word ידין is understood here as “taking up the quarrel on someone’s behalf.” 
   @כאחד, “similar to the “one,” i.e. the tribe of Yehudah who normally played the role of saviour of his people. The meaning could also be that Shimshon, from the tribe of Dan, would be the only judge who would rule over the entire people, something that otherwise would be the prerogative of the tribe of Yehudah. Yaakov likened Shimshon the Danite to a snake, as just like a snake he acted on his own, without the support of an army. He acted aggressively just as certain types of snakes who attack unsuspecting travelers without warning. 
   49,17. ויפול רוכבו אחור, “and its rider falls backwards.” When the snake bites the heel of the horse, it rears up with its head , throwing off its rider in the process.
   49,18. לישועתך קויתי ה', “I hope for Your salvation, <i>Hashem.”</i> The attacker, having bitten the victim’s heel, is afraid of the sword of the horse’s rider, and therefore implores G’d to save him from retribution.
   Another explanation of why Yaakov added this line at this point; is that he foresaw that Shimshon would eventually be at the mercy of the Philistines. He prayed on his behalf while blessing his tribe Dan.
   Another reason for the insertion of this line at this point could be that although the prophet Samuel in the Book of Samuel describes G’d as being supportive of the respective judges in their time, Yaakov foresaw that history would prove that Shimshon would be the exception. He therefore prayed that he would be proven wrong, and that G’d would remain at his side. The fact is that Shimshon would be the last of a string of judges, Samuel, his successor as the leader of the people fulfilling primarily a role as the “Seer.” In fact, before the death of Samuel the Jewish nation would for the first time be ruled by a King (Sha-ul), someone specifically crowned for the position and meant to be the founder of a dynasty, a ruler by merit of his ancestry.
   Some commentators feel that when Yaakov foresaw his descendant Dan as embodying the character of a serpent, he became so frightened by this image that he spontaneously protested by crying out: “may the Lord help me!” 
   <i>Rash’bam</i> explains the exclamation as pertaining not just to Shimshon but to the entire tribe of Dan, whose task in the desert was to be the rearguard of the Israelites’ army, the tribe most exposed to attack from the rear. He, <i>Rash’bam,</i> does not like to apply this outcry to Shimshon, as Yaakov did not prophesy his eventual defeat and capture.[a very nice interpretation, but not found in our editions of the <i>Rash’bam.</i> Ed.]
   49,19. גד גדוד יגודנו, “Gad will experience having to face troops from time to time;” seeing that the territory of this tribe will be on the east bank of the river Jordan, and hence more exposed to hostile forces, military exercises will be a common experience in this tribe’s history.
   @והוא יגד עקב, “and he will troop back in their tracks.” Another way of saying that the Gadites will cut down their enemies while the latter are retreating. The Talmud uses this expression for cutting down trees. Alternately, Yaakov referred to the military courage of the members of this tribe who would wage battle both at the head of the army as well as at its rear. 
   49,20. מאשר שמנה לחמו, “the food emanating from the territory of Asher will be rich in fats.” The letter מ at the beginning of the word מאשר is an addition, (not absolutely necessary) Alternately, it was used to make plain that the territory of Asher is meant, and not the people of the tribe. Yet another possibility is that this letter מ refers back to the blessing of Gad, as if to say that seeing that Gad will be preoccupied fighting wars and would therefore not have sufficient time to plant his crops and to harvest them, his brother tribe Asher would compensate him and provide him with royal delicacies.
   49,21. נפתלי אילה שלוחה, “Naftali’s territory will be as productive as a free-running doe. It was a custom among kings to send one another does as gifts, seeing that the does raised in the Northern kingdom would be looked after in the Royal Palace of the Kings in the south who would tie messages to their horns after which they would return to their habitat. [they were used as fast mail couriers. Ed.] The meaning of the words אמרי שפר, is that Yaakov wishes that they be bearers of good tidings. Yaakov hints that there would be ample reason to send good tidings from the territory of Naftali.
   49,22. בן פורת יוסף, “Joseph is a charming son;” all other sons of Yaakov are named before any description of their virtues or otherwise is mentioned. Here we find at least one of Joseph’s attributes preceding the mention of his name. The reason why Joseph was not first mentioned by name was that he was as if still a son living at home, so that he did not need any introduction.
   @בן פורת, <i>Rash’bam</i> comments that we find a similar construction to that in our verse in Psalms 93,3 נשאו נהרות ה' נשאו נהרות קולם , the rivers raise their voice, etc,” and only afterwards are we told in response to what these rivers raised their voice, i.e. in response to כי הנה אוביך ה', etc, “here G’d’s enemies are described as perishing.” A similar construction is found in Moses’ song after the splitting of the sea of reeds, i.e. ימינך ה' בכח ימינך ה' תרעץ אויב, instead of ה' ימינך תרעץ אויב, “Lord You smash the enemy with Your right hand.” (Exodus 15,6) The expression בן פורת parallels the expression in Ezekiel 19,10 פוריה וענפה, where it describes being fruitful.
   Some commentators view the word פורת as related to פארות as in ותעש פארות, in Ezekiel 17,6 where it means “it brought forth branches.” (Additional verses are quoted to show that this is not so far-fetched).
   @עלי עין, “when it is planted near a spring of water.”
   @בנות צעדה עלי שור, “girls stepped atop the wall.” Here Yaakov compares the leaves sprouting forth from the afore-mentioned branches to the daughters who are offspring of mature women, describing them as the rich fruit of these branches, all having deep roots from which to draw nourishment. They require walls to support them and to ensure them against being trampled and broken, seeing they are so heavy with fruit; hence the mention of עלי שור, “along the wall.” 
   Nachmanides writes that Yaakov mentioned daughters, thereby alluding indirectly to the two tribes Joseph would become. He could not do so directly, seeing that there could not be more than twelve tribes altogether, and he had already blessed Levi. Moses, when he blessed the Israelites at the end of his life, did something similar when instead בנות he employed the simile of שור, ox, and the simile of קרנים, horns, horns, as being projections emanating from the same body, but suggesting through this smile that each is a body in its own right. Seeing that Moses did not extend a blessing to the tribe of Shimon at all, he could name Ephrayim and Menashe separately, without upsetting the total number of twelve tribes. He therefore referred to the “tens of thousands of Ephrayim, and the thousands of Menashe,” describing how fruitful Joseph would become.
   49,23. וימררוהו ורובו, “they made life bitter for him and became his adversaries.” Compare Job 16,13 יסבו עליו רביו, “his adversaries ganged up on him with their arrows.” Yaakov employs the brothers’ conduct versus Joseph as similar to that described in the verse we quoted from Job, so that the simile of בעלי חצים, and ותשב באיתן קשתו, that Joseph when he had the opportunity to exact retribution from his brothers when he had many arrows at his disposal, refrained from doing so by keeping his arrows safely tucked in his quiver and his bow inactive, is most appropriate. 
   49,24. ותשב באיתן קשתו, Joseph’s ability to restrain his natural desire to punish his brothers was due to his attitude towards the One Who had also been the G’d of his father, Who had guided matters in a manner that eventually transformed Joseph to become the shepherd of Israel, i.e. making him the essence of Israel, the true תולדה, “offspring” of his father.
   Some commentators understand the expression רועה אבן ישראל, as Yaakov describing his reaction when being reunited with Joseph. Whereas his (Israel’s) heart had already been dead like stone, he had been almost literally resurrected and began to live after being reunited with his beloved son Joseph. This was also the meaning of the words ותחי רוח יעקב אביהם, “their father Yaakov’s spirit was resurrected.” (45,26.)
   49,25. מאל אביך, “From your father Almighty, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the letter מ at the beginning of this verse refers forward to the words ואת שדי in our verse. Yaakov explains that Joseph’s strength of character was assisted by these two attributes of G’d. It is the G’d of his father Who will truly bless him. 
   49,26. ולקדקוד נזיר אחיו, “on the head of the one who was separate from his brothers.” The word נזיר here may be understood in the sense of נזר, “crown” i.e. the most superior, of his brothers. Another way of looking at this expression is that seeing that the head is the highest, most valuable of all our organs, by blessing the head one automatically blesses the entire body, i.e. all twelve tribes.
   49,27. בנימין זאב יטרף, “Binyamin is a wolf garnering prey.” The kingdom of Sha-ul, the first king of Israel, a descendant of Binyamin, has been compared to that of a wolf. One of the characteristics of a wolf is that it flees from the place where it killed its prey, and does not wait around like a lion. King Sha-ul’s kingdom endured for no more than two and a half years, whereas his successor’s David’s kingdom, endured for 40 years. Yaakov therefore likens his domain to that of a lion, which, after killing its prey does not flee in fear of pursuit.
   49,28. וזאת אשר דבר להם אבותם, “and this is what their father told them.” This is how he concluded his blessings with the word זאת. Moses in his turn, commenced his blessings with the word זאת, as we know from Deuteronomy 33,1.
   49,29. ויצו אותם, “He commanded them;” Ibn Ezra understands this command as being the order to follow Joseph in every respect. Nachmanides writes that there had been no need for Yaakov to command his other sons to be obedient to Joseph, but the “command” Yaakov issued to the brothers was to bury him in the cave of Machpelah, as he had commanded Joseph already on a previous occasion. He remained afraid that perhaps Pharaoh would not give Joseph permission to personally leave the country. Yaakov was proven correct, seeing that Pharaoh consented to Joseph leaving only in order to enable him to honour the oath to his father.
   49,30. במערה וגו'...אשר קנה אברהם, “in the cave of Machpelah which Avraham had acquired, etc.” According to Nachmanides the reason why Yaakov recalled the details of the cave and who had been buried inside it, was to add distinction to that site in order to give his sons additional incentive to bury their father in that cave also. He added the words: “which Avraham had acquired as an inalienable ancestral plot,” in order to make them aware that Avraham had already designated this cave as an ancestral burial plot, so that they would have a legal basis for disputing anyone among the Hittites who might challenge their right to bury Yaakov there. The reason why the Torah repeats this once more in 50,13, is to indicate that with the burial of Yaakov in that cave Avraham’s intention at the time he purchased that cave had been carried out completely. He had purchased the cave for three pairs of human beings to be buried inside it, and not more. This is the reason that when the time came, Joseph did not ask the brothers to bury him there also.
   49,31. שמה קברו את יצחק, “this was where they had buried Yitzchok.” The reason why Yaakov phrased it thus, instead of saying: “there I buried Yitzchok,” is that at the time he had to share that duty (honour) with his brother Esau. He had no wish to even mention Esau at this time. Furthermore, he wanted to avoid the fact that his mother Rivkah had also been buried there, but that he had not taken part in her burial at the time.
   @ושמה קברתי את לאה, ”and I also buried Leah there.” Although, no doubt, his sons knew this, he used mention of the fact to establish his right to be buried there as her husband, in the event that anyone would dispute this. There was the chance that Esau, being the firstborn, might claim the right to be buried there with father and grandfather. Seeing that he had not disputed Leah’s right to be buried there, he should not dispute Yaakov’s right either. The reason why he considered it necessary to add (compare 50,5) the words אשר כריתי לי, “which I dug out for myself,” was to reinforce his claim to be buried there. The reason that Joseph took a whole army with him in order to fulfill his oath and to bury his father in the location he had chosen, was precisely because he anticipated that the wicked Esau might use the occasion to dispute Yaakov’s right to burial there. According to our tradition, Esau and his clan did indeed try and prevent Yaakov being buried there. In fact, the Torah does allude to this obliquely when writing in 50,14 that Joseph and his brothers and all those who had participated in this burial returned to Egypt. This was recorded only in order to inform us that during the armed dispute which preceded Yaakov’s burial, his side did not suffer any casualties. Yaakov’s merit was great enough to protect all those participating in his burial.
   49,33. ויגוע ויאסף, “he passed away painlessly and was gathered to join his people.” Our sages use this phraseology to comment that “Yaakov did not die,” seeing that the Torah avoided the word וימת, “he died,” in spite of the fact that he himself had announced that he was going “to die.” (compare 48,21). Possibly, he himself did not know that he would not die in the accepted meaning of the word, or he did not want to make a statement which sounded arrogant, bombastic. We also have the report of the Torah in 50,15 ויראו אחי יוסף כי מת אביהם, “Joseph’s brothers saw that their father had died.” This is no contradiction. As far as the brothers were concerned their father had ”died.” Or, they too, had remained ignorant of what has been revealed to us by our tradition and the allusion in the text, something the brothers did not know as the Torah had not been written and revealed as yet.
   50,4. דברו נא באזני פרעה, “please tell Pharaoh the following:” the reason why Joseph did not tell this to Pharaoh personally, was that it was forbidden to appear in the King’s palace dressed in mourner’s garb.
   50,10 ויעש לאביו אבל שבעת ימים, “he observed a seven days’ mourning period for his father.” According to Ibn Ezra this took effect as soon as they had buried Yaakov in Machpelah, in accordance with the tradition handed down by our sages.
   Some commentators believe that Joseph first returned to Egypt from the threshing ground of Atad, for when all the kings of the region had assembled there and had expressed fear that the Egyptians would use their presence as a pretext to invade and annex their lands, the elders of Egypt reassured them explaining that Joseph would return to Egypt immediately after the burial. (compare in part <i>Sotah</i> 13).
   50,12. ויעשו בניו לו כן כאשר צום, ”his sons did for him exactly in accordance with his instructions.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the emphasis in our verse as being the word בניו “his sons,” i.e. that his grandsons were not to be pallbearers. Some of these grandsons had been mothered by Canaanite women, and Yaakov did not want to be carried by them.
   If so, it seems hard to understand that Yaakov, while alive and much younger, had not forbidden his sons to marry such women, seeing that Avraham and Yitzchok had both been very concerned about this. Not only this, but <i>Rashi</i> himself on Genesis 38,2 where Yehudah’s marriage to the daughter of a “Canaanite” man by the name of Shua is reported, goes out of his way to explain that the word “Canaanite” in that verse is not an ethnic description but means: “a trader.”
   It is possible that among Yaakov’s grandchildren there were at least some who had been born to Canaanite mothers, such as “Sha-ul son of the Canaanite” in Genesis 46,10. (adoptee of Shimon?) As to <i>Rashi</i> explaining that Ephrayim and Menashe acted as pallbearers in lieu of Levi and Joseph, although they too were grandsons of Yaakov, this is no problem, Yaakov having explicitly described both Ephrayim and Menashe as being just like Reuven and Shimon (his sons) in every respect. (Genesis 48,5)
   50,15. לו ישטמנו, “supposing Joseph were to turn hostile against us? They hoped that Joseph’s hostility against them would be restricted to his heart and would not manifest itself openly. [this interpretation assumes that the word לו is a wishful expression as it is elsewhere. Ed.]
   50,17. ויבך יוסף בדברם אליו, “Joseph cried when they spoke to him.” He cried when he realized that they suspected him of harboring hostile thoughts against them. This verse is proof that Joseph had never informed Yaakov that the brothers had sold him, for if Yaakov had been aware of it, he would have ordered Joseph not to hold a grudge against the brothers on that account and to make up with them
   According to the <i>Midrash</i>, after Joseph’s original meeting with his father in Egypt, Joseph made a point of never again to meet his father without someone else being present so that his brothers would not have reason to suspect him of his telling his father that they had sold him.
   50,19. התחת אלוקים, “if in lieu of G’d?” Some commentators understand Joseph as remonstrating with his brothers who had prostrated themselves before him as if he were G’d, something most inappropriate, especially when they said: “here we are ready to be your slaves.” [Jews are G’d’ servants, not men’s. Ed.]
   50,24. ויאמר יוסף אל אחיו הנה אנכי מת, “Joseph said to his brothers: ‘here I am about to die;’” this indicates that they all survived him.
   50,25. וישבע יוסף את בני ישראל, “Joseph adjured the Children of Israel.” When he realized that his brothers were advanced in age, he included also their offspring in this oath as none of his surviving brothers might be alive when the Israelites would leave Egypt. Everyone knew of the exile that awaited them in Egypt and that its conditions would be very harsh. The reason that he did not make them swear to transfer his remains to the Land of Canaan immediately after his death, may well have been that he knew that it was beyond their political power to have such an illustrious ruler as Joseph buried in a foreign country.
   @פקוד יפקוד אתכם אלוקים, “when G’d will eventually recall you, etc.” Joseph reminds his brothers that he is merely a mortal human being, whereas G’d, Who is eternal, will in due course remember them and liberate them from their exile. The reason why he chose the expression פקד as characterizing this redemption may be because this expression was used by the Torah when soldiers returned from battle without having incurred any casualties. (Numbers 31,49) The word also lends itself to allusions of a numerical nature, i.e. the original number of years of slavery i.e. 400 would be reduced by the numerical value of the word פקוד i.e. 190, so that in actual fact the stay of the Israelites in Egypt would amount to only 210 years after Yaakov’s arrival there, the number being characterized by the numerical value of the word רדו, the word used by Yaakov when he instructed his sons to go down to Egypt to buy food in the first place. (compare Genesis 42,2)
   50,26. ויישם בארון, “he was placed in a coffin.” Ibn Ezra draws attention to the vowel <i>kametz</i> under the letter ב which suggests that this coffin was a known entity, drawing the conclusion that Joseph, personally, had prepared his coffin prior to his death.
   
   
   
   388

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
