
   Parshat Shemot
   
     1. ואלה שמות בני ישראל, “and these were the names of the Children of Israel, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the reason why the Torah decided to repeat the names of the sons of Yaakov here once more is because at the end of the last portion of the Book of <i>Bereshit</i> the Torah described how Joseph lived to see grandchildren and great grandchildren and how they multiplied. The Torah now wants us to know that the other sons of Yaakov experienced a similar blessing after arriving in Egypt.
   Nachmanides explains that the mention of the names here is designed to impress upon the reader that the exile in Egypt did not begin with the suppression of the Jews by the new Pharaoh, but that it commenced with Yaakov’ and his  family’s descent to Egypt some 93 years earlier. The report helps to establish the fact that the Book of Exodus is a direct continuation of the Book of Genesis. The Torah abbreviates here, mentioning only “the sons of Yaakov, his family totaling 70 souls,” instead of listing their names again as in chapter 46 of the Book of Genesis.
   
   1,6. וימת יוסף וכל הדור ההוא, “Joseph and his whole generation died.” Ibn Ezra feels that the line וכל הדור ההוא, “and that whole generation,” refers to what follows, i.e. the connection with the following verse that introduces a new ruler in Egypt.
   
   1,7. ובני ישראל פרו, “and the Children of Israel were fruitful;” in spite of the fact that the Egyptians oppressed them in order to limit their natural increase. Not only did they keep increasing in numbers, but they increased  disproportionately, as do vermin.
   
   וירבו, “they multiplied,” they did not die in the manner other people die, i.e. leaving replacements for themselves, but they left behind far more than that.
   
   ויעצמו, “they became powerful;” they were all physically exceptionally strong specimens, in spite of the fact that most were born as twins.
   
   במאד מאד, “very greatly indeed.” They had reached their full physical potential.
   
   1,8. ויקם מלך חדש, “a new king arose.” According to Ibn Ezra the way the Torah introduces the new king is proof that he did not belong to the dynasty that had ruled Egypt up to that point. A similar phrase is used in Samuel I 22,8 הקים בני את עבדי עלי, “my own son has set my servant in ambush against me.”
     
   1,10. הבה נתחכמה לו, “come on let us outsmart it!”          Neither Pharaoh nor his servants wanted to do violence to the Israelites, as it would have been a major act of betrayal to commit genocide against an innocent nation that had settled in Egypt at the request of the previous king. He was afraid that even if he were to give an order to destroy these people his subjects would not obey that order. Moreover, the descendants of Ephrayim and Menashe possessed considerable influence in the highest governmental circles, and the very number of the Israelites would have made open warfare against them a highly dangerous undertaking. The Israelites would surely resist any attack upon them by violent means.
   Therefore, he imposed a form of taxation upon that nation, a common practice in those days. When this did not have the desired effect, he resorted to instructing the midwives who assisted the Jewish women at birth, to kill the male babies before the mothers had held them in their arms. This was done clandestinely, so that even the mothers were unaware that they had given birth to a male baby. When this proved impossible to carry out, he issued the decree to drown all male babies. Instead of the government killing the babies, the population was encouraged to drown Jewish babies when found, and if the father would protest he would be invited to prove his allegation in court by producing witnesses to that murder. He would be assured that if the murderer would be found he would be duly punished for what he had done. As the restrictions the king had imposed upon himself were gradually loosened, many of his people would enter Jewish homes at night, misrepresenting themselves, searching for recently born boy babies. They would snatch these babies. This is why the Torah reports that Yocheved, after Moses was three months old, no longer risked hiding him at home. This situation was in effect for a relatively short period, as 3 years earlier, when Aaron had been born, this decree had not yet been in force. It appears to have been cancelled shortly after Moses’ birth, perhaps due to the intervention of the daughter of Pharaoh who had been audacious enough to save Moses’ life. It is also possible that the decree had been inspired by the astrologers who had predicted the birth of a saviour of the Jewish people on a certain day or in a certain month, as mentioned by our sages. This may also have been at the root of the overseers saying to Moses (and Aaron) 80 years later (Exodus 5,21) הבאשתם את ריחנו, “you have made our very scent abhorrent in the eyes of Pharaoh, etc.” They meant that until these “so called saviours” had given the Egyptians an excuse to deal harshly with the Jewish people, they had at least had to use subterfuge when applying discriminatory legislation. Now they felt entitled to repress the Jews with all their might openly.
   
   ועלה מן הארץ, “and go up from the land.” <i>Rashi</i> views this simile as similar to people who are superstitious enough not to mention possible disaster in the same breath as themselves, so what the Egyptians were really afraid of was not the emigration of the Jews, but their own expulsion from Egypt by the Israelites. It is also possible to explain these words at face value, i.e. that they were afraid that the Israelites would emigrate to the land of Canaan, taking with them all the chattels of the Egyptians.
   
   1,11. שרי מסים, “taskmasters;” Jewish officials who would select men from among their people whom they considered as fit to perform hard physical labour at the command of the King. In turn, Pharaoh appointed officials of his own to supervise the activities of these Jewish taskmasters. The taskmasters would designate what precisely these servants were to do and where, in this case that they were to build fortified cities by means of laying the bricks for the buildings involved. When the Egyptian overseers became aware that this stratagem did not slow down the birth rate of the Israelites, they decreed that Egyptians generally were allowed to impose all kinds of menial labour on Israelites whom they chose for that purpose. This is why the Torah speaks of the Egyptians generally enslaving the Israelites, i.e.ויעבידו מצרים את בני ישראל בפרך, “the Egyptians (man in the street) enslaved the Israelites imposing harsh conditions.” They added a new element to the hardship by not only making the Israelites build with bricks supplied by them, but by expecting them to also make the bricks themselves. An additional hardship imposed was that they were made to perform labour in the fields, something the Israelites had not been trained to do. This was not constructive work such as sowing and planting, but digging canals, reservoirs, etc. The Torah emphasizes that the conditions under which all these tasks were performed were quite intolerable, and the food supplied by the king for these labourers was minimal and unappetizing. We can understand how ungrateful the Israelites who had been redeemed from such conditions must have been when they longingly looked back on that period in Numbers 11,5 implying that the only redeeming feature of the fish that Pharaoh had supplied had been that they did not have to catch the fish or pay for them. Similarly, gourds, melons, garlic and other low ranking produce they had been able to help themselves to as their staple diet in the fields in which they had been made to work.
   Our sages view the word לפרעה, “for Pharaoh,” in our verse as meaning that they consoled themselves by being slaves of Pharaoh, instead of slaves of Pharaoh’s slaves. If so, we must understand the line ויעבידו מצרים את בני ישראל as referring back to the phrase וישימו עליו שרי מסים, “they imposed taskmasters upon them.”
   
   1,12. וכאשר יענו אותו כן ירבה, “they would continue to multiply in direct ratio to the degree of greater hardships imposed upon them.” This means that they maintained their birthrate at the same level as when they had been free men.
   
   וכן יפרוץ, “and they would proliferate ever more.” The term is borrowed from פורץ גדר, “making a breach in a fence,” (both literally and figuratively speaking, in this case making the efforts of the Egyptians to contain their birthrate ineffective). According to the commentators specializing in allegorical approaches, מדרש, the more the Egyptians tried to control the Jewish birthrate the more G’d blessed them by making them ever more fruitful.” This was most noticeable in the much smaller birthrate of the tribe of Levite, a tribe that remained exempt from performing slave labour. When the people were counted at the beginning of the Book of Numbers, the males of the tribe of Levi, even though they were counted already from one month up and not from twenty years up as the rest of the people, amounted to approximately 30-50% of the other tribes.
   
   1,13. ויעש להם בתים, He made houses for them.” This means that G’d made these midwives especially fruitful and people would refer to these offspring as “the children of Shifrah and Puah.” [instead of their fathers being mentioned as the progenitors. Ed.] The expression בתים, i.e. plural of בית is used in lieu of the word בנים, children, as for instance in Samuel II 7,11 בית יעשה לך ה' “for He will establish a dynasty for you.”
   Other commentators understand this as relating to the line ויהי כאשר יראו המילדות את האלוקים ויעש להם בתים, “when, due to the midwives being in awe of G’d, and Pharaoh’s decree therefore becoming futile, Pharaoh placed pregnant Jewish women in houses surrounded by Egyptians so that their neighbours would know when they would be likely to give birth.” These women were forbidden to give birth anywhere else but in these houses. Still a third way of interpreting this verse is that the “houses” were jails in which the midwives would henceforth be kept. The word בית does appear in this sense in Genesis 40,14 Joseph saying to the chief of the cupbearers והוצאתני מן הבית הזה, “so that you will bring me out of this jail  (the jail being called a house).”
   
   2,1. וילך איש מבית לוי, “A distinguished man from the house of Levi went, etc.” our sages comment that this means that Amram followed the advice of his daughter. (He had divorced his wife so as not to condemn any new born children to death. Thereupon his daughter accused him of being worse than Pharaoh who only murdered the male babies. Thereupon, Amram reconsidered and remarried his wife).
   Ibn Ezra comments that the Israelites at that time lived in many different cities of Egypt, and that the wife Amram married lived in another city, so that he had to go there to ask her to marry him.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah tells us of the apparently trivial fact that Amram went to get a wife, is only to show us that Amram publicly demonstrated that he was unconcerned about Pharaoh’s decree, and that he married precisely in order to sire children. The word וילך is used by the Torah again and again when it introduces any act performed by someone which demonstrates special initiative by that person. Examples are found in Genesis 30,14 and 35,22 where the Torah describes initiative displayed by Reuven. Similar use of the word וילך occurs in Genesis 22,13, 27,14. Samuel II 21,12, Kings II 5,5, and Hoseah 3,1. The Torah did not bother to mention Amram’s name at this point, nor that of Yocheved, as the important thing was only to report whose offspring they were. The Torah was anxious at this stage to reveal the birth of the Israelites’ saviour.
   
   ויקח את בת לוי, “he married Levi’s daughter.” According to our sages this was a second marriage for both, but to the same spouses.
   According to the plain text we speak about the first marriage of this couple. However, seeing that the Torah has never felt constricted to report events in their historical sequence, we are in order to understand this wedding as having occurred prior to Pharaoh’s decrees. During those years Yocheved bore Moses and Miriam for Amram. Their births were not reported as this was nothing out of the ordinary. 
   <i>Rashi</i> claims that Yocheved had miraculously regained her youth at the time, basing himself on the fact that the Torah did not write that Amram married “Yocheved, a daughter of Levi.” [which would not necessarily have meant that Yocheved was a real daughter, but a descendant, Ed.] Instead, the Torah wrote that he married a daughter of Levi, which means that the woman in question was 130 years old at least when she gave birth to Moses. 
   
   2,2. ותרא אותו כי טוב הוא, “she realized that he was ‘good.’” <i>Rashi</i> says that although this baby was born several months prematurely, after a pregnancy of 6 months and a day, all his limbs were perfectly formed already at birth. Hence she saw that he was “good.”
   Some commentators hold that the word טוב here means something similar to Jeremiah 44,17 ונשבע לחם ונהיה טובים, “when we will at our fill of bread we will be טובים, “good.” [in good shape. Ed.]
   
   2,3. ולא יכלה עוד הצפינו, “and she could no longer hide him.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the Egyptians who had been aware of Yocheved’s pregnancy had miscalculated, expecting her to give birth after 9 months. This is based on <i>Sotah</i> which claims that she had been pregnant with him already for 3 months before Amram remarried her. The Egyptians assumed that her pregnancy did not predate her remarriage, so that she could not have been due to give birth to a live baby at the time she did. There is therefore no need to postulate that Moses was born after a mere six months’ pregnancy.  Had he been born after a six month pregnancy, under these circumstances, Yocheved should have been able to hide him for 6 months, not merely three, unless we assume that the Egyptians were keeping a close check after Yocheved had been remarried for six months. Under such circumstances, according to the view that Moses was indeed born 3 months premature, this occurred three months after her remarriage.
   
   2,5. ותרד בת פרעה לרחוץ על היאור, ”Pharaoh’s daughter descended to the banks of the river to bathe.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that our verse is truncated and that its correct meaning is as if the Torah had written: “ותרד בת פרעה על היאור לרחוץ בו.” [as written it could be understood as “Pharaoh’s daughter descended to bathe above the river.” Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible to understand the verse to mean that there were steps leading down to the banks of the river and that these steps led directly to the river from the palace of the king, the lowest step being covered by the water in the river. When reaching that lowest step, Pharaoh’s daughter saw the basket in which Moses had been placed from a distance and she ordered one of her attendants to bring it to her. Alternately, the words לרחוץ על היאור is another way of writing לרחוץ ביאור, “to bathe in the river.”
   
   2,7. והנה נער בוכה. “and here there was a crying lad.”  <i>Rashi</i> understands the phrase as meaning that the voice of this baby was as strong as that of a lad, i.e. a growing youngster.”
   According to Nachmanides, <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation has already been discounted, for if it were correct we would have to view Moses as being <i>halachically</i> blemished, something that according to our tradition disqualifies a person from becoming a prophet, or performing priestly duties.
   Ibn Ezra writes that Moses’ limbs were exceptionally large for a baby of his age, as large as those of a growing lad. This would not be a blemish, but, on the contrary, would be a compliment to Moses and might account for the fact that Pharaoh’s daughter took pity on that child.
   I believe that the correct interpretation of our phrase is that the manner in which Moses cried was that of an older child, something not as irritating as a baby’s howls, and that this was what prompted Pharaoh’s daughter to have pity on him.
   
   According to the <i>Midrash</i> Moses did not display symptoms of being much older, but the angel Gavriel struck him so that he broke out weeping on account of his pain, which in turn attracted the attention of the daughter of Pharaoh and aroused feelings of pity within her.
   I do not believe that there is any need for such esoteric explanations. Children are described as נער already at birth, compare Judges 13,8 מה נעשה לנער אשר יולד, “what are we supposed to do to the child that is going to be born?” on the other hand, growing lads are referred to by the Torah as ילד, such as when Avraham placed the 17 year old Ishmael on Hagar’s shoulder in Genesis 21,14, so that there is nothing strange in the Torah again applying this adjective in our verse.
   
   ותאמר מילדי העברים זה, “She said: “this is one of the Hebrew boy babies.” According to the plain text she had every reason for this assumption, for why would an Egyptian place her baby in such a place at such a time? Our sages, however, say that she arrived at that conclusion when observing that Moses had been circumcised.
   
   2,10. ותקרא שמו משה, “she named him Moses.” Rabbi Joseph Kimchi writes that according to the rules of grammar she should have called him משוי, if she wanted to name him in commemoration of his having been pulled from the water. Similar constructions such as קנוי from the root קנה, “to acquire,” describe something that has been acquired. However, Pharaoh’s daughter was not sufficiently familiar with the finer points of grammar in the (Hebrew?) language and did not know how to distinguish between a verb in the active mode and the same word when used as a past participle. The name she gave Moses was inspired by Divine input as is appropriate seeing that in due course this child would pull the Children of Israel out of their exile, i.e. מושה.
   
   2,11. ויגדל משה ויצא אל אחיו, “when Moses grew up he went out to his brethren, etc.” In verse 10 when the wet nurse brought Moses back to his foster mother the daughter of Pharaoh, he is described as ויגדל הילד, the child grew up. Now, in the verse following, the adjective “the child,” has been omitted. He was now an adult and had been told that he was actually Jewish.
   
   מכה איש עברי מאחיו, “striking down a Hebrew man, one of his brethren.” Ibn Ezra queries the need for the additional word מאחיו in our verse, something we knew seeing that the man had been described as being a Hebrew. He therefore concludes that this word means that the individual in question belonged to the family of Moses. [seeing that his family members were all Levites and exempt from the forced labour, this appears tenuous. Ed.]
   
   2,14. מי שמך לאיש, “who has appointed you as a dignitary?” He implied that Moses was far too young to have been given any position authorizing him to act on his own. He added the word ושר, in order to say that even assuming that you were old enough and mature enough, no one has appointed you as an authority, שר, over us to unilaterally execute anyone. He added the word שופט, judge, to emphasise that even if you had the legal status of being a judge, you would not have authority over us. (Israelites)
   
   הלהרגני אתה אומר?, “are you going to say something which will kill me?” From this phrase we learn that Moses had killed the Egyptian by cursing him in the name of the ineffable G’d. This does not contradict what the Torah wrote, i.e. ויך את המצרי, “he struck (dead) the Egyptian,” (verse 12) The Bible uses the verb הכה to describe words, such as in Isaiah 11,4 והכה ארץ בשבט פיו, “and he will smite a land with the rod of his mouth.” (the Messiah when he comes.)
   Although, according to <i>Sanhedrin 105,</i> what Solomon means in Proverbs 17,26 when he says גם ענוש לצדיק לא טוב, is that the righteous should never place themselves in a position of causing or administering punishment, even when the victim would be a confirmed heretic, this situation did not meet the criteria discussed in the Talmud. The victim of Moses was guilty of raping a married woman, and clearly deserving the death penalty, as our sages derive from the words ויפן כה וכה, that Moses saw not only what this Egyptian had done in the field, but what he had done prior to this in the house of the Jew whom he had killed.
   Nachmanides questions this whole line of exegesis, writing that if Moses had used the holy name of G’d to kill the Egyptian, who had told the quarrelling Jew about this? He reasons that possibly Moses had placed his hand on the Egyptian prior to cursing him, so that the words ויך את המצרי, “he struck the Egyptians,” may be understood literally without contradicting the opinion that his death was caused by G’d honouring Moses’ curse. When the Egyptian suddenly fell dead as his feet, Moses became afraid and covered him with sand, The wicked Jew who had observed all this realized that either G’d had caused the death of the Egyptian, or if he had not observed the actual death, assumed that Moses had killed him with the sword, and that therefore he had buried him to obliterate the fact that the man had been killed violently, seeing he only had seen Moses burying the corpse.
   If we follow the plain meaning of the text, the words אתה אומר, need not refer to words spoken by mouth at all, but may describe someone’s intention, as in Kohelet where Solomon repeatedly introduces a thought with the words אמרתי אני בלבי, “I used to say in my heart.”
   
   אכן נודע הדבר, “indeed the matter has become known.” Ibn Ezra equates the word אכן with the expression אם כן, “if so, etc.”
   <i>Rash’bam</i> changes the meaning to אכן אם כן, “if indeed it is different from what I thought, and the matter has become common knowledge.
   
   2,15. ולכהן מדין שבע בנות, “and the priest of Midian had seven daughters.” Their father was not mentioned by name as his reputation was based on his official status, i.e. that he was the High Priest of the Midianites. In fact, he was identical with the well known Yitro about whom we will hear more. We know that it was he, as the Torah narrates: וישב אל יתר חותנו, he (Moses) dwelled with his father-in-law Yeter, which is short for Yitro. We find similar interchangeable names elsewhere, such as Elijah sometimes being spelled אליה and other times אליהו. After Yitro converted to Judaism he was renamed חובב, as we know from Judges 4,11 מבני חבב חתן משה, “and from amongst the descendants of Chovav, Moses’ father-in-law, etc.” It is customary to give new names to people who convert to Judaism. Chovav was actually a son of Re-uel, as is written in Numbers 10,29 ויאמר משה לחבב בן רעואל, “Moses said to Chovav son of Reu-el.” As to Exodus 2,18 ותבאנה אל רעואל אביהם, “when they came to Re-uel, their father,” which on the face of it seems to contradict what we have said, it is not unusual for the paternal grandfather to be described as “father.” Yaakov himself described Avraham, his grandfather, as “my father,” when he spoke about “the G’d of my father Avraham” in Genesis 31 as well as in Genesis 32,10. The reason why the daughters of Yitro are reported as returning to the house of Re-uel is that their father was not at home but occupied with his tasks as the High Priest of the country.
   
   ותבאנה ותדלנה, “they came and drew water, etc.” According to Nachmanides these words describe their normal habits, i.e. that on every day the male shepherds would water their flocks first, before the arrival of the daughters of Yitro with their flocks. On that particular day, the daughters of Yitro arrived at the watering troughs ahead of the male shepherds, assuming that they could proceed and water their flocks first, without interfering with the flocks of the male shepherds who were due to arrive at that spot later. They had already filled the troughs with water from the well used. As luck would have it, they had miscalculated, and the male shepherds arrived prematurely, and when they saw what had happened they simply drove off Yitro’s daughters, intending to water their flocks first as was their custom. The violent means used by the male shepherds enraged Moses so that he intervened on behalf of the female shepherds, helping them to water their flocks first as they had intended. He also helped with the actual drawing of the water, as the troughs did not hold enough water to still the thirst of the whole flock in one filling. Upon their return home, their grandfather was surprised to see them return so early. This is why he questioned them, and they answered that a distinguished Egyptian had helped them.
   
   2,19. איש מצרי, “a distinguished Egyptian.” Moses had deliberately dressed as an Egyptian, seeing that he was a fugitive and had to mislead his pursuers.
   There is a comment in a <i>Midrash</i> that Moses, who had allowed others to think of him as an Egyptian, did not merit to be buried in the Holy Land, whereas Joseph who had proclaimed the fact that he was a Hebrew even when it could have hurt him socially and career wise, did merit to be buried in the Holy Land. The other <i>Midrashim,</i> including<i> Shemot Rabbah 1,32,</i> understand this differently, Moses declining to accept the thanks of the shepherdesses by saying that it was actually due to the Egyptian man whom he had killed that they had been helped, as if he were not trying to escape Pharaoh’s police he would not at that time have been near these troughs. [in other words, Moses, far from using his disguise to merit the gratitude of the Yitro’s daughters, attributed their good fortune as due to his victim the Egyptian whom he had slain. It would appear most unwise for Moses to have revealed at this stage why he had come to Midian  just then. On the other hand, if the <i>Midrash Shemot Rabbah</i> is correct, it makes the fact that the daughters of Yitro did not immediately invite him to their house much more understandable. They were scared to harbour a fugitive from Egyptian justice. Ed.]
   
   וישק את הצאן. “he watered the flock.” The reason why they did not say: “he watered our flock,” was that they had witnessed that due to Moses’ intervention the waters came forth on their own until there was enough to also water the flocks of the male shepherds.
   
   2,20. ויאמר....למה עזבתם את האיש, “He said: ’why did you abandon the man?” According to Ibn Ezra the Torah searched for a brief method of describing what happened. It omitted reporting that the daughters complied with Reu-el’s instructions, as it is clear from what follows that they had done so.
   
   2,23. ויהי בימים הרבים ההם, “it happened during these many years, etc.” Our sages explain that the reason these years are described as “many,” is the fact that all these years were filled with pain for the Israelites. They therefore appeared as lasting far longer than if they had been years filled with happy events.
   Nachmanides writes that it is not customary to refer to years as ימים ההם, “those years,” or יום ההוא, “that day,” unless one wants to pinpoint a certain time during which an event not yet discussed took place. When the event in question is already history, the Torah customarily introduces such a narrative with the words ויהי אחרי וגו', “it was after a certain event, etc.” Accordingly, we would have expected the Torah, at this juncture, to write: ויהי אחרי הימים הרבים ההם וימת מלך מצרים, “it happened after those many years that the King of Egypt died, etc.” By writing בימים ההם, “during those years,” the Torah alluded to the nature of these years, i.e. that they represented a most painful period to the Israelites, and that when the king died, they used the opportunity to cry out to G’d on account of their sorry condition, and that G’d immediately responded to their outcry. The period described was not really so long in astronomical terms. We can therefore explain, in conjunction with the description of Moses’ growing up in the palace Pharaoh, until he went out and for the first time met his brethren, as a result of which he smote an Egyptian, that he was possibly 12 years of age but certainly not over twenty, so that he spent 60 years or more in exile, seeing that the Torah describes him as being 80 years of age when he first approached Pharaoh. (Exodus 7,7) We may assume that he came to Midian only toward the end of those 60 years. We know that when G’d first appeared to him he had only fathered Gershom, as when the angel tried to kill him for failing to have circumcised his son Eliezer, the latter could only just have been born. Seeing that according to the narrative, the reader may form the impression that Moses’ slaying the Egyptian, finding refuge in Midian, marrying Tzipporah, and encountering the burning bush, and his subsequent return to Egypt, that all these events occurred with practically no interval between them. The Torah therefore mentions that many years had passed between different events reported here as if they occurred successively within a short time capsule. The “long” period of which the Torah speaks here referred to time already elapsed. From the time the King of Egypt died, matters moved at a much faster pace.
   
   וימת מלך מצרים, “the King of Egypt died.” According to our sages the King did not actually die, but was smitten with  a form of leprosy. Jewish children were slaughtered as their blood was supposedly capable of alleviating his condition.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, normally, when a king who ruled harshly dies, the survivors hope that the new king would treat his subjects more kindly. In this instance, the Israelites found out that the new king was even worse than the old one so that they turned to G’d in prayer, begging for Divine intervention on their behalf.
   Some commentators say that what happened is that contrary to accepted norms, when the king dies the prisoners are given an amnesty, in this case the Egyptian prisoners did indeed get a pardon, but no Jewish slaves were allowed to return to their homes. This finally triggered the Jewish people turning to G’d in prayer.
   
   2,25. וירא אלוקים...וידע אלוקים, “G’d saw and took notice of the condition of the Israelites.” <i>Rashi</i> explains these various verbs as meaning that G’d responded to their prayers by paying heed with His heart and by not ignoring their plight. Anyone who does not recognize the person who walks in front of him is considered as not seeing him, even if he knows that person well. If he recognizes him but does not love him, he is also considered as behaving as if he did not know him at all, did not “see” him.  The Torah therefore describes G’d’s reaction as one of seeing the plight of His people, i.e. “loving” them, as in וידע אדם את חוה אשתו, “Adam had intimate relations with his wife.” G’d’s love manifested itself in His taking note of the Israelites’ plight. 
   Ibn Ezra explains the words וירא אלוקים as G’d taking note of the violence committed against the Israelites in public, and the expression וידע אלוקים as referring to the violence committed against His people under cover of darkness.
    Nachmanides writes that the various statements of G’d’s reaction which appear in our verse mean that although the time intended for the enslavement of the Jewish people had expired, the people had not yet become worthy of being redeemed. However, G’d decided to intercede at this time already in light of their complaints, i.e. in response to their נאקתם, their moaning. He remembered His covenant, i.e. as promised in Ezekiel who describes G’d remembering the people and redeeming them in spite of their not being worthy of this.
   
   3,1. וינהג את הצאן אחר המדבר. “he guided the flock out into the wilderness;” Ibn Ezra understands this expression  in light of the fact that Midian was sort of a satellite state, subject to Pharaoh’s sphere of political influence. This necessitated that Moses became a shepherd, a vocation that enabled him to operate beyond the reach of Pharaoh and his secret service. Once G’d told him that Pharaoh and the members of his regime whom he had fled had died, he was able to name his son Eliezer by saying that G’d had saved him from the sword of Pharaoh. (compare Exodus 18,4)
   
   אל הר האלוקים חרבה, “to Mount Chorev, the mountain of G’d.” Some people are astounded and cannot understand that Moses took the sheep of his father-in-law such a great distance away from Midian, seeing that the territory of Midian is far to the east of Sinai. Pirkey de Rabbi Eliezer (chapter 40) claims that on occasion the flock Moses tended went for 40 consecutive days without food.
   
   3,2. וירא מלאך ה', “An angel of the Lord appeared to him;” First the Torah reports that an angel of the Lord appeared to Moses, and afterwards we read that G’d saw that Moses had taken note of the spectacle of the burning bush whereupon G’d called out to him. This prompted Ibn Ezra to say that the word אלוקים in verse 4 refers to the angel mentioned in verse 2 as מלאך ה', “an angel of the Lord.” We find a parallel construction in Genesis 32,31 where Yaakov describes himself as having “seen G’d face to face.” This in spite of the fact that G’d had described himself to Yaakov as “the G’d of your father.” The fact is that the messenger is permitted to assume the name of the One Who has dispatched him while he is carrying out the instructions of his master. [clearly, Yaakov had not had a vision of G’d Himself, face to face, something which is impossible, as explained by G’d to Moses in Exodus 33,20. Ed.]
   Nachmanides disagrees with the commentary of Ibn Ezra, claiming that Moses, the most outstanding of all the prophets would certainly not be afraid to look at the vision of an angel, a vision granted to many prophets who were inferior to him. He goes on to say that our sages describe the angel Moses saw as being Michael, a most high ranking angel, not one of the lower ranking angels that appeared to other prophets. He identified this angel with the one described by Yaakov before his death as המלאך הגואל אותי in Genesis 48,16. Elsewhere this angel is described by G’d as incorporating some of G’d’s essence, שמי, “within him.” (compare Exodus 23,21). (see <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 97,3 that whenever Rabbi <i>Yossi ha</i>-<i>aruch</i> is mentioned the listeners felt that his mentor, Rabbi Yehudah <i>hanassi,</i> was personally present. [Rabbi Yossi <i>ha</i>-<i>aruch</i> was not only a disciple but a personal valet of Rabbi Yehudah <i>hanassi</i> while the latter was alive. Ed.] The <i>Midrash</i> brings this example in order to illustrate the concept of angels of the caliber of, for instance, the one describing himself as שר צבא ה' in Joshua 5,3-14. This type of angel, the one described as bearing the name of the Lord, is understood as being the category closest to the throne of G’d in the celestial regions. At the revelation of the burning bush, Moses encountered one of these angels.
   
   והנה הסנה בוער, “and lo, the bush continued burning.” The word בוער is equivalent to the expression דולק באש, “is in flames.” As to the Torah describing Moses as wanting to investigate why the bush did not turn into ash,מדוע לא יבער הסנה הסנה, he marveled at the phenomenon, seeing that flax in similar circumstances would have disintegrated into ash without delay.
   It is also possible to understand the word יבער as a form of בעור, destruction, elimination, as in ובערת הרע מקרבך, “you must eliminate evil from your midst.” (Deut. 13,6 and 8 other times in the Torah)
   Some commentators follow a forced approach to the words אסורה נא ואראה, understanding these words as an introduction to the statement that Moses wanted to find out why this bush would not be consumed by the flames. [I suppose the reason why our author describes this interpretation as “forced,” is that the Torah had already described Moses as having observed the phenomenon. He had not remained at a safe distance. Ed.]
   
   3,4. ויקרא אליו אלוקים מתוך הסנה, “G’d called out to him from inside the bush.” A reference to the immediate area of thorns, the raw material attacked by the flames, a place which was uncontaminated, seeing that neither man nor beast would walk there, being afraid of being stung by the thorns. This was the reason that site qualified for a manifestation of the Divine.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason that this mountain was subsequently known as הר סיני, was in commemoration of the סנה, the burning bush which refused to be consumed by the flames.
   
   משה משה, there is no comma between these two words. It is similar to אברהם אברהם in Genesis 28,19, or יצחק בני יצחק, (Chronicles I 1,34) [the author quotes a couple more examples of such constructions, without elaborating. Ed.]
   
   3,5. אל תקרב הלום, “do not come any closer.” This was a warning to Moses that he had not yet attained the degree of holiness permitting him unrestricted entry to holy sites. We know that prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai, Moses entered the thick cloud in which the holy mountain was enveloped at the time without hindrance or harm befalling him. (Exodus 20,18) The Torah describes G’d there as being behind this thick cloud. Moses having turned aside his face when coming face to face with a supernatural spectacle, was prompted by the same consideration of his inadequacy in matters spiritual, which at that time were still very strong within him.
   
   של נעליך!, “remove your shoes!” It is noteworthy that whereas when Moses and Ezekiel were commanded to remove their shoes, they were told to remove both shoes, or in the case of Ezekiel, not to remove them, whereas Joshua was commanded to remove only one shoe, נעלך, (compare Joshua 5,15) The reason may have been that Moses being a shepherd by vocation, wore big boots in the manner of the shepherds. Ezekiel, who was also a farmer, may similarly have worn big boots. Joshua being a highly placed officer, almost a crowned head, wore only light shoes in the manner of all the kings. Both of his shoes, נעליך, would have been equivalent to only one of Moses’ shoes in size and weight. Furthermore, the angel speaking to Joshua described only the immediate site on which Joshua was standing as a holy site, אדמת קודש, whereas in the case of Moses the entire mountain was holy ground. It is also interesting that whereas Joshua is reported as having complied with the command to remove his shoes, no such thing is reported of Moses. Perhaps, Moses not having entered holy ground before being told to take off his shoes, preferred not to come closer so that he would not have to remove his shoes, whereas Joshua was told to do so only after he had already been standing on holy ground, so that he had no other option.
   
   3,6. אנכי אלוקי אביך, “I am the G’d of your father, etc.” according to our sages, Amram, Moses’ biological father, is referred to in this verse.
   Nachmanides writes that when the sages said this they meant that G’d meant that He was Moses’ G’d, but that He preferred to associate His name with a righteous man who had already died, instead of with a living person, whose freedom of choice still enables him to turn his back on G’d at some time in the future if he so desires, and to thereby make G’d’s association with him a mockery. At a later stage, G’d referred to Himself as the G’d of the patriarchs, implying that He was the G’d of the entire Jewish people.
   Ibn Ezra explained that the word אביך in our verse refers to the first patriarch Avraham, seeing he had been the first to proclaim G’d’s name and his faith in Him in public. In subsequent visions G’d speaks of also being the G’d of the other patriarchs.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the expression אלוקי אביך is not materially different from the Torah having written אלוקי אבותיך, “the G’d of your forefathers.” The reason why the Torah uses the word אביך in the singular mode here is that people generally refer to G’d as their “father.” We find a similar description in Kings II 20,5 when Isaiah is instructed to give a message to King Chiskiyah, a parallel verse in Isaiah 38.5 when G’d describes Himself as the G’d of his father.
   
   3,7. ויאמר ה' ראה ראיתי, “The Lord said: ‘I have truly seen, etc.” Although throughout this portion G’d appears in His attribute of אלוקים, the attribute of Justice, in this verse He is referring to Himself as the attribute of Mercy, the ineffable name. The reason is that here He demonstrates His pity on the condition His people find themselves in.
   
   ראה ראיתי, according to Ibn Ezra the formula here describes G’d’s response to the unnecessarily harsh and violent conduct of the Egyptians <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> their Hebrew slaves. G’d assures Moses that although the Egyptians had usually chosen to practice their violent attacks on the Israelites in the privacy of their homes or the dark of night, He, the G’d of the Israelites, was aware of it all. He was also aware of the feelings of the Israelites that were being so maltreated.
   
   3,8. אל ארץ טובה ורחבה, “to a good and spacious land.” G’d first praises the quality of the land, i.e. its climate which is healthy for its inhabitants, and secondly, that the land is spacious so that it can accommodate the entire nation without danger of the country becoming crowded.
   It is also possible that the meaning of the words ארץ רחבה is that the land contains wide expanses of both valleys and mountainous regions, and that though there are mountains, they do not cover most of its territory. The Torah comes back to describe the land as especially suitable for cattle and sheep raising, i.e. a land flowing with milk and honey. This also implies that the water supply in this land is ample and that it is of good quality, as otherwise it would not be ideal for raising sheep and cattle. Seeing that mountainous regions do not produce fat cattle, G’d assures Moses that the land is suitable to raise good cattle also.
   
   אל מקום הכנעני, “to the area now inhabited by the Canaanites.” The reason that G’d did not describe that region as ארץ הכנעני, “the land of the Canaanite,” as is customary when referring to lands inhabited by different peoples, is a hint that the Canaanites will be uprooted and dispossessed. The Israelites would not share the land with the Canaanites but would live there instead of the Canaanites.
   
   הכנעני והחתי והאמורי והפריזי והחוי והיבוסי. Note that the “<i>Girgashi</i>,” another one of the Canaanite tribes inhabiting that region, is not mentioned here. The reason is either that their land may not have been as excellent, or that these people would emigrate rather than defend their land against the Israelites, being aware that the Jewish G’d Who had made good on His threats against Pharaoh would most likely also make good on the promises He had made to the Jewish people beginning with Avraham.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the <i>Girgashi</i> has not been mentioned here is that that tribe was relatively insignificant in terms of manpower and military might. He questions that seeing that six Canaanite tribes have been listed here by name, why did the Torah have to use the word הכנעני, “the Canaanite” altogether? We all know that these tribes form part of the Canaanite family of nations. He answers that the entire region was known as the “land of Canaan,” and it extends beyond the regions inhabited by the six tribes listed here, especially in the north.
   
   3,12. וזה לך האות כי אנכי שלחתיך, “and this will be the sign for you that it I Who have sent you as My messenger.” Nachmanides refers to numerous interpretations of the above line; the correct interpretation according to the plain meaning of the text being that seeing that G’d told Moses two distinctly different things, i.e. that He would liberate the Israelites from the yoke of the Egyptians and that He would lead them up to the land inhabited by the Canaanites which would become their future homeland, and Moses’ reply had been to ask how he could be expected to accomplish even the first one of these tasks. In response to G’d telling Moses that he would be leading them to the land of the Canaanites, Moses added that the people would not follow him, being afraid to face a land populated by powerful nations, and considering the prospect of warring against these nations as unrealistic. G’d reassured Moses on both scores separately, knowing that Pharaoh’s releasing them and their engaging in a march to dispossess the Canaanites were matters that were conceptually not connected. Concerning Moses’ misgivings in connection with the chances of Pharaoh releasing the Israelites, G’d told him not to worry, that He would be with him, and that he would have proof of this once the Israelites would accept the Torah on this very mountain that he was facing at that time. This revelation would also serve the Israelites as a sign that they had nothing to fear from the Canaanites. Pharaoh would agree to let them travel a relatively short distance of three days’ march to the Sinai region.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi understands the words וזה לך האות as G’d’s promise that He will be at Moses’ side all the time, enabling him to face that despot without fear or trembling. The fact that Moses would face down Pharaoh would be the great miracle. As to the line about what would happen at Mount Sinai, this was a reference to the second aspect of the liberation, the need to secure a country for themselves. At that mountain the people would become inspired to accept the Torah, and with it gain the confidence of securing the land of Canaan as their future ancestral home.
   
   3,13. ואמרו לי מה שמו, “(how am I to answer them) when they will say to me: ‘what is (this G’d’s) name?” Nachmanides writes that this verse cries out to be interpreted (not just read). It is quite inconceivable that the verse means that Moses said to G’d: “what is Your name, what shall I say to them?” and that the instruction by G’d to tell them His name would be the kind of אות, convincing sign or symbol that he was trustworthy in his claim to be this G’d’s appointee, sent to orchestrate their deliverance. How could such a simplistic statement as telling them of G’d’s name make believers out of confirmed non-believers? What proof did Moses bring with him that would encourage the people to believe that he indeed had been chosen by G’d to be their redeemer? We see indeed that immediately after G’d told him to relate His name to the people, Moses countered that he was convinced that the people would not believe him.
   Ibn Ezra understands Moses’ question to refer to the numerous attributes, (names) of G’d, and his wanting to know which of these attributes he was to stress when telling them that he had been sent to deliver them from the yoke of Pharaoh. It was a well known fact that miracles are not performed by the attribute <i>Shaddai</i>, but only by the four-lettered ineffable name of G’d. Ibn Ezra’s words do not appear acceptable at all, seeing that the question of performing any miracles had not yet been raised by either G’d or Moses. Moses had not been instructed as yet to perform any miracles in Egypt; he had only been told to lead the Jews out of Egypt by convincing Pharaoh in G’d’s name to release the Israelites from bondage. Moreover, the people had the tradition that Joseph had spoken of the attribute <i>elokim</i> remembering the Israelites when the time came to take them out of Egypt, (Genesis 50,24) There would therefore appear to be no reason for Moses to refer at this stage to any other possible attribute of G’d. Also the patriarch Yaakov had already told his sons that the attribute <i>elokim</i> would come to the assistance of the people when the time would be ripe. (Genesis 48,21) Seeing that the attribute of <i>elokim</i> had been sufficient to assure Avraham’s single-handed victory over the four Kings who had defeated the five kings of Sodom, there was no reason at all for Moses to suggest that another attribute of G’d need to be invoked in order to make the Exodus from Egypt possible.
   I believe (still Nachmanides writing) that we must understand matters in the following manner. At that time Moses was already privy to profound prophetic insights, having previously mastered all the philosophic wisdom available at his time, [perhaps also having composed the Book of Job at that time, a book that testifies to the profound wisdom of its author. Ed.]  In light of his knowledge of the complex nature of G’d and His attributes, he enquired under which heading G’d had intended to appoint him as the leader of the Israelite nation. He was convinced that this would be the first question by the elders of the people that he would have to answer in order to establish some degree of credibility. The elders knew of two of G’d’s attributes, the attribute <i>elokim, i.e. el shaddai,</i> the attribute which had successfully assisted the patriarchs throughout their lives, and the attribute <i>Hashem</i>, i.e. the attribute under whose aegis miracles of supernatural character are performed. The obvious reason which prompted Moses to raise this question was that G’d had introduced Himself to him as the G’d of the patriarchs, i.e. אלוקי אביך. Seeing that the patriarchs’ lives had been guided by the attribute of <i>shaddai,</i> it was quite possible that the Exodus would also be orchestrated under that heading. If G’d, at that time, had mentioned a specific attribute of His as enabling Him to forthwith orchestrate the redemption of the Jewish people, Moses would not have raised the question at all. G’d’s answer now was to ask Moses to wait until the people would come to Mount Sinai and experience the revelation, when it would become clear that such an event could not occur under the aegis of the attribute <i>shaddai.</i> The people would experience an attribute of G’d with which even the patriarchs had not been familiar. This was the attribute used to create the world, not the attribute employed to merely keep the world functioning as a going concern. Moses wanted to know if he were to reveal this attribute of G’d to the people already at this time. In other words, was he to reveal to them at this time universal aspects of G’d, or was he to restrict himself to representing G’d in His capacity as manager of the earth in its present format?
   When G’d answered אהיה אשר אהיה, this meant that there was no need for Moses to broaden the people’s theological base by dragging in the universal dimensions of G’d as the Creator, etc. It would suffice to assure the people that the same G’d (attribute) Who had been with the patriarchs would continue to be with both Moses and the people. This attribute would suffice, if called upon during periods of distress, to propel G’d to help His people. G’d’s response to His people’s prayers would be enough proof to them and to the people around them that there was a living G’d Who took an interest in the fate of His creatures. This corresponds to how our sages explained the name אהיה אשר אהיה, i.e. “just as I have seen them through this major problem, so I will see them through any major problems in the future.” It is assumed that the Jewish people, whenever they are in distress, will call upon this attribute of G’d asking for relief. The manifestation of the attribute of <i>shaddai</i> on such occasions is abundant proof of the existence of a living and caring G’d.
   Moses felt that it was premature to hint at future times when the Israelites might encounter similar distress; this is why he suggested that he introduce G’d simply as אהיה, the four letters of the ineffable name, the attribute of Mercy, an attribute which presupposes that this G’d is the Creator, hence He can operate freely in all of His creation, that He is the universal G’d. The word אהיה is repeated here three times, indicating that in G’d’s approach to the universe, seeing that He is eternal, there are no such concepts as past, present, and future, they are all one, i.e. , היה, הווה, יהיה“He was, He is, He will be,” are parts of the same concept. Only to mortals such as we, are these concepts separate and non-interchangeable time zones.
   Some commentators see in the expression אהיה אשר אהיה, a command for Moses to tell the people that G’d Himself suffers with the people whenever they endure suffering. G’d explained that the reason why Moses was granted this vision of G’d was precisely because the people had turned to Him, pleading for relief, and that G’d was about to answer their plea. He was sure, He said, that as soon as Moses would tell the people this they would indeed believe him when he said that he had been sent by this G’d. In other words, the answer to Moses’ question “what shall I tell them in order that they will believe me?” is that ”I will be with them.”
   
   Still another approach to our problem. Moses made the same mistake as Yaakov had made when he asked the angel in his nocturnal encounter his name, and who had been told that this was irrelevant. Celestial forces, unlike terrestrial phenomena, do not have fixed names, as they adopt names that match whatever task they perform at a given point in history. Seeing that G’d is active simultaneously on many different “fronts,” He ”travels” under many different “names.” [In colloquial terms: “G’d uses many different passports on different occasions.” Ed.] The meaning of the words אהיה אשר אהיה is simply “I will adopt whatever name the occasion and the circumstances call for at the time I manifest Myself.”
   
   3,15. וזה זכרי לדור דור, “and this is My remembrance from generation to generation.” G’d reverts to His reference as being the G’d of the patriarchs. He assures Moses, and through him the people of Israel, that His covenant with the patriarchs is of an eternal, enduring nature, one that will always be referred to at critical times in Jewish history. He responded to the children of the patriarchs in the past and will continue to do so.
   
   3,18. ושמעו לקולך, “they will listen to your message.”  <i>Rashi</i> explains that it is the wording of the message which will convince the people that Moses was the true redeemer, seeing that Yaakov and Joseph had predicted that the saviour, at the proper time, would identify himself with these words. (Genesis 50,24) Yaakov had said פקוד יפקוד אתכם, and Joseph had said ואלוקים פקוד יפקוד אתכם. <i>Rashi</i> means that the reason why Joseph repeated Yaakov’s assurance was to establish a tradition that the redeemer would identify himself with this quotation when he would appear on the scene.
   Nachmanides questions this commentary, saying that this would not be any proof for the people at all, as it was possible that Moses had been privy to that tradition just as they had been privy to it. He answers the question by adding that the tradition the people had was that the first individual who would identify himself claiming to be the redeemer and who would use these code words would be the true redeemer.
   We also find the <i>Midrash</i> stating that the reason why Moses was separated from his home when only 12 years old, was that in the event he had grown up in his home and had now come claiming to have been appointed by G’d as their saviour, the people would never have believed him as they would have said that his father had revealed the formula of Yaakov that the saviour would identify himself as such and would use the code words “פקוד פקדתי,” to him, just as he had revealed it to Joseph at the time out of love for his son Joseph. They would have claimed that Joseph in turn revealed the code words to Levi, who had revealed it to his brothers when he made them swear to take his remains with him to the Land of Israel when the time would come, and  commanded him that these words should remain a closely guarded secret. Seeing that Moses now returned to Egypt after having been abroad for close to seventy years, before it was likely that his father had revealed this formula to him, they were willing to take his use of this code word at face value.
   
   3,19.  ולא יתן אתכם מלך מצרים להלוך, ולא ביד חזקה“and the King of Egypt will not let you go, except through a strong hand.” According to <i>Rashi</i>, the line means that G’d says that as long as G’d would not display His strong hand Pharaoh would not let the Israelites go.
   
   	According to Nachmanides we are to understand the line as follows: Pharaoh will not let the Israelites go voluntarily, not even when I apply pressure, until I will display all the power at My command. I will use a strong hand in demonstrating this power of Mine to him, working many miracles. This is a preview of what the Torah describes later progressively as יד חזקה, זרוע נטויה, אותות ומופתים, “a strong hand, an outstretched arm, a variety of supernatural miracles.”
   All these instruments of G’d’s persuavive power would have to be experienced by Pharaoh before he would dismiss the Israelites.
   <i></i>
   3,22. ושאלה אשה משכנתה, “Each woman will request from her neighbour, etc.” even though the Torah had used the masculine mode when speaking of the actual event, i.e. (Exodus 112, and 12,35) implying that both the males and the females would request valuables from their Egyptian neighbours, the reason that a feminine mode was chosen by the Torah here is that it is usually women who borrow from their neighbours, not men.
   
   4,1. ויען משה ויאמר והן לא יאמינו לי, Moses answered saying: “but they will not believe me, etc.” According to <i>Shemot Rabbah</i> 3,12 Moses sinned in the manner in which he spoke to G’d at this point, seeing that he contradicted G’d Who had told him that the people would listen to what he had to say (3,18). G’d responded to Moses in the manner in which he had spoken to G’d. He asked him what he had in his hand, i.e <i>mazeh beyadcha?</i> When Moses replied that he had a staff in his hand, G’d turned the staff into a snake to show Moses that his answer had been quite wrong. G’d demonstrated that by reading the letters מזה not as “<i>mazeh</i>,” “what is this?” but as “<i>mizeh</i>” “with this,” that He would provide him with a means by which to make the Israelites believe him. (the <i>Midrash</i>, according to <i>Mahar’zu,</i> appears to imply that the need to employ miracles in order to make the Israelites believe that Moses was not an impostor was held as a sin against Moses, not against them.)
   
   Ibn Ezra, approaching the text as being quite plain, and Moses’ reply as being in order, writes that when G’d had said to Moses that the Israelites would listen to him, (3,18) He had spoken of the elders to whom Moses would have to identify himself in the first place. When Moses now said that the Israelites would not believe him, he did not refer to the elders, but to the masses of the Jewish people. He may also have referred to their having unspoken reservations in their hearts, disbelief they would not dare to voice at that time.
   
   Nachmanides explains that Moses meant that it is entirely possible that the words in ושמעו לקולך in 3,18 were not to be understood as an assurance, but as a command, a directive to Moses to make sure that the people would take him seriously, would believe what he had come to tell them. 3,18 is immediately followed by G’d Himself telling Moses that the elders following him notwithstanding, Pharaoh will turn a deaf ear to their mission. In other words, G’d had never promised immediate success at all. Moses was therefore entitled to point out additional factors which would make his mission difficult in the extreme. There are numerous instances in the Scriptures where the meaning of such words as ושמעו, or ואמרו, is not a prediction of what will happen but an assessment of what ought to happen.
   It is also possible that in 3,18 G’d had only meant that the elders would be willing, on the strength of Moses having identified himself, to go for an interview before Pharaoh with him, and to tell him that their G’d had instructed them to ask for a three day furlough to offer sacrifices to Him. After all, in their own estimation, what did they have to lose by going along? G’d had already told them that the mission would not be successful. (3,19) Moses therefore was quite correct in saying that after the interview with Pharaoh, also attended by the elders, had failed to produce the desired results, the masses of the people would not believe in him as their saviour. They would argue that if he had truly been a messenger from G’d he would have been successful.
   Another approach to the subject could be that what the people would refuse to believe would be Moses’ claim to have been privy to the instructions of G’d in His attribute as <i>Hashem</i>, the attribute of Mercy, rather than having received instructions from <i>elokim,</i> the attribute of <i>shaddai,</i> that was known to them but had not produced relief from their sorry condition. They would refuse to see in him a prophet with greater powers than the patriarchs who had not been known as miracle workers. No wonder, they would say, that Pharaoh was not impressed by him. They would argue that their sorry state was not due to their sins, for as far as their sins were concerned these would not form an impassable barrier between them and G’d’s attribute of Mercy.
   Yet another way of understanding our verse is that Moses simply meant that the Israelites would not believe him unless he could produce some kind of miracle to convince them that he had not lied. There was no suggestion that Moses did not accept G’d’s statement that the people would listen to him. .
   
   4,3. ויאמר השליכהו ארצה ויהי לנחש, “He said: ‘throw it to the ground so that it will turn into a serpent.” Nachmanides has trouble understanding the need for G’d to perform these miracles in front of Moses, seeing Moses had not been a doubter here. In his (preliminary) view it would have been more appropriate for G’d to tell Moses to perform this very miracle in front of the Jewish people, as He did with the third miracle the turning of water into blood. It is considerations such as these which prompted our sages to say that Moses was meant to consider the first miracle here as a personal rebuke for having spoken badly of the Jewish people, for having accused them of lack of faith. He was to realize that he deserved to be punished, and this is also why he reacted in fear, fleeing from the serpent. He considered it entirely possible that this snake would bite him as a penalty for badmouthing his people. The same applies to his hand turning leprous; this too was to remind him that the affliction known as <i>tzoraat</i> is in the main reserved for people who were derelict in their relationship with their fellow human beings, in particular by speaking badly about them. Their forced stay in isolation would bring this home to them even more forcefully. Moses did not recover from his fright until G’d told him to grab the snake by its tail. Moses is then described not as taking hold of the snake’s tail merely, as G’d had instructed, by אחיזה, a somewhat tenuous hold on things, but the Torah uses the word ויחזק בו, “he took a firm hold of it.”
   Some commentators claim that the miracle of the staff was a demonstration by means of a simile, that the great Pharaoh whose career had started out as a malleable human being, something similar to a pliable staff, had then become hard as a תנין הגדול, a great sea-monster, only to become all soft again, none of his powers remaining, his glory having vanished into thin air. When Pharaoh had turned “tough” on him after he had killed the Egyptian, Moses had already fled from him, as we read in 2,15. The miracle of the staff would reassure Moses that he no longer had anything to fear from him.
   
   4,4. שלח ידך ואחוז בזנבו, “extend your arm and take hold of it by its tail!” This means simply to establish physical contact, not that Moses would thereby control the snake’s movement, as the snake will attempt to wriggle free. This is why the Torah reports Moses as ויחזק בו, “he took firm hold of it.” This demonstrates that Moses had thought that as soon as he would get to Egypt Pharaoh would release the Israelites immediately, that there would be no attempt on his part to wriggle out of the demands made upon him. The redemption would not occur until strong-armed measures, such as Moses employed to control the movements of the snake would be employed. The second miracle would be performed in the presence of the assembled people who were mired in spiritual pollution absorbed through their being part of the Egyptian culture. G’d demonstrated by means of that miracle [the healing of an affliction considered incurable, Ed.] that the Israelites would become penitents and thus fit for redemption.
   
   Some commentators understand the meaning of that miracle to be that just as the Israelites who were free men when they came to Egypt had been afflicted by G’d so that they had become slaves, they would once more be able to regain their former freedom thanks to the same G’d Who had caused them to become afflicted in the first place. 
   
   4,5. למען יאמינו כי נראה אליך ה', “in order that they will believe that the Lord, (attribute of Mercy) G’d of your fathers has indeed appeared to you.” The Torah refers to the demonstration of this miracle, the verse being an abbreviation, seeing that it was quite understood that this was to be the purpose of the miracle.
   
   4,8. והיה אם לא יאמינו, “in the event that they will not believe you, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that we know full well whether or not the Israelites would believe Moses’ claim to be the redeemer appointed by G’d, it is clear that this verse was addressed only to Moses, to tell him that in the event that some of the people would not believe that Moses was the chosen redeemer after having seen the first miracle, the second miracle would convince also these doubters. 
   As to the Torah describing the reaction of the people to the miracle as a קול האות, a miracle with an audible impact, rather than as it having a visual impact, this is an example of what Rabbi Yishmael had described as the Torah employing a syntax familiar to the common people. Furthermore, as to the Torah describing the second miracle as אות האחרון, “the last miracle,” when in fact it would be followed by a third miracle, the reason is that as of that point in time only two miracles had been demonstrated to Moses. The verse hints that if after two miracles there would still be doubters, a third miracle would be performed which would silence the remaining doubters. As a matter of fact, in due course, Moses performed these miracles, and the people all believed that he was the chosen redeemer. (verses 30-31)
   
   4,9.  והיו המים אשר תקח מן היאור והיו לדם ביבשת, “and it will be that the waters which you will take from the river will turn into blood on the dry land.” Even though G’d had already told Moses that he was to take water from the river,ולקחת ממימי היאור, He repeated the word “you will take” once more. The idea was that Moses should not take the water from the river by means of some container, but directly by hand.
   
   והיו, “they will be (remain).” Why has this word והיו been repeated? According to <i>Rashi</i> this means that the waters in question will not turn into blood until poured on the dry land.
   
   Nachmanides writes that there is no need for this explanation in order to justify the repeated use of the word והיו, as it is part of the usual syntax of the Torah to repeat certain words whenever the Torah wants to emphasise a point, or when there is a lengthy interval between the legislation becoming applicable and its being carried out in practice. A case in point is Leviticus 27,3 where the Torah repeats the words והיה ערכך. [you will note there that when the Torah speaks about shorter time frames such as ages between  a month and five years, or five years and 20 years, instead of a time frame between 20-60 years, the words והיה ערכך are not repeated. Ed.] The first two miracles were temporary phenomena, the natural state of events being restored in short order. The water which Moses poured on the ground and which turned into blood, never reverted to becoming water; hence the words והיו לדם the second time would be aptly translated as “they will turn into blood permanently”.
   
   4,10. גם מתמול גם משלשום, “not since yesterday nor since the day before.” We learn from all this that G’d spent seven days trying to convince Moses to accept the mission voluntarily. 
   Looking at the plain text and trying to understand the relevance of Moses’ remarks, (as if G’d were not aware of his speech defect as well as his not being an orator), Moses argued that seeing that the people know that I have had this speech defect since youth, they will be astounded that You have not first fixed this, but have sent a prophet who suffers from such a blemish. Would not Pharaoh consider it an insult to have to deal with someone like me who suffers from such a blemish? Seeing that Moses, basically, did not wish to assume the burden of leadership at all, he did not pray to G’d to heal his speech defect. He contented himself with saying that someone with a blemish such as he suffered from was not likely to be the most suitable candidate for the task proposed by G’d. G’d, for His part, did not want to heal his speech defect precisely because he had not prayed to Him to do this. He simply told him to go and fulfill his mission, and that He would come to his aid whenever required. Whatever he would be saying to Pharaoh would come out of his mouth clear without Pharaoh ever becoming aware of the fact that 
   
   he suffered from any speech defect. Moses therefore experienced a double miracle in that whenever he faced Pharaoh he could suddenly speak normally, without there being even a trace of his usual handicap. Both what he said an how he said it sounded complexly normal. 
   
   Some commentators attribute Moses’ speech defect to the well known story in the <i>Midrash,</i> according to which Moses’ life was spared on account of something which led to his speech defect. He was suspected by the astrologers of becoming the redeemer of the Jews, and when, as a two year old, he was put to the test, being given the choice of grabbing for the king’s crown or for glowing coals, he grabbed for the latter and put them to his mouth when an angel had given him a push in that direction. Seeing that his very speech defect, in a manner of speaking, had been his “life saver,” it would have been inappropriate to reverse this “defect.”
   
   Some commentators do not agree that G’d healed Moses’ speech defect at all, even when he used to stand before Pharaoh, but that G’d might have done so if Moses had not used it as an excuse not to do His bidding. As it were, G’d expressed His displeasure by not healing Moses of this defect.
   
   4,11. מי שם פה לאדם?, “Who has equipped man with a mouth?” The Torah refers to the mouth here as an instrument of formulating speech.
   
   או מי ישום אלם?, “or Who makes (man) dumb?” The verb ישום, refers back to the word אדם in the first half of our verse. G’d does not “make“ man dumb, as dumbness is the lack of something, something similar to “nothing,” in the sense that it did not require to be created or refined. If the Torah, nonetheless, created the impression as if G’d had made some people “dumb,” perhaps the reason is that man is considered a נפש מדברת, “a personality equipped with the power of speech.” When one encounters a human being who lacks this power, one assumes that someone, i.e. Gd, had locked the power of expressing itself within that personality, and had made him dumb. The word אלם is the opposite of the word פה, mouth, just as the word פקח is the opposite of the word עור, blind; and the word חרש describes someone not equipped with the sense of hearing. Seeing that the word פקח can be applied to both eyes and ears, describing a lack of perceptive powers of the eyes or ears, we encounter such expression as לפקוח עינים,עינים פקוחות , i.e. “to open one’s eyes”, or “open eyes”, as otherwise we could not be certain in which mode the word פקח was being used at the time.
   Some commentators view the line מי שם פה simply as a rebuke to Moses, G’d saying: “did you really think that I was unaware that you had a speech impediment?” Surely, seeing that I have made you, you need not remind Me of such matters!”
   
   4,13. שלח נא ביד תשלח, “please my Lord, send through whomever You will send!” According to Onkelos, Moses referred to people whom G’d had used in the past as His messengers, and who had a record as being fit for such errands. He implies that among those there were people who were quite willing to be G’d’s spokesmen as well as being spokesmen of the people, people who also possessed the gift of oratory. He meant that even though G’d had assured him that He would be at his side every step of the way, it was not fitting for the representative of G’d to be a person who was afflicted with such a blemish as he was afflicted with.
   During all the time that Moses had been debating with G’d about whether to accept this assignment, he had been secretly hoping that perhaps G’d would cure him of his affliction, and this would be a sign that he would indeed be able to carry out his assignment successfully. When he had become convinced that this would not happen, he had suggested to G’d to send someone else.
   
   Nachmanides understands the words שלח נא ביד תשלח, as meaning that G’d should send anyone else in preference to himself, seeing that no one on earth could be as unsuitable for this task as he was. Moses’ refusal to accept the position of leadership was motivated exclusively by his exceptional modesty and humility. Some understand the comment by Moses, as if he told G’d: “seeing that I am not fit to deliver oral messages due to my handicap, let me present my case by letter, i.e. provide me with a written document to submit to Pharaoh, outlining our case for being released from bondage.”
   
   4,14. ידעתי כי דבר ידבר, “I know that he is a fluent orator.” This means that G’d tells Moses that He is aware that Aaron is willing to act as his mouthpiece even without being commanded by G’d to do so. As proof of Aaron’s helpful attitude, He tells Moses that he is on his way to meet his younger brother, not harbouring any resentment that his younger brother has been chosen for such a fateful mission. The only reason G’d had to tell him to meet Moses in the desert was to inform him of where in the desert he would find his brother.
   It is also possible that Aaron had heard that Moses had left Midian and that he had gone forth to meet him without even having received any instruction from G’d on the subject. Once Aaron had been on the way, G’d gave him directions where to meet Moses.
   
   4,15. ואנכי אהיה עם פיך, “and I shall be with your mouth, etc.” I shall give you precise instructions what to say to Pharaoh. At this point, G’d did not say that Aaron would speak on his behalf. Aaron would only speak on Moses’ behalf to the people, not to Pharaoh. We know this from verse 16 ודבר הוא אל העם, that it would be Aaron’s task to address the people, but the people would know that he was the “mouthpiece.” The word נביאך, means that just as a prophet is G’d’s mouthpiece, so Aaron will now become Moses’ mouthpiece.
   
   It is possible that this arrangement was out of the desire to show deference to the Egyptian establishment, in particular Pharaoh personally, who might be insulted if he received the word of G’d not even through his prophet but through the prophet’s mouthpiece. In spite of these considerations, in the end, Moses queried that the chances of Pharaoh paying heed to a stammerer such as he, was too much to expect. 
   
   ודבר הוא לך אל העם, “and he will speak on your behalf to the people;” Ibn Ezra writes that this was not a demotion of some kind for Moses, but the very reverse. Aaron’s role in this is to be compared to the role of the mouth of a person which represents the thoughts of that person’s soul. The soul, by definition, is not visible, just as the angels are not visible, seeing they have no body. Moses therefore had been elevated to the stature of an angel by having Aaron as his interpreter. This is how we can understand G’d saying that Moses would be to Aaron similar to אלוקים. The word אלוקים throughout Scripture is a name symbolizing the majesty of G’d or that of His holy angels. The angels are the ones who familiarize us with what G’d is doing at certain times during our history. At any rate, Aaron, far from being demoted to being a mere “mouthpiece,” had been promoted to reveal the invisible thoughts of Moses, i.e. of what G’d had communicated to him.
   
   4,17. אשר תעשה בו את האותות, “by means of which you will perform the miracles.” Although at this time, Moses had been instructed only to perform a single miracle, i.e. אות, not אותות, it was a hint to Moses that there would be a need for further demonstrations of G’d’s power. You will recall that G’d had spoken of כל נפלאותי, “all My miracles,” already in 3,20. Here the Torah is somewhat more specific than in the previous chapter. This is why here the Torah adds: אשר תעשה בו את האותות, with which you will perform the miracles, (pl.}
   
   4,19. ויאמר ה' אל משה במדין, “the Lord said to Moses in Midian, etc.” Ibn Ezra reminds us that the Torah is not bound to narrate events in the order in which they occurred, and that what G’d is now reported as having told Moses, He had told him already on a previous occasion. 
   
   
   Nachmanides disagrees with Ibn Ezra, saying that G’d’s first communication to Moses did not take place in Midian  but at Mount Sinai (Mt. Chorev). According to him, G’d spoke with Moses only on this occasion while Moses was in Midian. It is possible that once Moses had reluctantly agreed to assume the mission G’d wanted him to perform, he returned once more to Midian to obtain his father-in-law’s permission to return to Egypt. It was his intention to do so incognito. This is when G’d told him that there was no reason for this, as all the people who had sought his death had long since died. This message came to him while he was still in Midian. G’d made it clear to him that he should remain in Egypt until the redemption, the Exodus. This is why Moses took his family with him at that stage. It appeared to be a logical move as it would show the Israelites that he was convinced that the redemption was near, otherwise he would have left his family behind in Midian where they were safe and comfortable.
   
   כי מתו כל האנשים, “for all the people have died, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> the words כל האנשים refer to Datan and Aviram, the two men who had told Pharaoh about his slaying the Egyptian. How could G’d describe them as “having died,” when during the uprising of Korach a couple of years later, they were very much alive and ringleaders in that rebellion? The answer is that whereas at the time the incident with the Egyptian occurred these two men were among the wealthiest Jews in Egypt, so that what they said carried weight, in the meantime both had become paupers so that their influence was nil, no more than that of dead people. Sometimes people afflicted with the dreaded disease <i>tzoraat</i> are described as “dead,” as they are isolated beyond contact with society, but this was not the case with Datan and Aviram, whose posture in Numbers 16 shows them a) to have resided within the camp, and b) to have had good eyesight. C) They could not even have been described as “dead” because they had no children, as the Torah describes their challenging Moses brazenly together with their wives and children (Numbers 16,27).
   
   However, it is difficult to understand why both of these men should have wanted Moses dead, seeing he had saved the life of one of them by his interference in their quarrel? Besides, granted that both men had become paupers, how did this prevent them from being a threat to Moses’ life?  They could still act as informers to Pharaoh? 
   According to the plain meaning of the text, G’d informed Moses that the one who had ever been a real threat to him, i.e. Pharaoh, had died physically.
   
   4,20. ויקח משה את אשתו ואת בניו, “he took his wife and his sons, etc.” This verse is similar to Numbers 26,8 ובני פלוא אליאב, “and the sons of Phalu were Eliav. Even though Phalu is reported as having had only the one son, the Torah uses the plural mode ובני, when referring to this. Similarly, here. At this time Moses had only one son, Gershom. Tzippporah who had been pregnant with Eliezer at that time gave birth to him on the way, as becomes clear in verse 24 of our chapter. It is possible that before G’d had spoken to Moses at Mount Chorev, Tzipporah had born Gershom, and that she had again become pregnant. When Moses returned to Yitro from the desert Eliezer had just been born. Seeing that Moses was anxious to be on his way, he had not yet circumcised his new born son, so that his mother had not yet named the baby. She did not name him right after she had circumcised him, being not yet sure whether Moses would survive his encounter with the angel who had tried to harm him. It was only after Moses arrived safely in Egypt and realized that he had indeed been saved from all those who had wanted to kill him, that he named the baby with a name which reflected his gratitude to G’d for having saved him from all this.
   
   וירכיבם על החמור, “he made them ride on the donkey.” The Torah specifies that it was a donkey, not a camel or some other animal used to ride on; perhaps because he had a number of animals to choose from for his wife and children to ride on.
   
   וישב ארצה מצרימה, “he returned in the direction of the land of Egypt.” According to Nachmanides, even though the Torah uses the singular mode וישב, what are meant are Moses and his family.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the Torah used the singular mode is that though Moses had intended to bring his family with him to Egypt; he changed his mind after his encounter with the angel and the circumcision, after which, in the interest of the baby’s recovery from that procedure, Tzipporah decided the return to her father’s home for a while. Moses had not wanted to delay beginning his mission while waiting for his son to recover. It is also possible that they all went to Egypt together, and that when it became evident that the redemption of the Israelites was still some time in the future, Tzipporah, who had pined for her father’s home, returned there pending the Exodus becoming reality.
   
   4,21. ויאמר ה' אל משה בלכתך לשוב מצרימה, “The Lord said to Moses: ‘when you are on the way to return to Egypt, etc’.”
   According to Ibn Ezra what follows was said to Moses while he had still been in Midian. G’d told him that in spite of all the miracles He had provided Moses with to perform in Egypt, that He, G’d, had made Pharaoh’s heart strong so that he would not discharge the Israelites from serving him on account of the miracles Moses would perform. This would only occur as a result of the final miracle when, after being told that G’d would kill all the firstborn Egyptians including Pharaoh’s own firstborn, he would capitulate
   
   Nachmanides writes that Ibn Ezra’s description of events is not correct, for if it were, why did the Torah write the line בלכתך לשוב מצרימה ראה, “when you are on the way to return to Egypt, see!” Rather, the true meaning of the verse is that when Moses had already taken his staff and was about to set out on his return journey to Egypt, G’d warned Moses to perform all the miracles in spite of the fact that Pharaoh would not be sufficiently impressed by them to let the Israelites depart. The way things would develop would be that while Moses was doing “his thing,” i.e. what G’d had empowered him to do, and while Pharaoh, on the other hand, would do “his thing,” Moses was not to become discouraged. He warned him further that when it would come to the final plague when he would warn Pharaoh that G’d would strike dead his own firstborn son, Pharaoh would capitulate. The words אשר שמתי בידך, “which I have placed at your disposal,” mean that G’d had provided only Moses exclusively with the power to perform all these miracles. He gave Moses a review of how things would develop in order to encourage him to proceed with appropriate dispatch. Subsequently, he would receive detailed instructions concerning each of the miracles, i.e. each of the plagues.
   It is also possible that the words ואמרת אל פרעה וגו' are instructions to Moses concerning the 10th and final plague, when he would warn Pharaoh of G’d killing his firstborn son. Whereas with the other plagues the Torah reports G’d instructing Moses, and Moses then carrying out the instruction, we do not find G’d issuing any instructions there to Moses before he proceeded to announce the forthcoming plague to Pharaoh, (Exodus 11,4)
   It is also possible that G’d instructed Moses here to perform the same three miracles before Pharaoh that He had already instructed him to perform before the Israelites. This was in order that Pharaoh should realize that the only reason that the elders of the Israelites had requested what they did, was because G’d had sent them Moses who had performed these miracles for them in order to identify himself as their redeemer. Pharaoh would therefore have no reason to fault the elders of Israel for their request. Moses acted in this fashion although the Torah had not bothered to spell this out.
   
   Concerning the fact that the Torah also wrote “when Pharaoh will say to you that you should legitimize yourselves by means of a miracle” (7,9), and that He commanded Moses to turn the staff into a sea monster instead of into a serpent, as he had done before the Israelites, and that he showed Pharaoh that Aaron’s staff would swallow those of his magicians, this was a hint that He would overpower the magicians.
   
   In the <i>Midrash</i> Shemot <i>Rabbah</i> (5,6) we are told that in the event that someone were to claim that the miracles of blood, <i>tzoraat</i>, and the staff turning into a snake, that these had been performed only before the Israelites and not before Pharaoh, the Torah adds the word ראה, that G’d told Moses to look at the letters ד'צך ע'דש ב'אחב the respective first letters of each plague, letters which were engraved on the staff in order to confirm that all these plagues, i.e. miracles, would be performed in the presence of Pharaoh.
   
   4,24. ויפגשהו ה', “the Lord encountered him;” as a rebuke for having concerned himself with private concerns at the inn, instead of first performing the circumcision on his son Eliezer. The excuse that he was on the way and that the circumstances were such that circumcision would place the life of the infant in danger, did no longer apply as the inn in question was already close to Egypt, not in the desert
   Some commentators claim that because this was close to Egypt, Tzipporah suggested that she should await the Exodus of the people of Israel while remaining at the inn, and join the Israelites on their way to the Holy Land from there. Moses entertained the thought to leave her there. Seeing that he considered the place safe enough to leave his wife and children there, he had no excuse not to immediately perform the circumcision.
   Still other commentators claim that he was punished because he should have circumcised Eliezer while still in Midian and not have taken Tzipporah and her children with him at all at that time. Still another view holds that this was the punishment for Moses having agreed with Yitro at the time he married Tzipporah that he would leave half of the children born to him uncircumcised. As a result, he was not at liberty to perform circumcision on his second son in Yitro’s house.
   
   4,25. ותקח צפורה צור, “Tzipporah took hold of a sharp edged piece of stone, etc.” she took a kind of chisel, the same kind as has been described in the Book of Joshua (5,3) as חרבות צורים, the instrument used by Joshua when he circumcised all the Jews that had been born since the Jews had left Egypt who had not been circumcised in the desert because the climactic conditions would have posed a threat to the lives of the infants.
   
   ותכרות את ערלת בנה, “she cut off the foreskin of her son.” Moses did not circumcise him as the angel had incapacitated him. This is the meaning of the words ויבקש להמיתו, “he tried to kill him.” If these words referred to the infant, as some believe, why would not Moses have circumcised his son himself instead of his wife performing this task?
   
   ותאמר כי חתן דמים אתה לי, “she said: ‘you caused my bridegroom’s bloodshed.’” Tzipporah’s remarks were addressed to her young son. She blamed him for causing Moses’ death, had she not intervened. When the angel released Moses she changed the meaning of what she had said first to mean that her infant’s blood, (the blood of the circumcision) had made him a bridegroom of blood. [she had acquired the child at the cost of some of his blood. Ed.]
   
   Some commentators claim that Tzipporah’s comment was addressed to Moses, i.e. that she felt the angel’s threatening to kill Moses was part of the punishment for his having married a Midianite woman. In other words, she felt that she had acquired her bridegroom at the possible cost of her bridegroom’s life. When the angel released Moses, she realized that the problem had not been her marriage to Moses but the failure to circumcise her son on time.
   
   4,27. וישק לו, “he kissed him.” Aaron kissed Moses. Seeing that Moses was so humble, it would have been unseemly for him to take the initiative by kissing his senior brother. This accounts for the fact that contrary to similar encounters reported elsewhere, the Torah did not write “they kissed one another”). (compare Samuel I 20,41)
   
   4,28. את כל דברי ה', “all the words of the Lord.” He explained to Aaron that he had repeatedly refused the mission G’d wanted him to carry out, and that in the end he had accepted the task only under duress.
   
   5,3. דרך שלשת ימים, “a distance of three days’ journey.” If Moses had declared that they wanted to leave the country for good, the Egyptians would never have agreed to lend them their valuable trinkets to use in their rituals.
   
   There is a comment in the <i>Midrash</i> according to which when G’d told Moses to have the Children of Israel ask for these trinkets, he replied to G’d: “is it worth the effort to make the Israelites borrow these trinkets for a mere three days?” G’d answered him that He was aware that Pharaoh would not even grant a vacation of three days, and that in response to his refusal G’d would bring on the plagues, at the end of which he would send the Israelites from his land permanently.
   
   פן יפגענו בדבר או בחרב, “lest He will strike us dead either with the plague or the sword.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this was a veiled warning to Pharaoh and meant “lest He strike you dead either by the plague or by the sword.”
   
   Ibn Ezra understands the line as a warning to Pharaoh as well as to the Israelites who would be punished for not heeding their G’d’s commandment. This is the reason why when the time came for the slaying of the firstborn, the Egyptians were afraid that they would all die. They had belatedly remembered what Moses had said during the first interview with Pharaoh. 
   Nachmanides rejects this commentary as he is bothered by the fact that Moses and Aaron had not been commanded by G’d to say to Pharaoh that their G’d had threatened to punish the Israelites if they failed to offer sacrifices to Him.
   
   5,4. למה....תפריעו, “why do you disturb, etc?” According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of תפריעו is the same as תבטלו, “you are causing idleness.” 
   Ibn Ezra interprets the word as תשבתו, you cause them to deteriorate as in Proverbs 5,23 (29,18) באין מוסר יפרע עם, “the people will become corrupt in the absence of discipline.”
   
   לכו לסבלותיכם, “go about your own business!” <i>Rashi</i> equates סבלותיכם with עבודתכם, “your work,” as opposed to סבלות, forced labour, as the members of the tribe of Levi were exempt from forced labour.
   
   Ibn Ezra does not perceive the word סבלותיכם as addressed to Moses and Aaron, but as referring to the forced labour of the masses of the Israelites whom they claimed to represent. Some commentators claim that even the ordinary Israelites did not have to join the workforce until they had reached the age of nine, and that they could “retire” at the age of 60.
   
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the words Pharaoh told Moses and Aaron to rather perform their duties for their King, together with the remainder of the nation, seeing that on that occasion Moses and Aaron appeared before him accompanied by the common people. Pharaoh therefore told those people to get back to work instead of wasting their time dreaming of an illusory redemption. When Moses and Aaron, instead of complying with Pharaoh’s command, appeared before him once more, he commanded them to legitimize themselves by means of a miracle. Once Moses and Aaron had done so, he no longer looked upon them as part of the common people but respected them as elders, as sages. Once they had begun to decree plagues upon Egypt, he no longer treated them only with deference, but with fear, with dread. It appears that not all of the Israelites were slaving away making and laying bricks all the time, for if so the country would have become a large heap of bricks. Making bricks was a tax imposed by Pharaoh on the entire population, but the Israelites were singled out by working far longer hours and by having to supply a much larger percentage of their manpower.
   
   5,9. ואל ישעו, “let them not pay heed, etc.” some commentators believe that the root is שען, to rely on, to draw support, and that the root letter נ has been omitted in this case.
   
   Ibn Ezra explains the term as meaning “so that they do not become weak,” ירפאו, in the sense of becoming weak through indolence, נרפים. False hopes would engender general slackness.
   
   5,14. גם תמול גם היום, “as (much as) yesterday also today?” According to Ibn Ezra the day referred to here as “yesterday,” was the day on which Moses had performed the miracles before the people, and “today” was the day on which Moses and Aaron had their first audience with Pharaoh. On both of these days the Israelites did not deliver their quota of bricks.
   
   5,15.וחטאת עמך, “and it is considered a sin by your people!” The overseers instead of accusing Pharaoh outright, phrased it in a less offensive way, i.e. as if the Israelites were the guilty party.
   
   5,19. ויראו שוטרי בני ישראל אותם ברע לאמור, “The foremen of the Israelites saw themselves in an untenable position, saying:” Ibn Ezra understands the word אותם here not as referring to someone else but as referring to themselves, as if the Torah had written: עצמם. He quotes a couple of other verses where the word is used in similar fashion, one being in Deut. 34,6 ויקבור אותו בגיא, “He buried himself in the valley.” [Moses entombing himself. Ed]
   
   5,23. למה הרעות לעם הזה?, “Why did You allow more evil to be done to this people?” Some commentators are stymied by Moses’ reaction, seeing that G’d had warned him beforehand that things would be tough for a while. Ibn Ezra thinks that Moses had thought that from the moment he would speak to Pharaoh there would at least be a gradual improvement in the people’s situation. Instead, the people’s lot had actually worsened. This is why he asked G’d what such worsening was meant to achieve. He could not square this with G’d having told him that He had observed the terrible condition His people were in and that He was about to respond to their pleas. This is why G’d immediately tells Moses that he would witness an improvement in short order.
   
   Nachmanides is not content with this answer, seeing that Moses had accused G’d of not having saved His people thus far, one of the promises made in 3,8 and there is no other way of “saving, i.e. rescuing” the people except by leading them out of Egypt. He explains therefore that Moses had thought that although G’d had prepared him for the fact that Pharaoh would turn a deaf ear to his request, his refusal would be followed by G’d beginning to orchestrate the plagues immediately. When this did not happen, and Pharaoh appeared to carry the day by imposing even stricter decrees, Moses was nonplussed, and sought answers from G’d. Three days had passed since his interview with Pharaoh and he had not received any additional instructions from G’d. He thought that enough time had elapsed for the people’s condition to undergo a healing process. When he saw that he had miscalculated G’d’s timetable, he wanted to know why G’d had not waited with sending him on this mission until the time for the redemption was at hand.
   According to a statement in <i>Shemot Rabbah,</i> when Moses saw that the Jewish foremen had been beaten and nothing happened to Pharaoh, he went back to Midian with his family to Yitro, leaving his family in his care until after the redemption would have materialized.
   
   6,1. עתה תראה, “now you will see;” according to <i>Rashi</i> the word “now” means that whereas Moses would witness the redemption from Egypt, he would not witness the entry of the people into the Holy Land. Both the accusation Moses leveled against G’d that He had worsened the fate of the people, and the failure to speak to the rock instead of hitting it in Numbers 20, 5-14, combined to his not being allowed to witness conquest of the land of Canaan.
   Parshat Vaeyra
   
   6,2-3. וידבר אלוקים....וארא אל אברהם, “G’d said….I have appeared to Avraham, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that instead of writing הודעתי, “I have made known,” the Torah wrote a passive mode לא נודעתי, “I have not become well known.” This means that G’d’s attribute of <i>Hashem</i> had not become properly known, familiar, to the patriarchs. Seeing that this attribute reveals more of G’d’s essence than such attributes as <i>shaddai,</i> or <i>elokim,</i> the element of G’d’s fulfilling commitments He made of a long term nature, such as the promise to Avraham that his descendants would survive 400 years of exile and enslavement and proceed to the land of Canaan and take it over as their ancestral homeland, this attribute would from now on become better known. G’d implies that seeing that the time frame after which the redemption was supposed to occur had not yet been completed, the fact that this attribute of G’d had not yet been appreciated was not a reflection of G’d having withheld important information.
   <i>
   Rashi</i> also quotes an alternate commentary which suggests that the people should have inquired after this attribute of G’d, [why He had failed to keep His promises, the ones made to the patriarchs, Ed.] and that G’d now explains the reason why He had not yet seen fit to do so. <i>Rashi</i> rejects such a commentary saying that the time for G’d fulfilling His promises had not arrived yet, so that such a complaint would have been inappropriate. 
   The problem with such interpretations is that already during the very first revelation of G’d to Avraham at the covenant between the pieces (Genesis chapter 15), the Torah clearly states that “the word of <i>Hashem</i> came to Avram,” In other words, G’d introduced Himself to Avram not as <i>shaddai</i> or as <i>elokim,</i> but by His name <i>Hashem</i>.” He had added further that His claim on Avraham’s obedience was based on His having saved him from the furnace Nimrod had thrown him into in Ur Casdim. <i>Rashi’s</i> rejecting לא נודעתי as meaning “I have not made known,” is based on this appearance of G’d precisely as the attribute of Mercy, an essential attribute, as Avraham had not had a claim to being saved at the time, seeing he had voluntarily submitted to that test of his faith. [my words based on Rabbi Yitzchok Arama. Ed.]
   The question is why did G’d have to tell Moses: “I am <i>Hashem</i>,” seeing that He had been known as such to the patriarchs. I believe that the answer is simple. G’d tells Moses that although He had been known in His capacity as <i>Hashem</i> to the patriarchs, [compare how Avraham describes Mount Moriah after the binding of Yitzchok, as compared to the opening lines of that chapter (Genesis 22) Ed.] He had not appeared in that guise to the Jewish people as yet. The problem was that the people had not enquired as to the difference between these various attributes of G’d, i.e. when He would prefer to relate to them under one heading (attribute), and when He would prefer to relate to them under a different heading (attribute).
   Knowing all this, we can better understand Moses’ question to G’d in 3,13 “which of Your attributes (name) shall I say to them is the one which will orchestrate the redemption?” According to the interpretation of לא נודעתי להם, “I have not been known to them,” Moses’ question at that time should have been: “when they ask me what shall I tell them?” <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation that the entire paragraph contains a criticism of Moses who had questioned G’d’s handling of the situation since He had appointed him as leader, was to contrast his behaviour with that of the patriarchs who, even when faced with what appeared G’d’s inexplicable behaviour, had not questioned this. [I find all this somewhat strange. Avraham, when having to come to terms with G’d’s treatment of others, such as the people of Sodom had questioned G’d’s judgment, though he had never questioned it when it concerned his own fate. Moses too, questions why his people are suffering more; he does not question his own image being tarnished. Ed.]
   At any rate, we must not mistakenly understand G’d as saying that He had not been known as possessing the attribute of <i>Hashem</i>, but as explaining that only now had the time come to guide the fate of the Jewish people under that heading.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the letter ב in the word בא-ל, suggests that it applies also to an additional factor, i.e. meaning ”with.” [as in “and in addition to”, i.e. ובשמי ה', “and with My additional name, etc.” Ed.] Accordingly, we are to understand the line וארא אל אברהם ואל יצחק ואל יעקב בא-ל שדי ובשמי ה' לא נודעתי להם, “My task in appearing to the patriarchs as the attribute <i>shaddai</i>, i.e. the attribute which governs My power to control nature, the sun, moon, etc., was different from My task at this time when I have to demonstrate My power on earth, a domain basically assigned to man. [some of these words are my own, though I trust they reflect that of the author quoted. Ed.] The patriarchs had been taught that their experience when G’d saved them from famine, from the sword during war, etc., that these were phenomena not related to their specific good deeds, but to G’d exercising His השגחה, benevolent providence, as part of the השגחה כללית, supervision of the universe as a whole. [When directing phenomena devoid of free will such as nature, G’d employs a different attribute from that which He has to employ when facing opposing forces equipped with a free will, such as man. Ed.] During His guidance of the universe at the time of the patriarchs, He did not confront man’s free will. 
   The blessings and curses promised in the Torah are not addressed to the conduct of individuals but to the conduct of mankind as a whole or the Jewish people as a whole, [although G’d warns individuals not to use the people as a whole as an umbrella to hide their individual misdeeds (Deuteronomy 29,17-20) Ed.] The real reward in this life for observing the Torah’s commandments is something known only to G’d, the lawgiver, it is in the nature of a נס נסתר, “a hidden miracle,” i.e. when it does occur no one can pinpoint it as something unnatural. [the concept is familiar from the string of “natural” coincidences and their timing which combine to make up the Purim story. Ed.] These apparent coincidences are actually part of the process of reward and punishment, except that they are not recognized by us as such at the time. The reason why the sages tell us that astronomical influences, i.e. <i>mazzal,</i> do not govern the lives of the Israelites is that the same G’d Who runs nature, also interferes in an invisible manner in what astrologers believed was a forecast of their fates in the stars. This does not mean that astrology is “for the birds,” on the contrary, it means that the Creator can manipulate the events forecast by astrology in a manner which changes their impact on the individuals whom He chooses to be so impacted. Such intervention enabled Rivkah to become pregnant and have children, and it resulted in the Jewish people surviving a bloody encounter forecast by the stars, by the blood in question becoming the blood of the mass circumcision performed by Joshua, instead of becoming the loss of their lifeblood.
   
   Moses had actually posed two questions to G’d. 1) Why did you send me on this mission at all? 2) Why have you so far failed to save the Jewish people from their misery? Concerning his second question G’d answered him: “now you are going to see why I sent you. You will witness what I am about to do to Pharaoh.” Concerning Moses’ first question G’d said: “I am <i>Hashem</i>.” G’d told him that He had used the patriarchs to demonstrate His stature as <i>shaddai,</i> the G’d controlling events from the heavenly throne, whereas now He would employ Moses to demonstrate how He organized events on earth, by Moses being as it were “His hand and His outstretched arm.” It is your task to make My attribute of <i>Hashem</i> familiar both to the Israelites and to the Egyptians, i.e. the rest of mankind.
   
   6,4. וגם הקימותי, “moreover, I have established;” I have also sent you in order for you to be the instrument through which I will keep My covenant with the patriarchs, if they are like them, to give them the land of Canaan 
   
   6,5. וגם אני שמעתי, “moreover, I have heard, etc.” an additional reason why I have sent you is that I have heard the groaning of the people, i.e. that they have repented their ways and seen fit to appeal to Me. Hence, just as I endure forever, so My promise will be in effect until carried out. I will demonstrate this with My outstretched arm.
   Concerning the opening line in our paragraph ושמי ה' לא נודעתי, something which we might have expected to have employed the same verb, i.e. ראה, for instance וארא אל אברהם...ושמי הי לא נראתי, “I have appeared to Avraham, but My name <i>Hashem</i> has not appeared, etc.” the reason for this is that, generally speaking, visions granted to the patriarchs occurred during the night, while they were asleep, whereas the manifestations of G’d you and your people will experience will all occur while you are fully awake. In other words, you will become privy to revelations of far greater dimensions than the ones granted to the patriarchs.
   
   6,6. והוצאתי אתכם מתחת סבלות מצרים, “I will take you out from under the slave labour of Egypt.” This is G’d’s promise that He would take them out of the land of Egypt and that they would not again experience having to perform slave labour. Seeing that this promise still left open the possibility that after leaving Egypt the Israelites would be subjected to heavy taxation in their host country, G’d added:
   
   והצלתי אתכם, “I will save you,” i.e. you will not be subjugated to some other government at all.
   
   וגאלתי אתכם, “and I will liberate you.” I will perform so many judgments on the Egyptians that they will liberate you altogether in preference to enduring more plagues. The word גאולה is used here in the same sense as “selling,” i.e. setting free. The meaning of the words בזרוע נטויה, is that G’d will twist their arm until they release the Israelites.
   
   6,7. ולקחתי אתכם לי לעם, “I will acquire you to be My people.” This will take place when you come to Mount Sinai and accept the Torah.
   
   וידעתם כי אני ה' אלוקיכם המוציא אתכם, “then you will know that it is I, your G’d, Who is taking you out, etc.” Ibn Ezra says that according to astrology, the Israelites would have remained in exile still longer. G’d declared that He will supersede what is written in the stars concerning their fate.
   
   Nachmanides feels that this explanation does not conform to the tenor of the whole portion. He therefore suggests that the meaning is that when you will observe the brute force used by the Lord to bring you out of Egypt, and this will be witnessed by all the surrounding nations, you will realize that He is really your G’d, and that He has orchestrated all this on your account and for your benefit.
   
   6,8. ונתתי אותה לכם מורשה, “and I will give it to you as an ancestral heritage.” G’d did not speak about ירושה “an inheritance;” this means that the people leaving Egypt during the Exodus would not be the ones inheriting that land, but their offspring would.
   
   וידבר ה' אל משה לאמור, “the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, etc.” Nachmanides writes that some commentators claim that whenever the word לאמור appears in the Torah in the context of something being addressed to Israel, it means that G’d instructed Moses to address the text following to the Children of Israel, whereas in this verse there is an exception and the words of G’d were to be relayed to Pharaoh  Such an approach is flawed, for when Lavan related to Yaakov that G’d had addressed him during a dream on the night before, warning him that he was not to harm Yaakov even by word of mouth, he quoted G’d as prefacing His remarks to him with the word לאמור, (Genesis 31,29). The same difficulty is obvious in all the instances when the Torah wrote וידבר ה' אל משה למור, followed by the words דבר אל בני ישראל וגו', “speak to the Children of Israel, etc.” If the wordלאמור  had already meant that Moses was to relate what follows to the Israelites, why would we need the words דבר אל בני ישראל, “say to the people of Israel,” at all?
   He believes therefore that the word לאמור precedes the instruction to Moses to be precise in his instructions to the Children of Israel, not to leave anything in doubt, not to speak allegorically, or by hinting only. The reason why this is so is because Moses, as the only prophet on such a level, received clear and unmistakable instructions from G’d. Other prophets received what our sages call “blurred visions.” If Moses were not to relay what he had been told clearly and unmistakably, why would G’d have troubled Himself to spell His instructions out to him in the first place? This is what G’d told Aaron and Miriam in Numbers 12,6-8, when He warned them not to compare their level of prophetic insights to that of Moses, with whom G’d spoke as clearly as a man speaks to his fellow man.
   
   6,12. הן בני ישראל לא שמעו אלי, “behold, even the Children of Israel have not listened to me, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> this was one of the ten occasions when we encounter an “a fortiori” method, i.e. a logical argument in the Torah. This comment seems uncalled for, seeing that the Torah had spelled out that the reason why the Children of Israel did not listen to Moses was because the terrible conditions under which they laboured had which made them unable to think rationally, i.e. they suffered from קוצר רוח, “impaired intellectual judgment.” Seeing that Pharaoh did not suffer from that same ailment, where was the logic that Moses referred to? Seeing that the commentators are obviously aware of this counterargument, they explain Moses’ argument as follows: “if even the Israelites themselves are afraid of leaving Egypt seeing the very discussion of such a plan brought additional hardship upon them, surely this knowledge will fuel Pharaoh’s determination not to let them go.” Alternatively, Moses simply meant that when Pharaoh saw that the Israelites themselves did not pay heed to their leader, why should he pay heed to him?
   
   ואיך ישמע אלי פרעה?, “how can Pharaoh be expected to take me seriously?” We need to understand the sequence of events as follows: originally Moses had been instructed to take the elders with him when they would speak to Pharaoh. (3,18) It is possible that at that point the elders did the talking, while Moses was silently listening. Moses was also too shy to speak to the people, as we know from his having told G’d that he was not איש דברים, someone qualified to appeal to people by his oratory. At that point, G’d had assured him that his brother Aaron would make a good mouthpiece for him, and that he would formulate what Moses intended to say to the people. He would also perform the miracles, etc.
   Now that G’d suddenly tells Moses to speak to the people himself, without Aaron as his mouthpiece, and after having done so, the people did not respond to him, he asked G’d how he could possibly expect Pharaoh to be more responsive than his own people? G’d now added Aaron to be Moses’ spokesman in all interviews with Pharaoh. The Torah also confirms that Aaron addressed the people conveying all that G’d had said. (4,30) He had commanded both of them to address the people of Israel, but it was enough that one of them should be the actual speaker during these encounters. Now that G’d commands Moses himself to be the speaker, He repeats once more that He is the One Who had appeared to him previously. When G’d now said (verse 13) that he and Aaron are to speak both to the people and to Pharaoh, Moses is satisfied. The procedure was that G’d would tell Moses what was to be said, and he would tell Aaron of the instructions he had received, and Aaron would address these instructions to Pharaoh or the people, in accordance of what  the situation called for. Aaron’s part in all this was comparable to the part of a prophet throughout the ages who would be commanded by G’d to relay a message to the people, except that in Aaron’s case the instructions would come from Moses, so that Moses fulfilled the role normally fulfilled by <i>elokim.</i> Hence G’d told him that he would have that role <i>vis a vis</i> Aaron. This was a major promotion for Moses, and enhanced his stature considerably. Moses merited this promotion due to his humility, not wanting to arrogate to himself a role unfitting for someone suffering from a speech handicap. This is also why the Torah testifies at a later stage, (11,3) that “Moses was considered as a person of great stature both in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of the Egyptians generally.” 
   This does not conform to <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation that the words וידבר ה' אל משה לאמור in verse 10 are an introduction to what follows in verse 13. The fact is that verses 10-12 are, while verse 13 is a separate paragraph, if you will, as is evident by their being written as separate paragraphs. We therefore do not need <i>Rashi’s</i> comment that Moses was to deliver the stark message and Aaron was to elaborate on it. Consequently, we stick by our explanation that Moses delivered the message in the presence of Pharaoh, but that Aaron addressed it to Pharaoh.
   
   6,14. אלה ראשי בית אבותם, “These were the heads of their father’s houses.” The Torah’s intention in this paragraph is only to give us the genealogy of the house of Levi, whereas Reuven’s and Shimon’s genealogy are mentioned only in order to accord them the courtesy due to seniority. Had the Torah ignored the genealogy of Reuven and Shimon at this point, some people might have thought that Levi was the senior of the brothers. In order to show that the Torah wishes to focus on the genealogy of Levi, the genealogy of the two senior brothers is abbreviated and is commenced only from the point where they arrived in Egypt. In the case of Levi, we are even told details of the number of years some of the principals lived. This enables the reader to reconstruct the chronology of the Jewish people commencing with the birth of Yitzchok.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the report of the number of years Levi lived was meant to honour Moses and Aaron. Seeing that the Torah meant to honour Moses and Aaron, it also included details about the years Amram, their father lived, as well as some details about the other sons of Levi. In the case of Yitzhar, even his grandchildren’s names were mentioned as the marriage of Amram to Yocheved is reported, seeing they were the founding couple from whom the leadership of the nation devolved. The sons of Yitzhar are mentioned only in order to put the conduct of Korach, the rebel, into proper perspective. The brothers of Korach, Nefeg and Zichri are mentioned without their children’s names, although they did not join their brother in his rebellion, whereas Korach’s sons are mentioned precisely because they did not join their father in his rebellion, as the Torah states on another occasion ובני קרח לא מתו, “Korach’s sons had not died during the rebellion.” (Numbers 26,11) Uzziel’s sons are mentioned as they distinguished themselves when removing Nadav and Avihu’s corpses from the Tabernacle. (Leviticus 10,4-5) Seeing that no information could be added to Chetzron, the Torah did not bother to list his children’s genealogy here. 
   
   6,23. ויקח אהרן, “Aaron took a wife, etc.” This detail is mentioned to show that even members of the priesthood, a hereditary distinction, paid tribute to the line of the kings, so that Aaron married a member of the Royal House of Yehudah, i.e. the sister of Nachshon, who was the 5th generation after Yehudah through his son Peretz. (Chronicles I,2,7) The Torah also mentions by name the marriage of Eleazar, son of Aaron, to a daughter of Putiel, in light of their illustrious son Pinchas, seeing that Pinchas, though born before his father had become a priest, merited elevation to the priesthood by a special decree of G’d. [anyone born to a father who was already a priest at that time became a priest through hereditary genes. Ed.]
   Our sages state that the reason why the Torah mentioned that Eleazar married “one of the daughters of” Putiel, instead of simply ”a daughter of” Putiel, is a compliment, not a reference to a Putiel who used to sacrifice to idols, but a descendant of Joseph who had demonstrated self control in not allowing himself to be seduced by the wife of his master Potiphar. (<i>Baba Batra</i> 115) [the use of the expression בנות (plural of בת) here alludes to multiple genetic input, including that of Joseph. Ed.] Elezar’s wife being a granddaughter, not a daughter of Putiel, is the reason that her name is not mentioned.
   
   6,26. הוא אהרן ומשה אשר אמר, “this was Aaron and Moses to whom He said, etc.” The point of this verse is that in respect to אמירה, verbal communication, the Torah mentioned Aaron ahead of Moses, as it was he who delivered Moses’ message to Pharaoh. He did the actual talking. On the other hand, whenever the Torah makes reference to the Exodus, Moses is invariably mentioned ahead of his older brother Aaron.
   Ibn Ezra explains the Torah mentioning Aaron first as something natural, seeing he was the senior of the two. Moreover, Aaron had displayed prophecy to the people before Moses had been appointed as the prophet. After this, whenever they were speaking to Pharaoh, Moses is mentioned first, seeing he had superior rank. This is why after this exception you will no longer find that the Torah mentions Aaron first when G’d addresses both of them, or when the Torah discusses something in which both brothers participated. One cannot bring a counter argument from the verse (Numbers 3,1) אלה תולדות אהרן ומשה, “these are the generations of Aaron and Moses,” (in this order) or from the verse ותלד את אהרן ואת משה, ”she (Yocheved) bore Aaron and Moses,” seeing that the Torah there merely records the order in which they were born
   
   6,28. ויהי ביום דבר, “It was on the day <i>Hashem</i> spoke, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra this verse is directly linked to what follows, i.e. verse 29 ויהי ביום דבר ה', “it was on the day that <i>Hashem</i> spoke,etc.” 
   
   Nachmanides claims that it is possible to understand verse 28 as referring to what had preceded it, i.e. to verse 26 where Moses and Aaron are described as the ones who had been commanded by G’d to take the Israelites out of Egypt. Seeing that once we have a verse in which Moses is mentioned first, and another in which Aaron is mentioned first, the meaning may well be that the commandment to take the Israelites out of Egypt applied to both of them in equal measure. The Torah now clarifies that the word of G’d was issued to Moses, but that the commandment to carry it out applied to both of them in equal measure. This is the reason why this paragraph was split into two sections.
   
   7,1. ראה נתתיך אלוהים לפרעה, “see I have made you like a God as far as Pharaoh is concerned.” According to Ibn Ezra the word אלוהים here merely denotes that Moses had been elevated to a very high rank, so much so that Pharaoh would relate to him with the same reverence as he would display when facing a disembodied angel of G’d who addresses the prophet whereas the prophet subsequently relays the words of the angel to his people.
   
   7,3. ואני אקשה את לב פרעה, “I will toughen the heart of Pharaoh.” Most people question G’d’s right to exact punishment from Pharaoh if He had first robbed him of the freedom of will which is an inalienable right of every human being created in the image of the Creator. The answer to this question is quite simple. Pharaoh was not punished for disobeying G’d’s command but for the relish with which he maltreated G’d’s people. He was punished for the excess cruelty he displayed. This was not due to G’d’s interfering with his free will, but to a flaw in his character as a human being. People who display this degree of inhumanity of man to man, are denied the opportunity to return to G’d in penitence. This is described in Ethics of our fathers as עברה גוררת עברה, the commission of deliberate sins brings in its wake the commission of more sins and yet more sins. There are numerous verses in Scripture confirming this principle.
   
   Furthermore, if you will examine the text of the ten plagues you will observe that G’d did not interfere with Pharaoh’s decision making brain or heart until after the fifth plague. The wording of the first five plagues describes that Pharaoh’s obstinacy in resisting G’d and Moses up until then was entirely spontaneous, not reinforced by any attempt of G’d to coerce his behaviour. During the last five plagues, when Pharaoh had initially indicated a preparedness to comply with G’d’ request and to let the people go, at least for a vacation of a religious nature, he reneged on his promises as soon as the plague had been called off by Moses. 
    Some commentators simply see in the words ואני אקשה את לבו, not an interference with Pharaoh’s free will, but a device that enabled him to endure the plagues without collapsing. This, as a corollary, made him feel that he was strong enough to withstand anything G’d would try and do to him.
   
   7,4. ונתתי את ידי במצרים, “I will put My hand upon Egypt;” the word ידי when applied to G’d, Who has no physical dimension, is parallel to the hand of a human being who uses it to punish, to inflict pain.
   
   צבאותי, “My hosts.” Just as the angels are perceived as G’d’s army in the celestial spheres, so the Jewish people are His army on earth.
   
   7,7. ומשה בן שמונים שנה, “and Moses was eighty years old, etc.” Ibn Ezra, in dealing with the age of Moses at this time, mentions that no other prophet has ever been described as practicing his prophecy at such an age. The only ones able to do so were those that enjoyed an exceptionally high level of prophecy, 
   
   7,11. בלהטיהם, “with their incantations.” A reference to a variety of activities all connected to witchcraft.
   Nachmanides explains that the word בלהטיהם is derived from the root להט, flame, i.e. that the activities of the Egyptian necromancers were concentrated on the use of the element of fire, one of the four basic components of the material universe. Apparently, the forces, i.e. “angels” in charge of this are afflicting man with fever (heat) i.e. an invisible flame. The fact that these sorcerers understood some of these processes in nature contributed to Pharaoh discounting the miracle, as in his eyes Moses was nothing but a more accomplished sorcerer. In non-professional parlance, the agents causing such frustrating phenomena are known as שדים, demons. What distinguishes this “demonic” activity is the fact that its approach is invisible, and therefore more frightening than visible phenomena. Just as we get no warning of attacks by viruses or similar disease carrying pollutants in the atmosphere, so these harmful phenomena not only cause disease and death, but they inspire fear in addition.
   
   7,15. לך אל פרעה בבוקר, “go to Pharaoh in the early morning, etc.” according to<i> Rashi,</i> Moses went to meet Pharaoh at a secret place near the waters of the river Nile, a place where he defecated secretly, maintaining the fiction that as a deity, he did not need to bother with such animalistic necessities. The fact that Moses would be in a position to reveal this well-kept secret, was meant to show Pharaoh that he depended on Moses’ discretion.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, Pharaoh was in the habit to take his daily exercise walk near the banks of the river Nile. Some commentators, focusing on the words הנה יוצא המימה, ”here he is going out towards the waters,” suggest that Pharaoh was given an opportunity to discuss the Israelites’ concerns with their leader, for there were guards at the entrance to his palace which prevented Moses from securing an interview with the king.
   
   7,16. והנה לא שמעת עד כה, “seeing that thus far you have not been willing to listen.” The meaning of these words, which appear at first glance as if they do not tell us something we did not learn from the narrative thus far, is that until I begin to carry out My threats, to bring on the plagues, you will not begin to listen. 
   
   7,17. כה אמר ה'.....הנה אנכי מכה במטה אשר בידי, “Thus says the Lord….behold I am about to strike with the staff  which is in my hand, etc.” 
   According to Ibn Ezra this verse is only a short summary of what is going to happen, the missing ingredient being the name of the One Who had entrusted Moses with this mission. The verse really should have read: “here I, the Lord’s messenger, am about to strike the waters in the river Nile with the staff which is in the hands of Aaron.” Moses described the staff as being in his own hand, although Aaron would use it to turn the water into blood, the reason being that he wanted to make plain to Pharaoh that both he and Aaron were equally involved in what was going to unfold before his eyes.
   Personally, I do not see why Ibn Ezra had any difficulty with the wording as it is, seeing that, as we already explained, it was always Aaron who addressed Moses’ words to Pharaoh. It is natural therefore that he referred to the staff as his staff.
   
   7,20. וירם במטה, “he held the staff aloft, etc.”  Nachmanides explains the construction וירם במטה as meaning that Aaron raised the staff with his hand extending it in all the directions of the globe, exactly as commanded, i.e. קח את מטך ונטה את ידך, and after having extended his hand in every direction he proceeded to strike the waters of the river Nile.
   
   Ibn Ezra also writes that the Torah mentions the fact that the river was struck, but there was no need to mention the motions made with the hand or arm in all directions of the land of Egypt, as the raising of the staff automatically includes the raising of the hand holding the staff.
   
   7,22. ויעשו כן חרטומי מצרים, “the sorcerers of Egypt did likewise.” From where did these sorcerers take the water to duplicate Aaron’s turning the water into blood? They must have either used water that the Egyptians had dug up surrounding the areas that contained water, or they must have taken water in possession of the Israelites. Some commentators claim that the waters that Aaron had turned into blood reverted to being water in short order, so that there was no shortage of water anywhere. This would account for the fact that Pharaoh failed to be impressed with this miracle. This is why Moses and Aaron were not called in to reverse the plague, (as they were on the next occasion).
   
   7,23. ולא שת לבו גם לזאת, “his heart did not become perturbed even by this.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word גם, “also,” as referring to both the miracles of the staff and that of the water turning into blood. 
   Nachmanides explains the words גם לזאת, as meaning that although the water having been turned into a blood was not a mere trick, but a real plague, Pharaoh refused to display any emotion at what he had witnessed. Normal people would have reacted by becoming afraid that the next plague would hurt them, personally.
   
   7,24. לא יכלו לשתות מים מן היאור, “they could not drink the waters from the river.” Even when the river again flowed with water, they could not drink those waters as they had become putrid from the dead fish that had died when the water had turned into blood. This explanation does not appear to stand up in light of what the Torah writes, as we have been told specifically (verse 25), that “seven days elapsed after the Lord had struck the river.” In other words, the plague ran its course for a whole week, unless we must understand that line to mean that after the blood reverted to being water the Egyptians still could not drink from the river for a full week.
   
   7,25. וימלא שבעת ימים, “seven days had elapsed.” This verse is a continuation of the previous verse that had told us that the Egyptians had been unable to drink the waters of the river without telling us for how long such a condition continued. For seven whole days the Egyptians, in order to secure drinking water for themselves, had to dig in the neighbourhood of the river’s embankment 
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that many people claim that the waters which, while in the hands of the Egyptians had turned red, immediately resumed normal colour as soon as the Jews held it in their hands. If that were true, why did the Torah not mention this additional miracle?
   Personally, [Ibn Ezra speaking, Ed.] I believe that the first three plagues, i.e. blood, frogs, and the vermin, struck not only the Egyptians but also the Israelites, seeing that these three plague caused relatively little damage to either property or life. I believe we are duty-bound to pay careful attention to the text, and seeing that the first three plagues were more of a nuisance than a real danger to life and property, and the Torah did not spell out, as it did later- that the Israelites were immune, we must assume that they were not.
   
   Only the fourth plague, wild beasts invading urban areas and wreaking havoc, were major disasters, and the fact that these beasts would not invade the province of Goshen, home to most of the Israelites, was predicted at the time when Moses warned Pharaoh of the impending plague. (verse 18) All subsequent plagues struck only the Egyptians, as testified by the Torah. 
   Therefore I conclude, that just as the Egyptians had to dig for water- but they secured it for themselves- so did the Israelites. Ibn Ezra’s determination to follow the plain meaning of the text prompted him to even assume that the locust and the boils (8th and 6th plague), which did not pose serious danger to people, afflicted also the Israelites. [Our author not only accuses him of ignoring the approach of our sages, but considers this as unnecessarily accusing G’d of afflicting His own people as if He were not able to immunize them. Ed.]
   
   8,1. אמור אל אהרן נטה את מטך, “say to Aaron to stretch out his staff, etc.” seeing that we have been told earlier (6,6) that G’d would employ His זרוע נטויה, “outstretched arm,” when the “hand” was employed instead, the Torah had to spell this out.
   
   Ibn Ezra claims that the stretching out of Aaron’s hand with the staff in all four directions resulted in the frogs emerging from the streams and rivers as well as from the lakes, but not from the ponds.
   
   8,3. ויעשו כן החרטומים, “the sorcerers did likewise. “They succeeded in making frogs emerge from the relatively few ponds which had not yet produced frogs. Seeing that they were unable to make the frogs retreat to their natural habitat, [presumably this had been the task set for them by Pharaoh Ed.] Pharaoh saw himself compelled to appeal to Moses and Aaron to pray to their G’d to stop the plague.
   
   8,5. למתי אעתיר לך?, “for when should I entreat for you?” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Moses offered to pray immediately for the plague to cease at a time of Pharaoh’s choosing.
   
   Nachmanides, approaching the text from a literal perspective, claims the plague disappeared immediately at the time Moses prayed, as we know from verse 9 “G’d did in accordance with Moses’ word.” The Torah did not write that the frogs disappeared on the morrow. The letter  לin the word למתי does not prove anything concerning the timing of the cessation of the plague. According to Nachmanides there is no special significance in the construction למתי, as to when precisely the frogs should die. 
   
   להכרית הצפרדעים, “to wipe out the frogs.” Seeing that Pharaoh had been under the impression that the frogs would increase dramatically, Moses prayed that the frogs should die forthwith, the word להכרית being of the same root as such verses as ונכרתה הנפש ההיא, “that particular life will be terminated, etc.” (Genesis 17,14, Exodus 12,15, et al.) The reason Moses prayed for the death of the frogs and not for their return to their habitat, was so that the stench from their carcasses should remind the Egyptians of how their conduct <i>vis a vis</i> the Jews was viewed by the G’d of the Jews. Pharaoh had assumed that Moses had meant that the removal of the plague meant that the frogs would return to where they had come from. Moses assured him that the frogs remaining at this time in the river would indeed remain there, but that the ones already on dry land would perish there. The line (promise) וסרו הצפרדעים, “the frogs will depart etc.,” (verse 7) was not meant to suggest that they would leave Egypt, but that a plague of frogs emerging from the river would not occur again. Moses’ elaborating on all this to Pharaoh only meant to prove to him that the plague emanated from G’d, and that it was decreed on account of his treatment of the Jewish people.
   
   8,6. ויאמר למחר, He said: “as of tomorrow.” The whole world wonders why Pharaoh did not choose an immediate cessation of the plague. The answer given is that Pharaoh was still under the illusion that possibly this was a natural phenomenon, the approach of which had been overlooked by the astrologers, and that the frogs would disappear of their own accord in short order. By asking Moses not to stop the plague immediately, he hoped to disprove that G’d had anything to do with it.
   
   Nachmanides writes that from the word למתי, “for when,” used by Moses, Pharaoh had thought that Moses would be unable to stop the plague in short order, but that it might take at least a week, (as it had with the plague of blood). This is why he allowed Moses only a very short period to make good on his boast. Moses told him that he would honour Pharaoh’s wish for when the plague should cease.
   Other commentators understand the word למתי as not relating to the plague and its cessation at all, but understand it as Moses asking Pharaoh when he would release the Israelites in response to the plague’s cessation. Pharaoh promised to do so on the following day. However, he conditioned this on the understanding that Moses would pray immediately. The tone signs under the letters support this explanation somewhat, seeing that there is a <i>pessik,</i> a clear division sign, between the word למתי and the word אעתיר, “I shall pray, entreat.”
   
   8,8. ויצעק משה, “Moses cried out;” seeing that he had gone out on a limb giving Pharaoh a chance to prove him wrong (התפאר עלי) without having first consulted G’d, he now had to add an element of urgency to his prayer, i.e. “he cried out.”
   
   על דבר הצפרדעים, “concerning the matter of the frogs.”  This is an allusion to what our sages (<i>Sanhedrin 80)</i> said when they claimed that the frogs were even quacking within the Egyptians’ entrails. [which would make G’d’s task of removing them difficult. Ed.]
   
   8,9. וימותו הצפרדעים, “The frogs died.” How do we square this with verse 7 in which Moses predicted the frogs as “departing?”  Moses had referred to the frogs as a plague departing, he did not predict that they would depart under their own power, as did the locusts in the eighth plague. On this occasion the dead frogs remained wherever they had died.
   
   מן הבתים ומן החצרות ומן השדות, “from the houses, the courtyards, and the fields.” You will note that the frogs that had put their lives at risk by entering the ovens of the Egyptians, are not reported as having died. This was their reward for their self-sacrificing conduct in the service of the Lord. They were rewarded by returning to their habitat, the river, alive. The frogs that had remained in the river also did not die so as to preserve the species.
   
   8,12. ויאמר ה' אל משה ,אמור אל אהרן, “The Lord said to Moses: “say to Aaron, etc.” This time Pharaoh was not given a warning of the upcoming plague. We do not find any warnings prior to the sixth or ninth plague either. Each of these plagues was the third in a series. We have a rule (Maimonides <i>Sanhedrin 18,4)</i> that if someone twice in a row ignores the penalty of physical punishment administered for sins committed and persists in his conduct, he will be confined in a prison on a starvation diet which will result in his early death.
   
   Nachmanides writes that Moses did not issue warnings to Pharaoh concerning impending plagues unless the plague in question would involve the death of Egyptians, and it would have been unfair not to forewarn them of impending death for ignoring Moses’ request. The plague of blood, for instance, could have resulted in the death of Egyptians who could not dig near the Nile to obtain subterranean water. Similarly, the plague involving the frogs wrought havoc amongst the Egyptians as we know from Psalms 78,45. The three plagues vermin, boils, and darkness however, did not pose any threat to the lives of the Egyptians. Some of the warnings of the plagues were given by Moses after G’d had instructed him to deliver the warning early in the morning on the banks of the river Nile, -This does not mean an ungodly hour in the morning, but what is called “morning” for Kings, who habitually are presumed to be late risers.- The King at such times, would be accompanied by a sizable entourage so that the issuing of the warning was overheard by many people and Pharaoh could not have denied having received the warning. G’d selected this method in the hope that some of Pharaoh’s servants after hearing the warning, especially after  the first plague, would try and make their ruler change his mind and release the Israelites. In the event that the servants did not try and change their ruler’s mind, they would be just as guilty as Pharaoh himself, and would have brought their misery on themselves by their own obstinacy. When we do not find G’d instructing Moses to warn Pharaoh in the morning, he received the warning while in a private audience with Moses and Aaron. Warnings in public also were the case when G’d had instructed Moses with the words: בא אל פרעה, “come to Pharaoh.” When such opportunities for Pharaoh’s servants to show themselves as less obstinate were not taken advantage of, the reason for delivering these warnings in public no longer existed. The well known abbreviations of the three groups of plagues, i.e. דצ'ך, עד'ש, באח'ב may also be explained in terms of the type of warnings preceding them, or no warning preceding them at all.. 
   
   According to the <i>Midrash,</i> the letters in these abbreviations were engraved on Moses’ staff to indicate which plagues would be preceded by which warning or by the absence of any warning. Others claim that the division is based on which plague was orchestrated by Aaron, which by Moses, and which by Moses and Aaron jointly. Others hold that they are hints as to which plagues originated in the atmosphere and which originated on earth or in the water. Yet other opinions draw attention to the purpose of each of these groups of plagues, a purpose spelled out clearly by the Torah before each group of plague, each time the operative clause begins with למען תדע, ”so that you will realize that, etc.”
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the first three plagues used the least sophisticated phenomena in our universe, i.e. water and dust. These plagues were initiated by Aaron. The plagues that were brought about by phenomena in the upper regions of our universe were orchestrated by Moses, seeing that Moses represented the highest level attained by any of G’d’s creatures. These were: hail, and locusts, which is brought on by the wind, an almost non-physical phenomenon. Similarly, darkness was also a plague that was brought on by the air, the atmosphere, something intangible. The third group such a wild beasts, pestilence, and the slaying of the firstborn was brought on directly by G’d Himself. The remaining plague, the boils, was brought on jointly by both Moses and Aaron without the staff having been used at all. The three plagues brought on by Aaron alone were orchestrated by means of the staff, as were the three brought on by Moses alone. None of the other 4 plagues involved use of the staff.
   
   Rabbi Saadyah Gaon writes that between them the plagues made use of the 4 basic raw materials our physical universe is made of. Three plagues utilized the basic material עפר, dust, i.e. earth; they were: “boils,” which originated in the dust remaining after the furnace has burnt its course. The vermin and the wild beasts, the other two, also made use of that raw material as all bodies are made of earth and return to becoming earth when the life they supported terminates. Three further plagues were based on the second raw material our universe consists of, i.e. on water. They were: blood, frogs, and hail. Still another three plagues made use of the third of the four basic elements, i.e. air. They were 1) דבר, the pestilence which struck especially the livestock. We have a verse in Psalms 91,6 מדבר באפל יהלך, which is interpreted by <i>Bamidbar Rabbah</i> 12 as describing disorders in the domain of air. [birds would not fall from the air, their habitat, unless someone had interfered with that habitat. Ed.] 2) the plague of locust, which had been brought on by unusual changes in the air, i.e. a wind blowing constantly from the same direction. 3) The darkness. The atmosphere was made opaque instead of transparent, so that people felt as if they were in a narrow prison and could not move at all.
   Finally, there was one plague, which employed the fourth basic element, fire; this was used in orchestrating the simultaneous killing of all the firstborn in Egypt. Separation of body and soul is the result of a subcategory of fire, i.e. heat, which disturbs the equilibrium needed for body and soul to live side by side in harmony.
   The plagues utilizing the staff as the instrument that resulted in the onset of each plague also show variations in the way the staff was employed on each occasion.  Sometimes Moses is commanded: “take your staff and incline it, etc.” other times he is commanded: “take your staff and raise your hand in which you hold the staff, etc.” Sometimes he is commanded to first employ his hand followed by the staff, other times the sequence is reversed.
   
   Some commentators feel that the basic example is the plague of blood, and that the same procedure i.e. extending the hand which was holding the staff, was followed invariably in bringing on all these plagues, but that the Torah did not bother to repeat this each time. The Torah merely employs part of the procedure on different occasions, particularly when describing the execution of the command. These commentators are concerned to have us realize that Moses and Aaron carried out their instructions without deviating from them in the slightest.
   
   8,13. ויעשו כן, “they did so.” Even though the command was executed only by Aaron, the Torah includes the issuance of the command by Moses, and that is why it uses the plural mode when describing its execution. 
   
   8,14. ויעשו כן חרטומי מצרים, “the Egyptian sorcerers did likewise.” This does not refer to what they accomplished, but to their copying the manner in which Moses had  produced the vermin. They struck the dust and chanted their incantations.
   Another way of understanding the words ויעשו כן, would be that they do not refer to the sorcerers trying to imitate Moses and Aaron, but to their using their own techniques, hoping to achieve a similar result. After all, on the previous two occasions they had succeeded at least in convincing Pharaoh that they too could produce the phenomena Moses and Aaron had produced.
   A third possibility of understanding our verse would be that far from wanting to increase the number of vermin, they endeavoured to get rid of them by using their standard methods. When they failed, they had to admit that Moses and Aaron were not mere sorcerers of a more advanced school, but that their art was inspired by Divine assistance. 
   
   ולא יכולו, “but they were unable.” Our sages find in this confirmation that the power of demons does not extend to creatures smaller than a grain of barley.
   Some commentators believe that the failure of the sorcerers lies in the fact that they are anchored in the habitat ”air, atmosphere,” are not part of the creatures who walk the surface of the earth, whereas the vermin are an integral part of earth itself, being generated inside the crust of the earth.  Creatures that cannot walk the earth do not have dominion over creatures that originate within the earth.
   
   ותהי הכנם באדם ובבהמה, ”and the vermin kept afflicting man and beast.´ The sorcerers themselves were also afflicted by this plague.
   
   8,15. ויאמרו החרטומים אצבע אלוקים הוא, “The sorcerers said that it was manifestation of a ‘finger’ of G’d.”
   Ibn Ezra wrote that far from admitting that Moses and Aaron were superior to them, seeing that thus far they had been able to match Moses and Aaron plague for plague, they now attributed this plague directly to a natural phenomenon, i.e. part of nature and its cycles, and as not related even remotely to the situation of the Israelites. [the fact that Moses had not given any warning of this plague helped convince Pharaoh that his sorcerers were right. Ed.] Pharaoh had never denied the existence of <i>elokim</i> the Creator, he had only refused to acknowledge the existence of the attribute <i>Hashem,</i> and the special relationship of that attribute to the Israelites, as “HIS” people. Ibn Ezra cites the fact that the sorcerers did not say: אצבע ה' אלוקים הוא, “it is a manifestation of the finger of <i>Hashem elokim</i>, although even Pharaoh had begged Moses to entreat<i> Hashem</i> to remove the plague of frogs, as proof of their being far from acknowledging the phenomenon <i>Hashem.</i>
   
   Nachmanides writes that in his opinion Ibn Ezra is not correct, seeing that the Torah would not refer to a plague as אצבע אלוקים, unless such a plague was a clear indication that it occurred as a Divine punishment, not as a random event, part of astrologically predictable “normal” phenomena. Expressions such as “G’d’s finger, G’d’s hand, G’d’s arm,” are always reserved for manifestations of G’d’s direct intervention in the affairs of man, not natural phenomena which could have occurred at any time without reference to specific events known to man. He quotes such examples as Exodus 14,31, Samuel I 12,15, Samuel I 5,11 as support for this thesis. Furthermore, the very fact that the Torah reports that the sorcerers were themselves afflicted to the extent that they had to leave Pharaoh’s presence, would make any claim that this was not a Divine manifestation related to the Israelites’ continued enslavement quite unlikely. Seeing that the sorcerers ceased playing any role, as Pharaoh did not summon them to try and get rid of the plague of wild beasts, a plague that he had been forewarned about, shows that Pharaoh by then was isolated in his obstinacy, knowing that the sorcerers would be of no help to him at all. The sorcerers had referred to “a finger of G’d,” in order to minimize the awe in which G’d would be held on account of a minor plague such as the vermin. We do not find that Pharaoh and his advisors ever referred to G’d as <i>Hashem,</i> except when they were in the presence of Moses and Aaron. This was mere lip service, as they did not want to aggravate their relations with Moses who had proven capable of not only orchestrating a plague but also of causing it to stop. As to Ibn Ezra’s argument that Moses and Aaron had not given warning of this plague, this is only technically so, as no doubt they had struck the earth while being in the presence of Pharaoh, and this clearly was meant to bring forth the vermin. To attribute such a plague of vermin to “natural” atmospheric phenomena would hardly be believable to anyone. 
   If, in apparent contradiction to the above, we find that the Torah describes the sorcerers as so afflicted by the plague of boils, (#6) that “they were unable to remain in the presence of Moses,” (9,11) the Torah does not mention this because the sorcerers had come to duplicate the plague of boils, but because the Torah had stated that in spite of this very painful plague, something which should have given Pharaoh food for thought, the Torah wants to illustrate how painful this plague was by stating that even the sorcerers who had their reputation at stake, could not maintain a posture during that plague. If the sorcerers could not maintain a posture, how far less could any other Egyptian, excepting Pharaoh, of course. The Torah therefore explains that if Pharaoh remained steadfast this was only because G’d had given him the strength to do so. ויחזק ה' את לב פרעה. (9,12)
   
   8,17. וגם האדמה אשר הם עליה “including the ground they are on.” This includes the areas that did not have houses on them.
   
   8,18. והפלאתי ביום ההוא, “I shall set apart on that day, etc.” There is no doubt that all the other plagues did not afflict the Israelites either. The reason why the Torah mentions that the land of Goshen would not be invaded by the wild beasts, is that once wild beasts are allowed to roam freely, it could have been expected that they would not know how to distinguish between areas inhabited by Egyptians and districts predominately populated by Israelites. The Torah had made a similar comment during the plague of pestilence (#5) stating that not a single Jew became afflicted with that disease. There too, we would have expected the microbes not to have known how to make a detour around the Israelites. In the case of the fourth plague, although there may have been a few Egyptians living in the province of Goshen, the fact that it was populated in the main by Israelites, appears to have protected the few Egyptians there. [this in turn might have stiffened Pharaoh’s attitude, as he was searching desperately for an excuse that these were natural disasters, not vengeance by the Jewish G’d. Ed.]
   
   כי אני ה' בקרב הארץ, “that I, the Lord, am also G’d in the midst of the land.” Ibn Ezra writes that it was customary in those days that the kings would make their residence in the centre of their land, so as to be equidistant from most of their subjects. They felt that just as man’s heart is located centrally within his body, so the place of a king has to be in the center of his realm.
   
   8,19. ושמתי פדות בין עמי ובין עמך, “I will place a deliberate distinction between My people and between your people.”  This means that even if an Israelite will find himself in an Egyptian neighbourhood at the time when the beasts invade urban areas, they will not harm a single Israelite. 
   
   8,22. כי תועבת מצרים, “for it is an abomination in the eyes of the Egyptians;” some commentators claim that this line is a comment added to the Torah by Moses, seeing he wanted to take a swipe at idolatry. When confronting Pharaoh in person, Moses referred to their deities as אלוהי מצרים, and not as תועבה. The reason Moses was provoked to refer to the Egyptians’ deities by a derogatory term was that they worshipped the image of a lamb.
   
   8,24. העתירו בעדי, “entreat for me!” Ibn Ezra writes that the words העתירו בעדי should by rights, have been written at the beginning of this verse. Pharaoh’s intent was that as a result of Moses and Aaron entreating G’d on behalf of Pharaoh, G’d should remove the plague. Subsequent to this, he, Pharaoh, would release the Israelites from bondage and permit them to leave the country (temporarily). He stipulated only that the Israelites would not travel far (three days’ journey as per Moses’ original request) in order to perform their ritual in the desert.
   
   8,25. וסר הערוב מפרעה, מעבדיו, ומעמו, מחר, “the wild beasts will retreat from Pharaoh, his servants and his people tomorrow.” Seeing that during the plague of the frogs Pharaoh had requested that the removal of the frogs be arranged for the following day, Moses told him that this time too he would pray for the wild beasts to depart on the following day. However, they would not die, as had the frogs, as our sages explained; this was because their carcasses would have proved useful and welcome to the Egyptians, and they were not to benefit from the plague.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the difference in the disappearance of the frogs on the one hand and the wild beasts on the other, is rooted in the fact that the frogs and similar low life creatures which are always spawned in multiple births, have a tendency to increase in huge numbers constantly. To bring them all back to the river would overtax the river’s ability to sustain them. The wild beasts did not increase in numbers during the time they invaded the urban areas of the country, and making them return to their normal habitat did not strain that habitat’s ability to sustain them. G’d had not created a single extra animal (mammal) in order for it to plague the Egyptians.
   
   9,3. הנה יד ה' הויה, “behold, the hand of <i>Hashem</i> is about to afflict<i>,</i> etc.” Our sages have derived from the word יד ה' “the hand of <i>Hashem,”</i> as opposed to the previous mention of אצבע אלוקים, ”a finger of G’d,” that G’d orchestrated five times as many miracles while the Israelites and the Egyptians were at and in the sea of Reeds, as He had done in Egypt proper. Even though mention of G’d’s finger occurred only in connection with the plague of vermin, the meaning of that had been that whereas previously the Egyptians had related to the plagues as a variant of the magic performed by sorcerers, at that point they had realized that they were confronted with something Divine in origin, the “finger” of the Creator. 
   Although, now that the word יד, “hand of <i>Hashem’”</i> appears in connection with a plague that occurred in Egypt proper, this appears to invalidate the sages’ comment, this is not necessarily so, as the Torah here uses the word “hand” to describe the five categories of creatures which will become the victims of the pestilence about to occur, i.e. horses, donkeys, camels, cattle and sheep. The word יד is really extraneous in our verse as everyone can count that five species of creatures are mentioned. It is therefore reasonable to contrast the 10 plagues in Egypt with the 50 plagues which Rabbi Yossi Haglili told us occurred at the Sea of Reeds. Personally, I believe that the sages based themselves not so much on the word אצבע and יד respectively, when they extrapolated from its appearance, but from the addition of G’d’s name. Whenever the Torah uses the term יד or אצבע by itself, it is to be understood as such, and nothing additional needs to be read into it. When mention of the organ is followed by a reference to who is the owner of that ”hand” or “finger,” this is an invitation to the reader to investigate an additional message contained in the verse. 
   The author, (Rabbi Yaakov ben Asher) feels that the fact that the word יד ה' is followed by precise details of who will be the victim of this hand, means that nothing beyond what meets the eye is to be read into our text.
   
   במקנך אשר בשדה, “against your cattle that are exposed in the field.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the pestilence struck only the beasts left in the field in spite of the warning. This explains why there were beasts left that perished during the plague of hail. They were the beasts that had been sheltered by their owners during the plague of pestilence.
   
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah chose the present tense to narrate this plague and that the beasts which were indoors died also, and that this is why the Torah writes (verse 6) “all the livestock of the Egyptians died.” The word כל usually translated as “all,” is not to be understood literally, as whenever the majority of something died this is described as “all” of it dying. 
   Some commentators understand the line וימת כל מקנה מצרים, “all the livestock of the Egyptians died,” as meaning that all the dead beasts were found to have been owned by Egyptians, and not Israelites, the Torah adding this by writing that not a single beast owned by an Israelite died during that period, in order to emphasise it still further. The Israelites had kept their sheep well apart from the Egyptians, seeing that these considered sheep raising as an abominable occupation. It is possible that seeing that the microbes that infected the animals were carried through the air, the Torah had to write that G’d performed a miracle so that none of the animals owned by the Israelites would be victimized.
   
   9,8. ויאמר ה' אל משה ואהרן קחו לכם מלא חפניכם פיח הכבשן, “the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: ‘take for yourselves two handfuls of furnace soot;’” According to Ibn Ezra the reason that no demand was made to release the Israelites prior to decreeing that plague was that it did not last long.
   
   9,9. והיה לאבק, “it will turn into dust.” According to our sages this minute amount of furnace dust scattered over the entire land of Egypt and descended wherever there was a human being or beast that it could land on, and these would break out in painful boils on their skin. Perhaps the wind carried this dust even into the houses of the Egyptians. A similar phenomenon is well known as occurring during periods of drought when dust is brought even into the houses with the nightly dew. 
   Perhaps a straightforward explanation of the verse is that the words והיה לאבק, “it will turn into dust,” means that this soot from the furnace will immediately be turned into dust that in turn would turn into boils the moment Moses and Aaron threw it into the air. G’d decreed that this soot [normally the antithesis of anything septic. Ed.] will pollute the air and spread this painful series of boils. This was a heavenly decree not accounted for by any of the scientists.
   
   9,11.  ולא יכלו החרטומים לעמוד, “and the sorcerers could no longer stand before Moses, etc.” This is a description of the embarrassment of the sorcerers at their impotence, so that they withdrew to their private quarters so as not to have to face any hostile or disrespectful audience.
   
   9,12. ויחזק ה', “the Lord strengthened the heart of Pharaoh.” It is possible that during the preceding plagues the presence of and encouragement by the sorcerers had helped Pharaoh to maintain a defiant posture. Now G’d had to strengthen his heart so that he would not capitulate prematurely, and G’d could not complete the whole series of plagues He had planned.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that Pharaoh did not ask Moses to pray to G’d on this occasion because the plague did not last long, and we should not assume that because the first plague had lasted for seven days, that all the subsequent plagues also lasted for a whole week. We should be guided by the text, so that the plague of pestilence lasted only for an hour, whereas the plague of darkness continued for three whole days. This being so, we have no way of calculating during which month of which year these plagues commenced. If what the sages have handed down to us is based on tradition, we are, of course, bound to accept this, if not, we may pursue our own speculations. 
   
   9,13. השכם בבקר, “arise early in the morning!” Ibn Ezra draws our attention to the fact that the Torah did not command Moses this time to meet Pharaoh at the banks of the river Nile. Perhaps there was some other reason why Moses was commanded to arise early on that day.
   
   9,14. את כל מגפותי, “all My plagues.” The Torah describes the phenomenon of this hail as “G’d’s plagues,” (plural mode) although it is listed as only one of ten plagues. The reason is that it consisted of so many different components, i.e. thunder, rain, hail, and fire. This clearly was the plague that shook Pharaoh more than any other so far, as he reacted by admitting that the Lord was righteous and that he as well as his people were the wicked ones.
   
   9,17. עודך מסתולל בעמי, “seeing that you still continue to act as an obstacle against My people. etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the word מסתולל has its origin in סלסלה, a word describing something exalted, superior, etc. Pharaoh is accused as still considering himself and his people as superior to the Israelites. The root letters are repeated as originally it would have sufficed to write the word as in סולו לרוכב בערבות, “exalt the One Who rides the highest celestial regions.” (Psalms 68,5)
   Some commentators understand the word as describing reinforcement as inנשמו מסילות , “the paved (reinforced) highways have become desolate.”(Isaiah 33, 8)
   
   9,18. אשר לא היה כמוהו בארץ מצרים, “the like of which never occurred in the land of Egypt.” The wording suggests that this phenomenon had never been experienced in Egypt, although it had occurred elsewhere. We have a verse in Joshua 10,11 where G’d is described as raining down large stones on the Canaanites. Seeing that rain does not normally fall in Egypt, this would be a frightening experience in that country. Seeing that hail consists of frozen rain particles, that experience was new in Egypt also.
   
   למן היום הוסדה ועד עתה, “from the day it was founded until now.” All the preceding comments were part of what G’d announced to Moses, as Moses would not have been in a position to make such statements not having lived that long in Egypt. There is no need to tell us that Moses would deliver every word to Pharaoh which G’d had told him to convey to him. There is therefore no need to repeat his telling this to Pharaoh in detail, and the Torah made do with reporting that there were people who took Moses’ warning at face value, whereas those who did not paid with their lives.
   According to <i>Rashi</i> who claims that the pestilence only struck the beasts which had been left outside in the fields, why did Moses not warn the Egyptians at that time to take their beasts indoors to protect them, as he did here, to offer them protection against the hail? The answer, no doubt must be, that if the Egyptians had heeded Moses’ warning against leaving their livestock outside, the pestilence would not have a target to attack. In the case of the hail, the hail struck the earth, the orchards, etc, so that there were plenty of targets left even if the livestock had been salvaged. The livestock had only been considered a secondary target of the hail.
   
   9,23. ויט משה את מטהו על השמים, ”Moses stretched his staff heavenwards.” According to Ibn Ezra, the word שמים here is an alternate for the word “atmosphere.” We also find the expression רקיע השמים as referring to the atmosphere and not to celestial regions.
   
   ותהלך אש ארצה, “and the fire traveled earthward;” the reverse of the natural behaviour of fire which strives upwards.
   
   9,26. רק בארץ גשן אשר שם בני ישראל לא היה ברד  “only in the land of Goshen, the area in which the Israelites lived, was there no hail.” Seeing that Moses raised his staff toward the atmosphere generally, not in any specific direction, we would have expected that the hail would strike indiscriminately. The Torah therefore reports the additional miracle that the district in which the Israelites lived was not struck by the hail or rain.
   
    ה' הצדיק, “the Lord is righteous;” a reference to the warning issued by G’d to Pharaoh. When human beings exact vengeance they do not, as a rule, first warn the victim and provide him with a means to escape the impact of the punishment.
   
   9,29. כצאתי את העיר, “when I will leave the city, etc.” According to Nachmanides, normally Moses prayed in his house when calling upon G’d to stop the plague. Seeing that on this occasion he wanted to spread out his hands in prayer towards heaven imploring G’d to stop the hail, the thunder and rain immediately, this kind of prayer could not have been offered inside the city which was so full of the abominations that the Egyptians worshipped.
   Our sages say that Moses always prayed outside the city, period. The only reason that the Torah mentions this specifically at this point was that Pharaoh demanded an immediate prayer with immediate consequences. The Torah therefore had to explain that all of this could not occur immediately, in the strict meaning of the term, as Moses first had to leave town in order to pray to G’d.
   Some commentators understand the words כצאתי את העיר as meaning: ”when I leave your presence in order to go back to the city, etc.”
   
   9,30. ואתה ועבדיך ידעתי כי טרם תיראון, “I am well aware that both you and your servants do not yet relate with awe and reverence to <i>Hashem.”</i> According to Rabbi Saadyah gaon, this verse must be understood as part of the verse following, in which we are told tat the hail destroyed only the flax and barley crop. The wheat and spelt crops had not been harmed. He hinted to Pharaoh that as long as he had these crops to fall back on, he did not expect him to become a true penitent. He could promise that the hail would not again destroy any crop.
   
   Ibn Ezra directs our attention to the absence of any mention of what was supposed to happen before Moses would pray. Normally, after the word טרם, the Torah reports the event or activity which followed next. (compare Genesis 19,4, Isaiah 65,24, Samuel I 2,15) Here we may assume that Moses conditioned his prayer on the Egyptians first confessing their guilt and their willingness to make amends. The Torah wrote that Pharaoh continued to sin, and that this was because G’d had hardened his heart, i.e. his penitence was only from the lips outward.
   
   Nachmanides writes that there is no need to put words in the Torah’s text which are not there. Moses referred to his experience with Pharaoh, i.e. that as long as the plague had not been called off he maintained a posture of penitence, which vanished as suddenly as the plague itself.
   
   9,31. הפשתה והשעורה נוכתה, “the flax crop and the barley crop had been destroyed;” Nachmanides writes that he does not understand why these verses have been inserted here, at a point when Moses had not yet completed his prayer. 
   According to Rabbi Saadyah gaon these comments are not part of the Torah, but are a Torah recording of what Moses had thought at the time. Nonetheless he himself is unhappy with this interpretation, seeing that the Torah had stated that the hail struck all the grass in the field (verse 25), i.e. even underdeveloped grain seedlings. [we must remember that we do not possess an original manuscript of Rabbi Saadyah gaon on this, but only Ibn Ezra’s quote. Ed.]  In light of this, how could the wheat and the spelt have escaped serious damage by the hail? We must therefore assume that the comments which we find disturbing were part of Moses telling Pharaoh that he knew that his posture of penitence while under the influence of the destruction all around him, may have been sincere, but it would not last as not all the crops have been destroyed, and that is why as soon as he would experience relief he would promptly forget about his having acknowledged that G’d was righteous and that he was the sinner. 
   [When one looks at the plagues with the benefit of hindsight as we do, Pharaoh’s continued obstinacy appears foolish and self-destructive in the extreme. When one tries to put oneself into the realities of his time, one can appreciate that he felt that any G’d who does not kill a rebellious creature, as does a mortal king with a rebellious subject, probably does not have the power to kill. The plagues were tools at his disposal, but sooner or later he must run out of such tools, and the survivor of God’s plagues would stand tall as a hero. Ed.]
   Moses explains that the reason that the wheat and spelt crop was undamaged had nothing to do with G’d’s inability to ruin them, but was an integral part of their developing later in the season, and remaining pliable even after lengthy exposure to hail and rain. Moses may have presented these words as an inspiration he had received from G’d, although he had not been told specifically to reveal this to Pharaoh. It is an implied warning not to renege on his penitence as G’d has other means at His disposal to also ruin these crops without which the Egyptians could not sustain any meaningful standard of living.
   
   9,32. כי אפילות הנה. “for they ripen later in the season.” <i>Rashi,</i> offering also the view of the <i>Midrash Tanchuma 16,</i> writes that this was an exceptional miracle i.e. the word אפילות is a rearrangement of the word פליאות, ”miracles.” The <i>Midrash</i> quasi begs the question why we need to resort to miracles when the Torah itself had offered a rational explanation why these crops had not been destroyed by the hail. Perhaps, although these crops had not been ruined by the hail, they could have been ruined by some other natural disaster. The Torah therefore may have wanted to inform the reader that Pharaoh was aware that there had been no other reason to fear for that crop.
   Some people question that if we accept the view that the time frame of each plague, including the preceding warning, lasted for a month, and we count backwards from the plague of the dying of the firstborn which occurred in Nissan, that the plague of hail must have occurred in the month of Tevet, and how could any crop be sufficiently advanced at that time to suffer damage or even be ruined through hail? Even in the land of Israel only barley ripens by Nissan? In light of this calculation, most commentators came to the conclusion that each cycle involving any of the plagues could not have lasted longer than two weeks, including the preceding warning when such occurred. Accordingly, the hail would have occurred during the month of Adar. Possibly, seeing that Egypt’s crops never had to wait for irrigation, thanks to the river Nile and its canals, the grains ripen there at a time which for us is the deep of winter.
   
   9,34. וירא פרעה כי חדל המטר והברד והקולות, “when Pharaoh saw that the rain, the hail, and the thunder had ceased, etc.” Note that in the previous verse the Torah had described the cessation of the plague as occurring in a different sequence of steps, i.e. 1) thunder, 2) hail; 3) rain.  The latter was described as being arrested in mid-air. The sound of Moses’ prayer resulted in the sound of thunder ceasing, the spreading out of his hands resulted in the hail and rain stopping to fall. Pharaoh’s perception of the sequence of these events was different, however. He first noticed that the rain and the hail had stopped. Only later did he realize that also the thunder had ceased.
   
   ויוסף לחטוא, “he continued to sin.” All this in spite of the fact that he had publicly acknowledged that G’d was righteous and that he and his people were the wicked ones.
   
   ויכבד לבו, “his heart became strong;” in spite of the fright that he had experienced during the progress of the plague of hail.
   
   הוא ועבדיו, “as well as his servants.” The Torah mentions his servants as they had a tradition that Moses would impose 10 plagues, and hail had been the seventh plague. We had pointed out earlier that the plague of hail contained elements of four plagues (hail, fire, thunder and rain) so that the Egyptians clung to the illusion that they had weathered the last of the plagues. This was also the reason why, when Moses threatened an additional plague, the servants finally lost their cool, and challenged Pharaoh, asking rebelliously, for how long he would allow Moses to become the snare that would ruin them. They had realized that these plagues would continue endlessly until Pharaoh would release the people of Israel.
   Alternatively, seeing that Moses had said that both Pharaoh and his servants had yet to humble themselves in true penitence, they reacted by making Moses’ statement a self-fulfilling prophecy and they stiffened their attitude.
   Parshat  Bo
   
   10,1 בא אל פרעה כי אני הכבדתי את לבו, “come to Pharaoh for I have hardened his heart.” G’d informed Moses that although, by natural processes, Pharaoh’s heart had already become softened, and he had even confessed his guilt, He, the Lord, had now hardened his heart again.
   
   למען שיתי, “in order that I can demonstrate, etc.;” to give Me an opportunity to perform My miracles so that the Egyptians (and the Israelites) will become familiar with My power; Pharaoh will not, however, be subjected to additional punishment on account of My having hardened his heart.
   
   10,2. ולמען תספר, “and in order that you will tell, etc.” What G’d said to Moses here, He said on behalf of the whole Jewish people, i.e. for the people to tell their children and grandchildren all that had happened to the Egyptians just before the Exodus, how G’d had made a mockery of the Egyptians. He mentions the hardness, obstinacy, of the Egyptians who were the servants of Pharaoh, seeing that the Torah had reported that both Pharaoh and his servants had  (on their own) stiffened their attitude (9,34). This audience with Pharaoh had as its purpose to warn him of the impending plague of locusts if he would persist in reneging on his promise to let the Israelites depart. There would have been no point in sending Moses to Pharaoh unless he was meant to deliver a message. The Torah abbreviates the narrative of the first audience involving this warning, describing Moses as not waiting for any response from Pharaoh. The Torah sometimes chooses to be more succinct in its narrative than on other occasions.
   
   <i>Midrash Shemot Rabbah 13,4</i> quotes G’d as having told Moses about the forthcoming plague by the hint that it would be something that would be talked about for many generations. The <i>Midrash</i> quotes Joel 1,3 which discusses another plague of locust, this time in Israel, as something that made an equally lasting impression. 
   
   10,3. ויבא משה ואהרן, “Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh, etc.”  Ibn Ezra writes that it was a known fact by now that whenever a plague was to be announced both Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh. Why then did the Torah see fit to single out this occasion by writing that both Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh? The reason may be that we hear later that Pharaoh dismissed both Moses and Aaron summarily. Had we not been told that they both had come to Pharaoh, this would have sounded strange. Pharaoh’s reaction to the warning on this occasion was out of character, seeing that he had clearly admitted being in the wrong. Had it not been for G’d stiffening his attitude to the point of being rude to Moses for the first time, his behaviour would be totally beyond comprehension.
   
   10,4. הנני מביא מחר ארבה, “behold I will bring on a plague of locusts,” Nachmanides writes that some commentators believe that many months separated the plague of hail from that of the locusts. These scholars base themselves on the line (verse 5) ואכל את כל העץ הצומח לכם מן השדה, “it will consume every tree that grows for you in the field.” [seeing that the Torah had described the hail as ruining all the trees, (9,25) until they had been replaced how could the locusts eat their foliage? Ed.] Nachmanides himself disagrees with this view, claiming that only a few days elapsed between the plague of hail and that of locusts, seeing that the judgments visited upon the Egyptians did not exceed a period of 12 months. Moreover, it is clear from the Torah that there had been some residue which had not been harmed by the hail (again verse 5,ואכל את יתר הפלטה הנשארת לכם מן הברד, “it will consume any remnants left intact for you by the hail.”) This clearly shows that both plagues occurred in the same calendar year. The hail could not have occurred before the month of Adar, as no crop would have had advanced enough to be ruined; the plague of locusts, obviously, must have occurred before the middle of the month of Nissan, the month of the Exodus. The trees that the hail struck were the branches which had not yet sprouted blossoms or fruit. The trees struck by the locusts had already produced leaves, etc.
   
   10,6. ויפן ויצא מעם פרעה, “he turned (without taking leave) and left the presence of Pharaoh.”
   Some commentators think that Moses turned to face the King and to retreat walking backwards, all the while facing the King.
   Other scholars, on the contrary, interpret our verse to mean that Moses turned his back on Pharaoh and marched out of the room. He indicated that he was angry and did not request permission to withdraw.
   The reason why Moses acted in this fashion was that he assumed that just as Pharaoh had once before demonstrated real fear during the plague of the hail, he would do so again now, and he would finally humble himself to prevent wholesale deaths from hunger of his subjects due to the locusts. By leaving at this moment, Moses wanted to afford Pharaoh and his advisors an opportunity to consult and agree on a course of action.
   
   Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation of what the Torah narrates here is that this was Moses’ standard procedure after he had delivered a warning. The only reason why the Torah dwells on this detail here is that for the first time Moses and Aaron were recalled after they had left.
   
   10,7. ויצא....ויאמרו עבדי פרעה, “after Moses had left the servants of Pharaoh said, etc.” They waited until Moses had left, as they did not want to challenge their King in Moses’ presence, and they did not want to give Moses the satisfaction to know that they were afraid of him.
   
   10,8. מי ומי ההולכים?, “who are all those who are going?” Pharaoh wanted to know, that seeing the request of the Israelites had been for a leave of absence to offer sacrifices to their G’d, who would be the people involved in that other than adult males of superior rank, the ones normally performing such rites. Moses replied that seeing the occasion was happy one, a festival, the entire nation would participate in such celebrations.
   
   10,10. ראו כי רעה נגד פניכם, “see here, your evil intent is staring you in the face.” The evil you plan to embark on, i.e. your attempt to flee from Egypt, is clear from the fact that you want to take even your small children with you.
   Another possible explanation for the above line is: you should face the fact that you will shortly be faced with retaliation by me, so that your illusion of freedom will be short-lived.
   Alternatively, the words ראו כי רעה נגד פניכם, could mean  “the evil which you intend to do will boomerang and hit you in your faces.” I will forbid you to leave altogether, and you will be paid back tit for tat. 
   
   10,13. ורוח הקדים נשא את הארבה, “and this easterly wind carried the locusts.” Seeing that an east wind is a blast of hot air, as we know from Jonah 4,8, where the effect of this hot easterly wind on Jonah’s state of mind is described, and it is the custom of locusts always to make their appearance when it is hot, as we already know from the prophecy of Nachum 3,17 מנזריך כארבה וטפסריך כגוב גבי החונים בגדרות, ביום קרה שמש זרחה ונודד ולא נודע מקומו אים, “Your guards were like locusts, your marshals like piles of hoppers which settle on the stone fences on a chilly day; when the sun comes out, they fly away and nobody knows where they are.” When G’d would want the plague to disappear, all He had to do was to command a west wind to that region.
   
   10,14. ואחריו לא יהיה כן, “and after it there will never be its equal.” The plague of locusts during the life of the prophet Joel could not be compared with the plague in Egypt, as the latter comprised a single species of locusts, whereas in Israel at the time of Joel there were a number of different species of locusts combining to make the experience so memorable. (compare <i>Rashi</i>)
   
   Nachmanides questions the above, quoting Psalms 78,46: “He gave their crops over to the grubs, their produce to the locusts.” He also quotes another verse in Psalms 105,34 “Locusts came at His command, grasshoppers without number.” According to both these verses there were more than one species of locusts that invaded Egypt during the plague described in our chapter. Perhaps, in order to reconcile the apparently conflicting statement by <i>Rashi</i> with the verses mentioned fro the Book of Psalms, <i>Rashi</i> meant to say that the species of locusts which invaded Egypt in our chapter was a much larger one than people had ever become familiar with, whereas the species that appeared in the time of Joel were larger than the several species which became manifest in the days of Moses. This attempt to resolve the problem is futile, as there is no question that when the Torah in our chapter discusses the uniqueness of this plague of locusts it means that neither prior to that time nor afterwards did such a plague ever again occur on such a scale.
   
   Rabbeinu Chananel, on this verse, writes first of all, that the Torah means that such a plague of locusts, which had been predicted by a prophet, never occurred again. The invasion of the land of Israel in the time of the prophet Joel had not been announced beforehand by a prophet. Furthermore, ever since the prayer of Moses to have the plague of locusts removed, Egypt was never again plagued by locusts. [My edition of Rabbeinu Chananel does not contain such a statement, Ed.] At any rate, Rabbeinu Chananel feels that just as Joshua requested the miracle of the sun and moon being arrested in their orbits until he had mopped up the opposing armies, Moses predicted the miracle of the plague of locusts, and he did not even have to request it.]
   It is possible to understand the plain meaning of our text differently. Just because a plague of locusts was something quite common in those regions in those times, and moreover, seeing that the one which occurred during the reign of Pharaoh, was orchestrated by a completely natural event, namely a strong east wind blowing, it was necessary for the Torah, i.e. in this instance Moses, to mention the fact that it would occur, to point out when and how it would occur, and that it would be disproportionately severe in the damage it would cause, so much so that it would be more severe than anything like it ever, before or after. This would bring home to the victims that this was not a natural disaster but a punitive act by the Creator.
   
   10,16. חטאנו לה' אלוקיכם ולכם, “we have sinned against the Lord your G’d and against you.” He apologized to Moses and Aaron for having insulted them and banished them from his presence.
   
   10,17. שא נא חטאתי, “please forgive my sin.” Pharaoh employed the singular mode when addressing Moses seeing he was the senior leader and was an <i>elokim,</i> Divine representative <i>vis a vis</i> Pharaoh. When appealing for their prayer on his behalf to G’d, he employed the plural mode, i.e. העתירו, not העתר. He did so as a form of courtesy, knowing full well that it was Moses who would pray for the cessation of the plague. We know this already from Moses’ offerלמתי אעתיר, “for when shall I pray,” during the plague of the frogs. He is also on record as having said: והעתרתי אל ה' “I shall entreat the Lord.”
   
   10,19. לא נשאר ארבה בגבולך, “not a single locust remained behind within the boundaries of your country.” The locusts, as opposed to the frogs at the time, did not die, the reason being that they had not come into existence for the purpose of this plague. They had merely been transported across a great distance, away from their natural habitat [this is all based on the opinion that the wordsותעל הצפרדע in 8,2 appears in the singular mode as opposed to the other occasions when this word appears in the plural mode. According to this view, a single frog became converted into millions of frogs for the sake of the plague, but after it had already left the river Nile. The frogs would therefore not have been able to “return” to their habitat, not having had a habitat in the first place. Ed.] 
   
   10,21. וימש חשך, “the darkness will be tangible.” This expression describing touching something, as when Yaakov expressed his concern to his mother Rivkah that his father, being blind, would subject him to the ”touch-test.” (Genesis 27,12) The darkness was so opaque that the people could feel it with their hands. The reason was that this “darkness” was not merely the absence of light of the sun, but it was caused by the descent of “thick” air into the lower atmosphere covering Egypt. This layer of “thick” air extinguished any candles or other artificial means of lighting the Egyptians would use at night to see by.
   
   10,24. צאנכם ובקרכם יוצג, “your flocks and herds will stay put.” Pharaoh, knowing that the Israelites’ original vocation was to be cattle herders, was convinced that if they meant to leave permanently, they would not leave their livestock behind. Even if he should have miscalculated, Pharaoh figured that the huge amounts of livestock left behind by the Israelites could be viewed as a compensation for the need to make do without their slave labour.
   
   10,25. גם אתה תתן בידינו זבחים ועולות, “you too will give to us (from your own herds) meat offerings and burnt offerings.” Moses did not intend to use Pharaoh’s animals as sacrifices by the Jewish people, seeing that such offerings belonging to idolators, would be an abomination in the eyes of <i>Hashem</i>. He made these remarks to show Pharaoh that not only would he not benefit financially by the departure of the Israelites, but on the contrary, he would be so anxious for them to leave when the time came that he would compensate them financially in order to get rid of them sooner. The Lord’s hand would be felt so severely that Pharaoh would be willing, if only able, to offer all kinds of sacrifices to assuage the Lord’s feelings which he had hurt by his obstinate posture during this whole period. All he would be concerned with at that time would be to save his own life.
   
   10,29. לא אוסיף עוד לראות פניך, “I shall never see your face again.” If, in apparent contradiction to this statement, the Torah described Pharaoh as calling Moses and Aaron (12,31), on that occasion Moses may have stopped short of entering Pharaoh’s palace, or, what he meant here was that instead of Moses coming to see Pharaoh, as had been the case lately, the next time Pharaoh would have to come to see Moses.  
   
   11,1 עוד נגע אחד אביא על פרעה, “I shall bring one more plague upon Pharaoh.” Moses received this message from G’d while still standing in the presence of Pharaoh.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that Moses was given this instruction while in Midian, when G’d told him to tell Pharaoh that he would kill his firstborn son (Exodus 4,23.) The meaning of the word ויאמר in our verse is simply that G’d had already told this to Moses some time ago. Here too the Torah engages in an abbreviation. The Torah relies on the details of this plague having been announced in verses 4-10.
   
   11,2. כלי כסף וכלי זהב, “vessels made of silver and vessels made of gold.” Why did Moses not include a reference to garments, as the Torah had done 3,22? This reference to garments surfaces again when the Torah describes that the Israelites “borrowed” these from their neighbours immediately prior to their departure (12,35). Some commentators say that the reason was that “shlepping” along all kinds of garments was more of a handicap for the people on their impending journey, so that G’d omitted reference to the garments, to indicate that this was entirely voluntary; they did not have to ask for clothing. The Israelites, when it came to the departure, decided to fulfill G’d’s commandment in its entirety, hence they also asked and received fancy garments.
   
   11,3. ויתן ה' את חן העם בעיני מצרים, “G’d granted the people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians.” In spite of the fact that the Egyptians experienced all these plagues orchestrated by the messenger of this Jewish G’d, they no longer related to the Israelites with hostility; on the contrary, they had belatedly realized that not the Israelites but they themselves had been the sinners all along by using brute force in their relations with them. It was therefore no more than fair that G’d recompensed them by endowing them. We must not translate the words ויתן ה' את חן העם בעיני במצרים, as a reference to the “borrowing” the Israelites were about to do, as, at the time when the Israelites had not yet received these items the expression ויתן would be premature when all they had as yet was a promise by G’d. Here G’d could only have said “I will give the people favour, etc.” In chapter 12,36 G’d is reported (in the past tense) of having given the people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians as the reason why they handed over all these valuables.
   
   גם האיש משה, “moreover, the man Moses,” he enjoyed such an image because he had orchestrated the plagues.
   
   גדול מאד בעיני עבדי פרעה, “enjoyed great stature in the eyes of Pharaoh’s servants.” This is a reference to the servants who had challenged Pharaoh’s policy.
   
   ובעיני העם, “and in the eyes of the people.” This  refers to the Jewish people. Seeing that the people, after Moses’ failed intervention on their behalf, had challenged him to a דין תורה with G’d, protesting his mixing in their affairs (Exodus 5,21). The Torah now reports that the minds of the people had undergone a change of heart <i>vis a vis</i> Moses, even though they were still enslaved in Egypt.
   Other commentators understand the words ובעיני העם as referring to the Egyptian people. The reason that the Torah did not report Pharaoh and his pliant ministers as sharing this high regard for Moses, was because G’d had toughened his heart so that he spoke to Moses in a disparaging manner [something he had not done previously. Ed.]. G’d had created this scenario in order to eventually force Pharaoh to come to Moses and plead that the Israelites leave, the sooner the better. In this manner, Moses’ stature would be enhanced still further if the “mighty” Pharaoh came begging to him in the middle of the night.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the words ויתן ה' את חן העם בעיני מצרים are to be understood both as relating to the Egyptians lending their valuables to the Israelites, and to the esteem that they held Moses in by that time.
   
   11,4. כחצות הלילה, “around midnight.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the reason that Moses did not refer toבחצות הלילה , ”precisely at midnight,” as the Torah reports the slaying of the firstborn having occurred at, was because he did not want to take a chance of being called a liar in the event that the astronomers’ clocks in Egypt were not accurate. 
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that according to some experts in grammar, the word כחצות is a form of the verb when it becomes converted into a noun. The meaning is: “at the point of time known as midnight, etc.” In other words, the meaning is no different than if the Torah had written בחצי הלילה. 
   Personally, I do not think there is a need for all this, as the meaning of the words כחצי הלילה is “the moment the stroke of midnight is over, etc.” At that moment the second half of the night commences.
   
   Nachmanides writes that G’d had never said to Moses that this would take precisely at midnight of a certain date, but that the words reflect that Moses had been informed that on some midnight this plague would become effective. The precise date when this would occur was revealed to the Israelites only in the second paragraph dealing with it. (12,23) The third paragraph dealing with this plague reports on what happened and to whom. (12,29)
   
   11,5. עד בכור השפחה אשר אחר הרחיים, ‘to the firstborn of the maidservant who is behind the millstone.” When the Torah reports about the actual plague happening, it uses a different example when describing the woman at the lowest rung of the social order, namely “the firstborn of the prisoner in jail.” Actually, the Torah refers to the same person each time. When the warning was issued it was daylight, so that the prisoner was at work moving millstones. When the plague occurred it was midnight, a time when all the prisoners are in their cells to prevent them from escaping.
   
   11,7. ולכל בני ישראל לא יחרץ כלב לשונו, “but against all the Children of Israel not a dog will whet its tongue.” (in preparation to giving the alarm) even though the city was full of corpses and it is the custom of the dogs to howl in the presence of corpses, as well as when they hear people walking at night; in fact there is a popular proverb according to which howling of dogs without visible reason, signifies that the angel of death is about. In spite of all this, on this night in Egypt the dogs kept mum.
   11,8. וירדו כל עבדיך אלה אלי, “and all these servants of yours will be coming down to me, etc.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> this is a form of courtesy to Pharaoh, as the King. Moses had in mind that Pharaoh would come down to where he lived, but he used a euphemism in order not to sound as if he meant to insult him. Although the Torah had described Moses’ as leaving Pharaoh for the last time in a state of “burning fury”, meaning that he had slapped Pharaoh so that at that point Moses certainly did not treat Pharaoh deferentially, we may accept the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish who says that instead of replying to Pharaoh’s insolent refusal, he slapped Pharaoh. [there are numerous explanations as to what Resh Lakish meant with his statement. Ed.] Others say that Pharaoh had slapped Moses prior to his leaving. [the basic problem is that the Talmud feels that every expression of anger must have a tangible symbol, and here none such has been spelled out. Ed.]
   11,9. למען רבות מופתי, “in order to increase the number of My miracles.” Seeing that there was only one plague left to be performed in Egypt, <i>Rashi</i> understands the plural mode <i>moftay”</i> as applying to both the killing of the firstborn and the splitting of the Sea of Reeds, and the Egyptians being poured into that sea and drowning.
   Nachmanides claims that this could not be the meaning here, seeing the Torah concludes by “and he did not release the Israelites from his land.” He explains the meaning of מופתי as meaning that although the plague of the killing of the firstborn was the plague most feared by Pharaoh, and we would have expected him to humiliate himself rather than to maintain his posture, G’d explains that Pharaoh’s attitude was only due to His having strengthened his heart, giving him this unbelievable fortitude. G’d explains to Moses that this will provide Him with the justification to orchestrate more miracles. The plural mode is justified because the plague of killing the firstborn also resulted in the Egyptian deities being destroyed and their livestock similarly experiencing the death of the firstborn.
   11,10. ומשה ואהרן עשו את כל המופתים האלה, “and Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles. This verse refers to the miracles which have already been described in detail. The reason this is mentioned here is because Moses and Aaron had completed the task of warning the Egyptians of what would befall them if they did not heed the warnings.
   Ibn Ezra writes that in light of the fact that G’d had told Moses at the outset that Pharaoh would not respond to warnings or plagues until the last one, and this stage had now been reached, seeing that he had received all the warnings he would ever receive, the Torah reports that Moses and Aaron had carried out all the instructions they had received. If not for the need to write the Passover legislation prior to the Israelites performing those rites, the Torah would have continued with reporting the killing of the firstborn and the departure of the Israelites immediately.
   12,1. וידבר ה' אל משה ואל אהרן בארץ מצרים, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses and to Aaron in the land of Egypt, etc.” The emphasis here is on the word ארץ, in open country, outside the city limits, as our sages have explained. We must distinguish between such utterances of G’d to Moses as the instruction to warn Pharaoh of the plague of the dying of the firstborn, a communication Moses received while in Pharaoh’s palace, not outside the city limits. Prayers, commandments, etc., G’d had not revealed within the urban area to Moses, nor did Moses offer his prayers, there, as the urban centers were the centers which abounded with idolatrous symbols, symbols which were despicable in the eyes of G’d. In fact, Moses had already been informed about the plague but it had not been a commandment in the sense that he had to deliver the warning at a certain time. This occurred only now, and seeing that there was nothing new in it this warning this could be delivered within the urban area. The legislation about a new calendar and the Passover had to be revealed outside the urban areas of Egypt
   12,2. החודש הזה לכם, “this month shall be for you.”  Seeing that this was the first commandment relayed to the Jewish people, the Torah mentions that it was revealed to him in the land of Egypt, seeing that all (most) other laws were given to him at Mount Sinai. Alternatively, the words בארץ מצרים mean that the law was given in the rural area of Egypt not while Moses was in the urban areas.
   
   It would have been appropriate for the Torah to continue immediately with: “speak to the community of Israel that this month will be the first, etc.” However, Moses and Aaron are here considered as representing the entire people, and G’d first wanted to legislate matters that would remain valid throughout the generations before dealing with how the Passover by the present generation of Israelites who stood poised for the Exodus was to be observed.
   
   Once the Torah reports Moses and Aaron being told דברו אל כל עדת ישראל (verse 3), this is the commandment to tell the people now how to observe their Passover. Verse 14 commences with details about the observance of the day of the Exodus to be observed in subsequent years and by subsequent generations. 
   
   According to the <i>Midrash</i> the wording of the Torah gives only the Jewish Supreme Court the latitude to proclaim the new moon so that the Torah could not first address the entire people.
   The meaning of the words: “this month shall be for you the first of the months,” is first and foremost that from now on this is the first month in the year for you, and all subsequent months are going to be named in relation to this month, i.e. “the second month”, “the third month”, etc. This will serve to keep the month of the redemption and the miracles associated with it alive in our daily lives throughout the year.  We follow the same pattern as we follow with the days of the week, (in our daily psalms) by making the Sabbath the focal point of the week and the days following it all being related to it by being called “second day,” “third day,” etc.  We remind ourselves of the day of our rest on every single day of the week by means of this stratagem Similarly, we remind ourselves of the miracle of the redemption by the Torah mentioning months only in that fashion. 
   [after the Babylonian exile, the Jewish people adopted proper names for the months, even reflected in the manner we announce the new moon on the Sabbath preceding it. This was not the Torah’s intention, obviously, and this writer wonders if the sages who permitted use of the secular names of the months wanted to remind us that the redemption from the Babylonian exile did not completely eliminate the traces of exile for a variety of reasons which are not my task to elaborate on here. Ed.] These names of the months current in Persia did find their way into the Bible in the writings of Ezra, Daniel, and the story of Esther, as well as in the prophecies of Chagai and Zecharyah. These prophecies were all revealed while the prophets and the people were already in exile. The Jews who returned to the land of Israel after the Babylonian exile, may have intended to remind themselves of their being redeemed from that exile in a manner parallel to the Jews who were redeemed from Pharaoh’s exile.
   
   12,5. שה תמים, ”an unblemished lamb.” It was appropriate to select a lamb for that sacrifice as the horoscope of the lamb is in its ascendancy during the month of “<i>Nissan</i>.” Consuming the lamb was a reminder to every Israelite that this Egyptian deity had been completely powerless to protect its worshippers. By doing this we testify that our departure from Egypt was not due to our own efforts or ability, but exclusively to the power of <i>Hashem</i>.
   
   12,6. בין הערבים, “in the afternoon.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> this means any time from noon on, as this is called בין הערבים. Ibn Ezra disagrees, citing as his reason that when it come to lighting the <i>Menorah</i> in the Temple, the Torah describes that time as בין הערבים in Exodus 30,8 and this refers to a period close to sunset, as we know from the Torah’s own elaboration with the words יערוך אותו מערב עד בקר, Exodus 27,21, “that the time for the Menorah to be arranged to burn is from evening to morning.”
   
   Nachmanides writes that he believes that the night is referred to as ערב, seeing that the Torah has commanded us to eat the <i>matzoh</i> on the night of the 14th to the 15th of Nissan with the words בערב תאכלו מצה, seeing that the <i>matzah</i> had to be eaten with the meat of the Passover and the Passover is described as being eaten during the לילה, “night, roasted on the fire etc.” (12,8). He agrees that the end of the day is also called ערב, even if it is clearly still daylight, as we know from Genesis 19,1 ויבואו שני המלכים סדומה בערב ולוט יושב בשער סדם, “The two angels arrived in Sodom in the evening, while Lot was still sitting holding court in the public square of Sodom.” [the evening being a time when they were still clearly visible. Ed.] Furthermore, we have a verse in Psalms 55,18 ערב ובקר וצהרים אשיחה ואהמה, “evening, morning and noon I complain and moan.” Clearly, the psalmist, by mentioning these three parts of the day, means to describe the entire day as being divided into three parts. It follows that any part of the day which follows noon and is not yet evening must be called בין הערבים, “afternoon.” The period following dawn while the sun is still in the east is called בקר, morning, comprising a total of six hours. The period known as צהרים, “noon” comprises 2 hours, i.e. one hour before astronomical noon and one hour after astronomical noon. The term צהרים is taken from the word צהר, a bright light, as we find it in the top of Noah’s ark (Genesis 6,15) “a window for light, צהר, you are to make in the ark.” These two hours are the brightest part of the day. As soon as the shadows lengthen after the sun has passed its zenith and the sun has left the eastern part of the sky, we come to the period known as בין הערבים. This period until nightfall is known as ערב. The real meaning of the term בין הערבים is not that it is something that separates two time periods from one another, but it is similar to the meaning in מבין השרפה, Numbers 17,2 where it describes Eleazar’s fire-pan being picked up right in the midst of the fire. Similarly,בין הערבים  describes a time period within which slaughtering of the Passover lamb is to take place. This time frame is bounded at the beginning from immediately after noon and at the end immediately before sunset. This is also the meaning of בין הערבים תאכלו, in Exodus 19,12 where G’d tells the Israelites that they are to eat the quail during that time frame. Seeing that we have no reason to believe that the quail could not be eaten also later, and there is no restriction applicable to it such as when eating the meat of animals whose blood was sprinkled on the altar, <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation that the plural mode of ערבים refers to two evenings is very plausible. He refers to the ערב בקר  and the ערב יום, the end of the period known as morning and the end of the period known as day. The time in between is the time during which the Passover lamb is to be slaughtered. We find support for this interpretation by <i>Rashi</i> in Kings II 3,20 ויהי בבוקר כעלות המנחה,  “and in the morning when it was time to present the meal offering, etc.” We also encounter the other time frame known as בין הערבים, as מנחת ערב, the meal offering of the evening, in Ezra 9,5 ובמנחת הערב קמתי, “at the time of the evening offering I concluded my fast, etc.” The term מנחה in both instances is not confined to the “meal offering,” but on the contrary, it is derived from the word מנוחה, i.e. when the sun prepares to take a rest from its daily activity in the sky. This meaning is reflected in the translation of Onkelos on the word ערב in Genesis 3,8. Similarly, this is the time frame allocated to lighting the <i>menorah</i> and the offering of the second part of the daily incense offering, (in conjunction with the daily burnt offering) which are also described as בין הערבים in Exodus 30,8 and 29,39 respectively. We can explain the words:שם תזבח את הפסח בערב, (instead of בין הערבים) in Deuteronomy 16,6 as referring to a period previously described as ערב in conjunction with the setting of the sun. Onkelos understands the term בין הערבים as בין שמשיא, “between the sun in the east and the sun in the west,” as in ויהי כבא השמש בערב, “it was when the sun was about to set, in the evening, etc.” Deuteronomy 16,6 clearly defines ערב as the period when the sun sets: שם תזבח את הפסח בבוא השמש, normally translated as “there you will slaughter the Passover, in the evening, when the sun sets.” This translation would clearly conflict with what the Torah has written here. Therefore, in my opinion, the word תזבח  in that verse does not refer to the slaughtering but to the whole procedure of offering and consuming the Passover which reflects the preparation the Israelites had made on that date for an immediate departure from Egypt. The verse in Deuteronomy therefore concludes withמועד צאתך ממצרים, “the appointed time at which you departed from Egypt.” After all, the Torah had referred elsewhere to the fact that G’d had taken the Israelites out from Egypt at night,כי.... הוציאך ה' אלוקיך ממצרים לילה. (Deut. 16,1) We must not forget that the actual Passover sacrifice was called by the Torah זבח פסח, so that there is nothing strange in the word תזבח not meaning: ”you will slaughter,” in the verse quoted. Similarly, it appears that we can also understand Deut 16,4 ולא ילין מן הבשר אשר תזבח בערב ביום הראשון לבוקר, as referring to the sacrifice you have performed on the evening of the first day (of the Passover). There is no need to translate the word תזבח as “you slaughter.” The verse tells us that the sacrificial meat of last night’s זבח, also known as the Passover, must not be allowed to be left over uneaten until daybreak.
   
   12,8. צלי אש ומצות על מרורים יאכלוהו, “roasted on the fire together with unleavened bread and bitter herbs they shall eat it.” The meaning of the word על in the phrase על מרורים, is “with,” just as in the construction ראשו על כרעיו ועל קרבו, “its head together with its legs and its innards.” The reason why the Torah employed the word על here in preference to the more common word עם for “with,” was to indicate that it is not mandatory to make a “sandwich” of all thee three ingredients and to eat them all simultaneously. As long as all three ingredients are eaten during the same meal that is satisfactory. The verse also teaches that the bitter herbs do not need to be eaten with the unleavened bread, as long as they are eaten in conjunction with the meat of the sacrifice. Concerning the eating of the unleavened bread the Torah repeats (verse 18) that it is to be eaten during the course of that evening, i.e. the repetition meaning that this is mandatory even if for one reason or another –such as the absence of the Temple- we cannot eat the Passover lamb.
   I believe it is more correct to explain the word ומצות in our verse as belonging to what has been written immediately prior to it, i.e. ואכלו את הבשר בלילה הזה צלי אש ומצות, so that the eating of the bitter herbs is not part of the Biblical commandment, but is a Rabbinic injunction. In practice this means that when there is no Passover meat the commandment to eat bitter herbs is no longer Biblical. Not only that, if for some reason no bitter herbs are at hand, this does not invalidate the commandment to consume the sacrificial meat. Anyone who has consumed the meat of the Passover even without the bitter herbs, has fulfilled his Biblical duty. Eating unleavened bread on that evening and eating the meat of the Passover are two separate and independent Biblical commandments.
   
   12,9. כי אם צלי אש, “but only when roasted on the fire.”  Seeing the meat had to be consumed in a hurry, and boiling meat takes longer than roasting it.
   
   12,12. ובכל אלוה' מצרים אעשה שפטים, “and I will execute judgments on all the deities of Egypt.” <i>Rashi,</i> in illustrating how these judgments of the idols of the Egyptians were carried out, says that if the deities had been made of wood, the wood would rot, whereas if they had been made of metal,  the metal would melt.
   
   Nachmanides points out that <i>Rashi</i> had failed to explain that the reason why the Torah had not given us these details may be understood in light of Jeremiah 10,8 ומוסר הבלים עץ הוא, “(according to Malb’im) seeing that in our imperfect world the instruments of enforcing discipline are usually made of wood, sticks to beat with, etc., although foolish people also make deities out of wood, destroying everything made of wood would hardly teach man a lesson. This is also why when the plague of the killing of the firstborn is carried out, the Torah does not mention precisely which of the Egyptian deities were destroyed, as the word כל is noticeably absent there. Moreover, destroying their idols at night would not worry the Egyptians, who, 1) worried first of all about their own lives, 2) did not become aware until daylight that something had happened to their personal idols. It would therefore not have had the desired effect at the appropriate time.
   Nachmanides therefore proposes the following: mention of the deities of the Egyptians refers to the respective representatives at the heavenly throne of the people of Egypt, their <i>mazzal.</i>
   The fact that the Torah writes (Numbers 33,4) that the Egyptians were busy burying their dead and that G’d had killed their deities lends support to Nachmanides’ interpretation.
   
   12,21. ויקרא משה לכל זקני ישראל, “Moses called to all the elders of Israel.” This paragraph is a summary, similar to when G’d commanded Moses earlier, saying only כאשר צוה ה' את משה כן עשו, ”the Israelites did in conformity with all that G’d commanded to Moses.” The method that Moses followed in relaying these commands to the people was by telling them details of the legislation before summing it up in general terms. The Torah, reverting to the general terms, כלל, describes Moses calling together the elders who in turn assembled the people at large, telling them משכו וקחו לכם צאן , “draw forth or buy for yourselves a sheep, etc.” It is quite possible that the formulation used was due to the fact that the livestock of the Israelites was quite a distance away from them in the province of Goshen. They were forced to leave their livestock there as sheep, being something repulsive, abominable to the Egyptians, they would not want to antagonize the Egyptians by having their sheep where the Egyptians would see them. The whole paragraph was read to the people, and additional details about what to do with these animals’ blood were added, including the brush to use with which to smear the blood on the doorposts and lintels of their dwellings. They were also warned not to leave their houses during the time that this killing of the firstborn would take place, so as to avoid becoming victims themselves.
   
   12,22. ואתם לא תצאו, “as far as your yourselves are concerned, do not set foot outside the threshold of your houses.” <i>Rashi</i> points out that this warning became necessary after G’d had given permission to the forces normally active as destructive elements, such as the angel of death, to be about on that night and to perform their duties. These forces are not equipped to distinguish between the innocent and the guilty, and the night is the period during which they perform most of their work. He quotes Psalms 104,20 בו תרמוש כל חיתו יער, “that is when all the beasts of the forest stir,” as his source.
   
   Nachmanides writes that he does not understand <i>Rashi’s</i> remark that the night is the period during which all destructive forces enjoy free reign. If that were so, he argues, why is it not forbidden to go out every night in order to protect oneself against these forces, based on the warning in the verse we have just read?
    <i>Rashi</i> should have written that on this particular night the destructive forces in the world had been given a free hand to carry out their work. The reason that the Torah, i.e. <i>Rashi,</i> did not want to present the matter in this light, is that seeing that G’d personally, orchestrated the killing of the firstborn a wrong impression would have been created.
   What happened was as follows: G’d warned the Israelites not to leave their houses during that night because during that night G’d Himself was traversing all parts of Egypt, similar to a king who patrols his realm. Just as a king does not do so without an entourage which precedes him to herald his coming, and which ensures that no assassins lie in wait for the king, so it is with G’d, as we know from Zecharyah 14,5 ובא ה' אלוקי כל קדושים עמך, “and the Lord my G’d will arrive and all the holy angels will be with You.” Seeing that we find that at a time when the destructive forces have been given free reign they do not distinguish between the guilty and the innocent, the only way the Israelites would all be immune on that night was if they stayed indoors. Normal people do not go out at night even if they have not been told not to do so, because they are aware that it is not as safe as to go out by day. If, on that night, an Israelite would change his habit of staying at home, he would expose himself more than he would on other nights. How do we deal with the words: ולא יתן המשחית לבא אל בתיכם לנגוף, “and He will not allow the destroyer to enter your homes to inflict him?” The meaning is that the destructive forces which abound every night anyways, will be restricted to the outside by G’d on this night, so that no Israelite who stays indoors will die on that night, [even if according to G’d’s timetable set for him before he was born, this was the date when normally he should have died. Ed.] On that night only G’d Himself killed Egyptians. 
   Some commentators simply say that the word המשחית in our context here is not an adjective but a noun describing the act of destruction, השחתה. 
   
   12,24. ושמרתם את הדבר הזה, “You shall observe this matter.” This verse does not refer to the instruction to smear the blood of the Passover lamb on the lintel and doorposts, seeing that this was a commandment that applied only on the night of the Exodus, but it refers to the basic Passover legislation and its ritual. 
   
   12,25 והיה כי תבואו אל הארץ, “it will be after you will come to the land, etc” This spells out that the Israelites during their journey to the holy Land, were not required to observe the Passover rites and the festival as such, on the anniversary of their departure from Egypt. The Torah insists that the legislation will become effective immediately the people will cross the Jordan into the Holy Land, even if they have not yet conquered part of the land and settled there. This raises the question that the Torah reports in the Book of Numbers that on the first anniversary of the Exodus the Israelites did observe the Passover rites? (Numbers 9,1-8)
   The answer is simple. The observance of that Passover had to be especially legislated by G’d by special instruction to Moses. If it had been mandatory based, on what we have read here, why did G’d have to give instructions on that occasion that it be observed? Although <i>Rashi</i> says that the fact that the Israelites’ having observed the Passover rites in the second year when they were still encamped around Mount Sinai is detailed in the Torah was an implied rebuke, i.e. that only in that year did they offer the Passover, what rebuke was there for something they had not been asked to do in the first place? We may have to answer that what <i>Rashi</i> meant was that the Israelites had not been deemed fit to offer the Passover after the sin of the spies, a testimony to their having rejected the whole liberation from Egypt, and they had even wanted to appoint a leader to take them back there. [I elaborated somewhat. Ed.] Had the people not committed that sin, they would have been settled in their homeland already before another year had passed, so that no more than one Passover in the desert had ever been envisaged.
   
   12,27. זבח פסח הוא, “it is a Passover feast offering.” The term פסח expresses the concept of המלטה, escaping from something, being rescued, similar to the word פסוח. 
   The term is used seeing that G’d, out of a feeling of pity, allowed the firstborn Israelites to survive this judgment of the idolaters. They qualified for this pity because they had demonstrated loyalty to G’d by offering the lamb. This is why the lamb itself is now referred to as פסח. 
   
   12,28. וילכו ויעשו בני ישראל, ”The Children of Israel proceeded and carried out, etc.” They left the assembly and went to get the sheep and slaughtered it etc., as prescribed. 
   
   כן עשו, “so they did.” It is not unusual for the Torah to repeat something like this when the message is that the instructions were carried out in every detail. Our sages, added that the mention of the Israelites “going,” וילכו, means that they did not only receive a reward for performing the commandment but also for the time and effort spent in the preparatory stages/
   
   12,30. כי אין בית אשר אין שם מת, “for there was not a single house without at least a single human corpse.”  This was because not only the firstborn of the father died but also the firstborn of the mother, and in the absence of a firstborn in the true sense of the word, the senior member of the household died. You might therefore have expected that the Torah, when legislating the sanctification of the Jewish firstborn would include the firstborn of the father. The reason this was not done is because the firstborn of the mother is far better known, his birth having been witnessed. [to determine paternity we would need DNA tests, etc., not available at the time. Ed.] 
   
   12,31. ויקרא פרעה למשה ולאהרן לילה, “Pharaoh called on Moses and Aaron during the night.” Moses made a point of sleeping in the capital that night, in order that his prediction that Pharaoh’s servants would come down to him and humble themselves could come true. When Pharaoh arrived at his abode they sent messengers to Goshen giving permission for the Israelites to leave, whereupon they assembled in Ramses <i>en masse</i>. It was still fully light at the time when they assembled there. From there they proceeded with pomp and ceremony (not as escapees) as described in Numbers 31,3. As to the apparent contradiction in the verse (Deut. 16,1) הוציאך ה' אלוקיך ממצרים לילה, “that the Lord your G’d took you out of Egypt at night,” this refers to the night when they became free to go, having obtained Pharaoh’s permission.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the Israelites who were residing in Egypt proper left the same night, whereas they did not cross the border, i.e. the city of Ramses, until the morning following. At that point, they were joined by all the other Israelites who had come to meet with them, having traveled from Goshen.
   This commentary does not sound plausible, for how could anyone have traveled at night after having been told not to leave their homes until morning as they would expose themselves to danger if they did?
   Onkelos explains what happens as follows: the miracles which were performed for the Israelites on that night are called by the Torah “G’d took you out of Egypt.” The wording is justified seeing that the departure of the Israelites from Egypt was due to these miracles.
   
   קומו, צאו!, “get up and get going!” He meant that they should depart without delay seeing that the King had commanded that the people would depart immediately and had refused them the right to perform any more slave labour. He added that they should engage in the worship of their G’d as they had demanded all this time, as an additional reason for them to hurry to do as commanded. It is as if the servants said to Moses and Aaron: “do what he says seeing this is what you waited for all this time!” [this commentary presupposes that the words ויקרא למשה ולאהרן לילה, ”he called upon Moses and upon Aaron at night, did not describe Pharaoh, personally, going to see Moses, but his servants did. Ed.]
   
   12,32.  וברכתם גם אותי, “bless me also!” according to the plain meaning of the text, Pharaoh wished to be included in a complimentary fashion in Moses’ prayer for the dying to stop. After all, as we explained earlier, Moses had assured Pharaoh that there would be no further plagues in Egypt. Alternately, he meant that Moses should pray that G’d should not continue to penalize him in any form.
   
   12,34. משארותם צרורות בשמלותם על שכמם, “their leftovers bundled up in their garments, flung over their shoulders.” 
   Ibn Ezra understands the word משארותם as referring to wooden bowls used to knead dough in. The word appears in this context in Deuteronomy 28,17 טנאך ומשארתך, “your fruit basket and your kneading bowl.” They flung this over their shoulders as their donkeys were fully loaded with all the fancy garments they had taken from the Egyptians. I find this illogical, for would it not have been simpler for them to place the heavy wooden bowls on the donkeys and to carry the lighter garments on their shoulders?
   
   12,39.ויאפו את הבצק אשר הוציאו ממצרים עגות מצות, “(as a result) they baked the dough they had brought out of Egypt into flat cakes of unleavened bread.” This was done deliberately, in order to fulfill the negative commandment that anyone eating leavened goods on that day will be subject to the <i>karet</i> penalty. If, judging by the words כי גורשו ממצרים, the impression was created that the dough was baked by the heat of the sun on the basis that the Israelites had flung the dough over their shoulders, this is not meant to give the impression that if the Israelites had remained in Egypt any longer that this dough would have risen, become leavened, but it explains why it was baked while they were <i>en route</i>, and not in their homes before their departure.
   Alternately, the plain meaning may be that the reason why it turned into unleavened cakes was because they did not have time to bake it in the regular way prior to their departure as they were literally being expelled. Had they been allowed sufficient time, these cakes would have been leavened.
   
   12,40. ומושב בני ישראל אשר ישבו במצרים שלשים שנה וארבע מאות שנה, “ According to <i>Rashi</i> we have to divide up these years into the thirty years between the promise to Avraham of his children inheriting the land of Canaan after a period of being strangers or slaves or both, and the birth of Avraham’s son Yitzchok who would be the carrier of his name, and the 400 years commencing with that time, Yitzchok himself being a stranger in the land of Canaan, moving about and not owning any land. <i>Rashi</i> bases himself on an ancient <i>Midrash</i>. (<i>Mechilta, also Bereshit Rabbah</i> 44,21) according to which the last 210 of these years commenced with the arrival of Yaakov in Egypt.
   
   Nachmanides writes that this appears incorrect, seeing that as long as Avraham was alive we cannot perceive any of his children as having been in exile. The meaning of the promise in Genesis 15 is simply that G’d told him that his descendants, before this promise would be fulfilled, would experience many years of exile and even slavery, the period in question extending over 400 years. G’d, at the time did not bother to inform Avraham about the extra 30 years we read about here, seeing that He had already told him that taking over the land of Canaan had to await the time when the accumulated sins of the Emorite would spill over the allotted measure, so that G’d could legally dispossess them. Accordingly, the period that the Children of Israel dwelled in Egypt, (starting with the descent of Yaakov, or with the arrival of Joseph 22 years earlier) are 430. The 30 years are a hint that the extra years, just as the years spent in the desert, were not a period during which the measure of the Emorites’ sin had not yet been complete, but this delay was solely due to the sins of the Israelites themselves. The verse before us simply informs us that the duration of the stay of the Israelites in the land of Egypt until the allocated time was up was 430 years. The last 30 years had nothing to do with the promise/decree announced by G’d to Avraham in Genesis chapter 15. 
   We find a similar construction in Deuteronomy 2,14 והימים אשר הלכנו מקדש ברנע עד אשר עברנו את נחל זרד שלשים ושמונה שנה עד תם כל הדור אנשי המלחמה וגו, “The number of years which we walked from Kadesh Barnea until we crossed the river Zered were 38 years, until the entire generation of men of military age had died, etc.” The Israelites who had been encamped for 19 years at Kadesh Barnea (according to all our sources) certainly did not wander another 38 years in the desert. Moses describes simply that the entire period beginning with the decree that the men of military age at the time of the sin of the spies would die in the desert, until the last of these men had died, took 38 years. 
   We must learn from all this that when someone sinned and a penalty such as exile is decreed for him during which he is not free to live his life according to his own agenda, this does not automatically mean that at the end of the exile he will be free to do as he pleases during the remainder of his life. If he becomes guilty of any additional offence, he will, of course, be punished for such an offence separately. The promise to Avraham by G’d that his descendants would eventually inherit the land of Canaan and that it would take 400 years for that promise to be fulfilled, simply meant that it would not be less than 400 years. It did not mean that at the end of those 400 years possession would become automatic. If the Torah therefore speaks of 430 years having elapsed during which the Israelites had dwelled in the land of Egypt, this means that the extra years had been added on by G’d on account of serious sins committed by Avraham’s descendants. The promise to Avraham was, that as compensation for the 400 years of waiting for the redemption, these people would leave the land of their oppression (remember that no specific country had been named) with great material possessions. The word אחרי, “after,” mentioned in chapter 15 of Genesis, hardly ever means “immediately after.”
   Furthermore, there are no promises by G’d which are so ironclad that they could not become null and void if the recipient became guilty of a major sin prior to the time the promise was due. [the exceptions are promises worded as an oath.] It is common knowledge that the Israelites, while in Egypt, were guilty of numerous and serious sins, including the cardinal sin of not circumcising their male babies. Ezekiel chapter 20 recounts a list of such sins by the Israelites committed both in Egypt and subsequently in the desert. It is therefore easy to understand why G’d added 30 years to the number of years originally decreed. In fact they should have stayed still longer, had it not been for the communal prayer in which for the first time in over 80 years the Israelites pleaded with G’d, as described in Exodus 2,23, and G’d’s responding in 2,24. The Jewish farmer, when offering the first fruit of his respective crops recites a prayer/blessing during which he refers to G’d’s response to the people on that occasion. (compare Deuteronomy chapter 26. In verse 6 the farmer confesses that while in Egypt the Egyptians made sinners out of our people, i.e. וירעו אותנו המצרים. We all know that even after the Exodus, G’d was forced to delay arrival in the Holy Land and taking possession of it by another 40 years to give Him time for the Jewish people to replenish themselves as the generation who left Egypt had forfeited seeing G’d’s promise fulfilled in their lifetime. As a result, the fourth generation which should have returned to the land of Canaan did not do so, except for Calev and Joshua, and children who had been under 20 at the Exodus
   
   12,42. ליל שמורים, “a night of fulfillment of anticipations.” According to Ibn Ezra, G’d stood watch during that night and did not allow the destructive force to enter the homes of the Jews. This is why He commanded that in future the beneficiaries of His standing watch, i.e. His people, should observe that night by observing a special watch.  This is the appropriate manner of thanking the Lord and praising Him for what He did for us.
   
   Nachmanides queries, saying that the language, i.e. שמורים הוא לה' להוציאם מארץ מצרים, “it is a night of special watch in order to take them out from the land of Egypt,” is not compatible with an interpretation that restricts the verse to saving the lives of the Jews from the destructive forces that abounded on that night. He therefore interprets the word שמורים as a reference to the conclusion of a watch over the fate of the Jewish people from the time when the covenant between the pieces was concluded with Avraham 430 years earlier.
   It is also possible to understand the word ליל שמורים as summing up all the strenuous efforts G’d had had to make in order to ensure that by that night the Jewish people would be on a spiritual level that would justify their redemption for all time.
   
   הוא הלילה הזה לה' שמורים לכל בני ישראל לדורותם, “this was the night for <i>Hashem</i> of protection for all the Children of Israel throughout their generations.” This night which <i>Hashem</i> had kept His eye on during all these many years, had become sanctified now as associated forever with His name as <i>Hashem</i>.
   
   12,43. זאת חוקת הפסח, “this is the decree of the Passover offering.” Ibn Ezra says that the whole paragraph deals with the observance of the Passover in future generations, claiming that the words ויעשו בני ישראל את הפסח  (verse 50) refers to the observance of the Passover in the year following, in the desert, as described in Numbers 9,5. The matter is not surprising as the Torah also commanded Aaron to save the manna in a bottle, almost 40 years before this was done, although it is reported already in Exodus 16,34. How could Aaron be reported, in the past tense, as having deposited this bottle next to the Holy Ark, when there had not yet been a Holy Ark at that time, in fact the legislation of building a Tabernacle had not yet been given?
   
   Nachmanides disagrees, claiming that in none of the paragraphs other than in Numbers were the Israelites commanded how to observe these rites in the desert. He points out that prior to the performance of the circumcision of all the males, the Torah had to record the legislation about all uncircumcised males not being allowed to partake of the meat of that sacrifice. Actually, this paragraph should have been written prior to the paragraph describing the killing of the firstborn, however, seeing that paragraph about the new moon, etc., was written (announced) on that very day. Moses told the people immediately and he commanded them regarding all the laws of the Passover. He added numerous other commandments, such as the prohibition of idolaters eating from the meat of that sacrifice, he added what had occurred in the middle of that night, assuring the people that on that night they would be redeemed. He told them that the Exodus that would occur on that night would change their status for all future generations. When completing this interlude, the Torah reverts back to details such as not breaking a bone of the Passover lamb (in order to suck out the marrow), not to take any part of the meat out of the house, as well as details about how a proselyte will be able to observe these rites. These latter regulations apply for the generations after the Exodus.
   
   כל בן נכר לא יאכל בו, “no person alienated from his faith is allowed to partake in it.” According to <i>Rashi</i> what are meant are people alienated from their father in heaven, The law applies both to gentiles, as well as to Jews who act like gentiles.
   
   Nachmanides writes that there was no need to exclude gentiles specifically, and this also agrees with the translation by Onkelos who speaks of a Jewish “stranger.” A heretic is known either as a משומד, “someone who has destroyed himself,” in the spiritual sense, or a מנוכר, from the word נכר,alien, i.e. someone who has estranged himself to his Creator.
   
   12,44. ועצם לא תשברו בו, ”you are not to break a bone of it.” Seeing that the Passover lamb is to be eaten על השובע, as the final part of the meal, so that it satiates the person consuming part of it, breaking bones of it would create the impression in the viewer that the person doing it was left hungry after eating its meat. Alternately, the meaning could be that on that occasion, when the meal was being consumed hurriedly, while standing up, the Israelites would try and stuff themselves as much as they could in anticipation of a long march. Such behaviour would contradict the festive nature of the meal.
   
   12,51. ויהי בעצם היום הזה, “it was on that very day, etc.” Ibn Ezra explains that this verse is inseparable from the one following it, [although the Christians start a new chapter with the next verse. Ed.] seeing that G’d spoke to Moses and gave him the instructions regarding sanctifying the first born of man and certain beasts.
   
   Nachmanides justifies the use of the line: “on that very day,” by referring to the ליל שמורים discussed previously. The verse describing the nature of that night could have given the impression that the Israelites actually moved out of Egypt during the same night. The line in our verse is meant to correct any such impression, and to emphasise that the Exodus took place on the morning of the 15th of Nissan. The significance of the previous night, the ליל שמורים, lay in the Israelites having obtained permission to leave by the Egyptians.
   
   13,2. קדש לי כל בכור, “sanctify for Me every firstborn, etc.” In practice these animals (as well as the males of the people) were to be treated as special immediately the Israelites reached the desert.
   Ibn Ezra, commenting on the singular mode קדש לי, instead of קדשו לי, says that in the interest of brevity Moses is here presented as if he embodied all the people.
   Some sages believe that the commandment for Moses to “sanctify” is equivalent to “to purify,” The firstborns, at this stage, represent the priests, until after the sin of the golden calf, when they were replaced by the Levites and the direct descendants of Aaron. At any rate, the major function of the priests is to purify the people, the opposite of “defiling them.”  Unless the priest is instructed by the Torah to defile himself, such as burying his next of kin, he is to refrain from contact with anything that confers ritual impurity.
   
   13,4. היום אתם יוצאים, “this is the day on which you are leaving.” The reason why the Torah had introduced the prohibition of eating leavened food is as a hint for all future generations that the anniversary of the Exodus is to be a day when anything leavened is out of bounds to the Jewish people. Seeing that on the original date of the Exodus it was springtime, the Torah adds that we must make sure that Passover will always occur in the spring season, [not before the spring equinox. Ed.] The Hebrew word אביב for spring is rooted in the term אב, the first, the leader; the barley from which the first בכורים, one <i>omer</i> of it is offered on the second day of Passover, is always the first ripe grain during the spring in locations such as the land of Israel, or countries even closer to the equator.
   
   13,5. והיה כי יביאך ה' אל ארץ הכנעני, “It will be when the Lord will bring you to the land of the Canaanite,” according to <i>Rashi</i> all the land inhabited by the seven Canaanite tribes is included in this 
   
   Nachmanides opines that this is self-evident, seeing no other tribes have ever been resident there. If anything is not clear, it is why only some (5) of the 10 tribes making up the Canaanite nation have been listed here? The view of our sages is that the lands occupied by the five tribes mentioned here is the area in the land of Israel which the Torah repeatedly describes as “the land flowing with milk and honey.” The other 2 tribes whose land was conquered by the Israelites under Joshua [not including 3 more tribes mentioned in the promise to Avraham in Genesis 15, 19-21. Ed.] was not as fruitful. Generally speaking, only six of the tribes are mentioned, as the 7th, גרגשי, according to tradition, preferred to emigrate rather than to confront Joshua militarily.
   
   13,8. בעבור זה עשה ה' לי בצאתי ממצרים, “on account of this the Lord has done for me when I left Egypt.” The verse is Israel’s justification to future generations for performing the rites of gratitude on the annual celebration of Passover, and why all generations are duty bound to continue this tradition. We have a similar verse in the same vein in 13,15 על כן אני זובח לה' כל פטר רחם הזכרים וכל בני אפדה, “this is why I continue to offer as a sacrifice every first born male sheep to the Lord, whereas I redeem every first born male son of his respective mother.” The reason why the Torah uses the pronoun זה, “this,” is that you are to tell these experiences of yours to your children now. In other words, you who have experienced “this,” have to tell your children what happened on “that” day when they had not yet been born.
   Ibn Ezra understands the words בעבור זה וגו', to mean that G’d performed all these miracles in order for me to annually commemorate them by the performance of the rites legislated here.
   
   13,9. והיה לך לאות על ידך ולזכרון בין עיניך, “and it shall be for you a sign on your arm and a reminder between your eyes.” This means that the passages of the Torah written here shall be worn regularly on your arm and be placed between your eyes, so that you will remember all this. The reason such a parchment is also to be placed on your arm is to symbolize the חוזק יד, “the strong hand,” G’d employed in order to orchestrate your redemption from Egypt. It is a reminder of all the miracles.
   
   13,11. והיה כי יביאך ה', “it will be when the Lord will bring you, etc.” The commandment to redeem the first born sons, and to sacrifice the first born male sheep, etc., do not become operative until you get to the Holy Land.
   
   Nachmanides writes that the instruction “sanctify for Me all the firstborn, etc.,” refers to all the ones fitting this definition who are now part of the Jewish community and their flocks. One of the reasons why the commandment may not have been practiced in the desert is that the boys in question had not even been circumcised. At any rate, the commandment, while in existence, remained in limbo, in common with many other commandments, until the people reached their destiny in their own land. The firstborn donkey was to be redeemed There is a dispute in the tractate Zevachim if the commandment did apply in the desert, but seeing that we cannot resolve it, it is not worth pursuing.
   
   כאשר נשבע לך ולאבותיך, “as He has sworn both to you and to your forefathers.” The meaning of this phrase is: “He has sworn to your forefathers to give it to you, the present generation.” Alternately, the Torah means that any word of G’d is equivalent to an oath, seeing that He has repeated the promise twice. He had said: (Exodus 3,8) “I will go down to save them from Egypt and to bring them up from there”, as well as: “I shall bring you to the land I swore to give to your forefathers.” Furthermore: “I will bring you to the land I swore to your forefathers.”
   
   13,12. והעברת כל פטר רחם, “you shall set apart every first born issue of the womb, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the verse speaks of human firstborns, seeing that there is a break in the verse before it continues mentioning first born animals.
   Nachmanides writes that the word והעברת refers to the setting apart of these animals from the flock as something sacred for G’d. Having made that point, the Torah goes into further detail, commencing with the words וכל פטר שגר בהמה, detailing three categories of firstborns.
   
   13,14. כי בחוזק יד הוציאנו ממצרים, “for with a strong hand did He take us out of Egypt.” Having said this as a kind of “headline,” the Torah now continues to describe how this “hand” of G’d manifested itself. It was primarily the simultaneous killing of the firstborn that resulted immediately in the release of the Israelites. The contrast with the earlier plagues, which did not result in the release of the Israelites, is clear to anyone. This is why I perform sacrificial rites on every anniversary of that event.
   
   13,15. ולטוטפות בין עיניך, “and as an ornament between your eyes.” The word טוטפות describes the part of the head on which the phylacteries are worn. The expression appears in tractate <i>Shabbat,</i> 57B as the area where the straps of the phylacteries surround the forehead.
   Alternately, it describes the part of the head which faces the ground, as per the proverb in <i>Megillah</i> 14 that ducks have a tendency to appear to look at the ground while at the same time seeing far into the distance with their eyes. The word used to describe this kind of vision is מטיפין. 
   The reason the Torah uses the word לטוטפות in the plural mode is because, according to an ancient tradition, the phylacteries of the head are divided into 4 separate compartments, each containing one of the relevant four paragraphs of the Torah referring to the subject.
   
   Nachmanides writes that the origin of the custom to wear the phylacteries of the hand on the upper left arm, and the phylacteries of the head on one’s forehead, is that Judaism if taken seriously, requires input by both the heart and the brain, the upper left arm being close to man’s heart, whereas the forehead is immediately outside the seat of the brain.  This is the reason why the Torah says that the Exodus and all that it implies should be symbolized “between your eyes,” i.e. the phylacteries with the relevant paragraphs from the Torah should be positioned on the part of body closest to the seat of our memory banks. Brain functions properly only because man has a faculty that enables him to store sensations called memory. The knot with which the straps of the phylacteries of the head is tied, is placed at the rear end of the head, the area near which our memory banks are located in the brain.
   References to the phylacteries appear in the paragraph dealing with sanctification of the firstborn, as well as in the paragraph detailing observance of that commandment once the Israelites would take possession of the Holy Land, seeing this particular commandment is tied directly to the Exodus from Egypt, as something which must remain as a kind of visual image. The other commandment, also contained in one of these paragraphs, commits to our memory the fact that our G’d is unique and has demonstrated unique powers. The obligation to perform the commandments of the Torah is anchored in these two fundamental considerations. [Moses sums this up in Deut. 4,35 אתה הראת לדעת: “you (the Jewish people as the only one) have been granted visual evidence of the existence and manifestation of power of the Lord your G’d.” Ed.] 
   
   I will now proceed to explain some general rules applicable to many of the commandments of the Torah. [this is still Nachmanides. Ed.] Ever since idolatry exists in our world, starting with the generation of Enosh, [a grandson of Adam! Ed.] mankind’s knowledge about G’d the Creator has become confused. Some people claimed that the universe preceded ”G’d,” whereas others deny only that G’d the Creator has any knowledge of any specific individual; still others do believe that G’d has such knowledge but they dispute that G’d supervises and directly or indirectly intervenes in the fate of individual people. By doing this, they reduce mankind to the level of the fish in the ocean over whom G’d does indeed not exercise individual supervision. As a result of this lack of G’d’s supervision of man’s individual fate, the concept of reward and punishment does not apply to man either.
   Once G’d intervenes in the world by performing acts involving the community or an individual, this discredits all those who deny that the Creator still has an interest in the well being or otherwise of His subjects on earth. If such intervention by G’d in people’s lives, or the performance of super-natural miracles have been announced in advance and with specific dates and places, this still better authenticates our belief that the Creator does indeed continue to take a supervisory interest in His creatures. It demonstrates that G’d communicates with chosen individuals and reveals His secrets to them. By doing such things on occasion, the truth of the Torah is perpetuated, and this is why the Torah wrote in connection with such advertised miracles:למען תדע כי אני ה' בקרב הארץ “in order that you will realize that I the Lord am active on earth.” (Exodus 8,18) This disabuses people who believe that historical and other events on earth are the result of pure chance. In Exodus 9,29 למען תדע כי לה' הארץ, the Torah tells us that the miracles that are about to occur will demonstrate ownership of the earth by G’d, rebutting those who claim that the universe preceded the existence of G’d. G’d created the universe out of “nothing,” i.e. He provided matter, without which there could not be a material universe. Finally, the Torah quotes G’d saying: למען תדע כי אין כמוני, “in order that you should know that there is No One like I.” (Exodus 9,14) These were the three theological principles which Pharaoh had denied, and it took all the plagues to convince him that not only had he been wrong, but that he had been a terrible sinner.
   Having established that even such a pagan as Pharaoh had finally become convinced of the error of his ways, surely, no one in his right mind expects a private revelation by G’d of His powers every time he entertains some doubt about something! In view of the unreasonable nature of such a request, G’d provided us with some commandments, the performance of which is designed to keep alive within us the memory of the lessons learned not only by Pharaoh but also by the Jewish people at the time. Affixing the relevant passages of the Torah to the doorposts of our homes and gates, placing the phylacteries containing these passages on our heads and arms daily, are all part of this training in remembering that what our forefathers transmitted to us as experiences they lived through had indeed occurred, and we have reason to be eternally grateful for G’d’s intervention in the lives of our forefathers at that time. The story of the Exodus and what preceded it is not only a lesson in the kindness G’d extended to a people who had become assimilated and was outwardly, and mostly inwardly, indistinguishable from its host nation, but is a basic lesson in what constitutes our perception of what we are about, and what ultimately, the universe is about, i.e. the greatness of the Creator. Our sages taught us to relate to so-called מצוות קלות, commandments which because they appear easy to fulfill are not presumed to confer much reward for those observing them, as if they were of the same weightiness as מצוות חמורות, commandments which either are difficult to fulfill, or which carry death penalties as an indication that G’d appears to be more concerned about them than about the other kind. It is not up to us to evaluate the relative merit of G’d’s commandments. What is important for us to remember is that just because G’d does watch over what we are doing, none of us can afford not to be engaged in some manner of service of the Lord, even if such service is indirect, such as earning a living in order to honour the Sabbath by eating better quality food, and wearing better quality clothes. etc. We must at all times retain the awareness that we are G’d’s creatures, and as such we must be guided in our behaviour by the desire to please our Creator. We cannot lay claim to even part of the rewards of observing the Torah until we have embraced it by believing fully what our sages have taught us. We must be convinced that unless we, the Jewish people, collectively will observe the Torah, we cannot for long survive successfully. Our continued existence is bound up with remaining loyal to the covenant G’d made with Avraham, our first patriarch. Our mode of conduct must be living testimony to the ongoing existence and benevolent interest of G’d in His people and mankind at large.
   
   Parshat  B’shalach
   
   13,17. ויהי בשלח פרעה....כי קרוב הוא, “It happened when Pharaoh had dismissed the people,… for it was near;” according to <i>Rashi,</i> the meaning of the words “for it was near,” is that it would afford too easy an opportunity for the people to return to Egypt. They would be tempted to do this if they had to face armed conflict.
   
   Nachmanides comments that if that were the meaning of the words כי קרוב הוא, the Torah should first have written the words כי אמר אלוקים , ”for G’d had said, etc.” The whole verse should then have read as follows:ולא נחם אלוקים דרך ארץ פלשתים כי אמר אלוקים כי קרוב הוא, לכן , “and G’d had not led them the route via the land of the Philistines, for He had said that even though it is nearer it is too easy to turn back from, therefore, etc.” It was better therefore to lead them on a more circuitous route as they would not then have the temptation to return to Egypt rather than face immediate armed conflict. [“the land of the Philistines” is a synonym for crossing any inhabited region which would be opposed by such inhabitants. Ed.] We find a similar construction in Psalms 41,5, רפאה נפשי כי חטאתי לך, “heal me for I have sinned against You.” Clearly, the meaning of the word כי could not be “for I have sinned against You,” but must be: “although I have sinned against You.” 
   Some commentators understand the words כי קרוב הוא as not describing something spatial, but as referring to timing. G’d meant that an immediate arrival at the borders of the land of Canaan would then occur before the fourth generation of Canaanites had forfeited the patience of G’d, so that He could legally deprive them of their land and give it to the Israelites. [the word קרוב בימינו, “soon in our days,” and many other such uses of the word קרוב for relating to something that would occur soon are too numerous to need to be quoted. Ed.]
   Yet another interpretation of the words כי קרוב הוא understands it as describing the political common interests of the Philistines and the Egyptians that would cause the former to help the Egyptians recapture their slaves.
   Still another approach to the words כי קרוב הוא, sees in them a reference to the devastating defeat suffered by 200,000 members of the tribe of Ephrayim, who thirty years earlier had decided that the 400 years that G’d had spoken about to Avraham were at an end, and who had decided on their own, to escape from Egypt and when approaching the land of the Philistines were annihilated by them. G’d did not want to risk re-awakening such memories by making the people travel that route. The very word כי with its numerical value of 30 is a veiled reminder to the reader what it is all about. Moreover, G’d feared that if the Israelites would get involved in war before the three days travel into the desert that they had been given permission for were up, and on account of their fear they would return to Egypt, the Egyptians would be willing to let them return, whereas once the three days had passed, even if for some reason other than war, they would decide to return to Egypt, the Egyptians would not welcome them, but treat them as traitors who had broken their word. Therefore, G’d wanted a situation to develop which would make a return to Egypt even more dangerous an undertaking for the people than facing uncertain dangers by moving ahead.
   
   בראותם מלחמה, “when they would face armed conflict.”  <i>Rashi</i> understands this as a veiled reference to the war against Amalek and the Canaanites.
   Nachmanides writes that neither the war against the Amalekites nor that against the Canaanites would trigger a desire by the people to return to Egypt. The Amalekites had attacked the Israelites not because the Israelites threatened them, but because they represented a spiritual threat to their way of life. They would also have attacked the Israelites if they had decided to remain in the desert without looking for a homeland. G’d simply wanted any war to be delayed until the Israelites were so far away from Egypt, that returning to Egypt simply would not be a viable option. Facing war, or rather, avoiding war against the Philistines, would leave open the option of return to Egypt.
   13,18. וחמושים עלו בני ישראל, “and the Israelites were armed when they went up.” The Torah records that although G’d led the Israelites in the direction of the uninhabited desert, where normally no encounter with sizable hostile forces need to be anticipated, they were armed, enabling them to cope with such unforeseen eventualities. They were still afraid that the Philistines or neigbouring tribes might fight a war of aggression against them, as opposed to defending their territory’s sovereignty. Alternately, the phrase is meant to depict the Israelites as marching with full confidence, not as people with a slave mentality.
   
   13,19. ויקח משה את עצמות יוסף עמו, “Moses took the earthly remains of Joseph with him.” Actually, the Torah should have written this verse already when reporting the very first move of the Israelites out of Ramses. (12,37) Why did the Torah report it as if belonging to the second day of the Israelites’ journeys? We may have to answer that whereas on the first day the Israelites took the remains of all the sons of Yaakov collectively, whereas only on the second day did they get around to separating Joseph’s coffin from those containing the remains of the other brothers.
   
   13,21. וה' הולך לפניהם, “and the Lord would walk in front of them, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that this verse is an example of the Torah using syntax man is familiar with, and the meaning is that the Divine power in the form of His messenger traveled with the Israelites.
   Nachmanides writes that he has mentioned on previous occasions that whenever we encounter the formulation וה', this always refers to <i>Hashem</i> together with the celestial court of Justice. The Torah narrates that G’d’s glory was enveloped in the cloud above the Israelites which would move continuously a short distance ahead of the main body. At night, the celestial court would be enveloped in the pillar of fire.
   
   להאיר להם, “in order to provide light for them.” These two clouds were needed to provide artificial light for them, as the Israelites being enveloped in these clouds, could not tell whether it was day or night beyond the clouds they saw.
   
   14,4. וחזקתי את לב פרעה, “I shall stiffen the heart of Pharaoh;” seeing that Pharaoh lately had become so humiliated, unless G’d would give him back some self-confidence, he would not dare to pursue the Israelites whom he himself had not only chased out, but had begged to offer prayers on his behalf. Without such Divine intervention, even if Pharaoh should have reached the conclusion that the Israelites had fled, he would not, in his present state of mind, have the audacity to mount a pursuit.
   
   14,5. ויוגד למלך מצרים כי ברח העם, “The King of Egypt was informed that the people had fled, etc.” He was told that wherever the Israelites went they left a trail of destruction; this convinced the King that they had no intention of returning.
   Alternately, the King was told that the people marched in a disorderly fashion, did not have a definitive objective; this persuaded the King that they had fled rather than set out on a prearranged goal where to observe the ritual they had spoken of
   Still another possibility is that the King was told that the people marched proudly, like victors, had made flags for themselves as a symbol of their independence, and behaved generally like a well organized body of people, not like a bunch of undisciplined slaves who would be coming back to their former masters.
   According to the <i>Midrash,</i> the King had dispatched messengers (spies) at the time the Israelites left, whose task it was to monitor their movements. <i>Rashi</i> quotes that <i>Midrash.</i> As soon as the three days of which Moses had spoken were up, these messengers reported back to Pharaoh that the people had not turned around, but kept moving further away from Egypt. The difficulty with this explanation is that the Israelites did turn back on the third day, so how did these messengers know that they did not intend to come back to Egypt? This would presuppose that they had gone in one direction only for two days, and if so how could the messengers know that they had no intention of returning to Egypt? They were not far enough away from their starting point to allow such a conclusion to be drawn at the end of the second day! Moreover, the same <i>Midrash</i> claims that Pharaoh and his chariots covered a distance of six days’ march in a single day’s pursuit and that they then caught up with the rear of the Israelites, seeing that the splitting of the sea occurred on the seventh day (21st Nissan)? However, the <i>Midrash</i> adds that on the first day the Israelites miraculously covered a distance of approximately 120 kilometers. This represents the distance a people normally travel in three days. Accordingly, Pharaoh did not receive the report until the evening of the fifth day, spent the 6th day chasing after the people. He caught up with them on the evening between the 20th and the 21st of Nissan. This is when the Israelites descended into the bottom of the sea that split for them.
   
   14,7. ויקח שש מאות רכב, “He took 600 chariots.” <i>Rashi,</i> basing himself on the <i>Mechilta,</i> in answering the question where Pharaoh took the horses from which pulled these chariots, seeing that all the livestock supposedly had been killed by the fifth plague of pestilence, points out that the Torah had reported that the livestock of the farmers who had heeded Moses’ warning, took their animals indoors, so that they survived that plague. This prompted Rabbi Shimon in <i>Tanchuma Beshalach 8</i> to coin the phrase that טוב שבגויים הרוג, “that the only good gentile is a dead one.” The Jerusalem Talmud limits the applicability of this proverb to periods when the gentiles are at war with us. The version there is that “the gentiles are considered as irrelevant.”
   According to this approach, when <i>Rashi</i> commented on our verse (9,20) that “the people who heeded G’d’s warning took their animals indoors,” this is not an appropriate comment, as any animals which at the time had not been outdoors for any reason were also saved, without their owners being rewarded for heeding G’d’s warning. Horses and mules, which are used for transporting humans, are generally kept in stables indoors so as to be at hand when their owners need them, so that the whole question of whence these animals came from appears superfluous.
   
   כל סוס רכב פרעה, “all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh.” Ibn Ezra says that the point made by the verse is that all these chariots traveled as a unit, not each one separately.
   
   14,10. וייראו מאד, “they were very much afraid.” Ibn Ezra expresses surprise that a body of 600,000 armed men such as the Israelites, should have displayed fear because an army of only 600 chariots pursued them. Why were these people not prepared to defend their lives and the lives of their children against this miniscule force of Egyptians?
   The answer is strictly psychological. All the Israelites had been raised from infancy to see in the Egyptians their natural masters, and to willingly bear the burden of being slaves to these masters. They had absolutely no knowledge of how to conduct a self defense. We have evidence from the encounter with Amalek, a small people. The Israelites who far outnumbered them, would have been lost if not for the support offered by the knowledge that Moses prayed for their victory. Eventually, this slave mentality caused the death of the whole generation who had left Egypt as adults, and only their children, who had not been slaves, could be relied upon to face the Canaanites in battle and not to run scared.
   If Ibn Ezra would have taken a look at the <i>Midrash, which</i> deals with the meaning of the words שלישים על כולם, he would have seen that the Israelites, at least according to that <i>Midrash,</i> were outnumbered by three Egyptians to each one of them. Some sages challenge Ibn Ezra, saying: “who told him that the Amalekites attacked with only a small army?”
   
   ויצעקו בני ישראל אל ה', “The Children of Israel cried out in supplication to <i>Hashem.”</i>
   14,11. ויאמרו אל משה המבלי אין קברים, “They said to Moses: ‘are there not enough burial places in Egypt, etc.?’” Nachmanides explains that it is clear that after the Israelites had pleaded for help to G’d, they would not immediately hereafter insult Him by the aforementioned cynical question, and by adding: ”what did You do to us by taking us out of Egypt?” We therefore must understand the verses here as reflecting the manner in which different groups of Israelites reacted to the imminent threat of annihilation which they faced. One group of Israelites resorted to prayer, another resorted to ridiculing the chance of a miracle being performed for them. Seeing that they did not believe in miraculous salvation they made peace with their impending death, but not before accusing Moses of instead of having been their redeemer having become their angel of death. It is this division among the people at that point in time to which the psalmist refers in Psalms 106,7 וימרו על ים בים סוף, “they rebelled at the sea, at the Sea of Reeds.” This is also why once the people are described as העם, “the people,” and once they are described as בני ישראל. The latter were the elite, few in number, who turned to G’d for help, the former were the masses whose attitudes were still not much different from what they had been while they were slaves and cynicism was the only weapon at their command. The people who were desperately afraid were therefore the “העם,” whom Moses told in verse 13 to stop acting so scared. This עם were the ones who are described after the event in verse 31 as “being in awe of <i>Hashem,</i> seeing that previously they had only made sarcastic remarks. The elite, i.e. the בני ישראל, did not need this education.
   In the <i>Mechilta</i> the sages explain that as a first step the people had prayed to G’d that Pharaoh should have a change of heart and should desist from pursuing them.  When they noted that their prayer had not helped, they became heretical in their attitude, making above-mentioned sarcastic comments to Moses, blaming him for their present predicament.
   
   לקחתנו למות במדבר, “have you taken us to die in the desert?” Remarkably, they did not accuse Moses of letting them become victims of a losing battle against the Egyptians, but of dying a meaningless death. This pattern repeated itself in verse 12, i.e. ממותנו במדבר. They recalled that they had always been afraid of dying in the desert even if they would not come under attack by hostile armies.
   Nachmanides explains that the people made it plain that even if there were no danger of war, etc. they were dead set against going into the desert. They were simply afraid that in the desert they would perish from the results of thirst and hunger. It is perfectly possible that they had already voiced their misgivings as soon as Moses did not lead them the route which was well traveled and which would have taken them via the land of the Philistines. They may even have told Moses that the route via the land of the Philistines presented unacceptable, risks, as did the route which led straight to the sea of Reeds, and that any route requiring them to travel trough the desert was perhaps the greatest risk of all. [they were understandably of the opinion that having neutralized their former masters, it was their turn to be the rulers in Egypt. Ed.] They may have preferred death followed by burial, to death in the desert where no trace of their bodies and graves would ever remain.
   
   14,13. לא תוסיפו לראותם עוד, ”you will not ever again see the Egyptians in a threatening posture.” Nachmanides writes that according to our tradition it is a negative commandment applicable throughout the generations not to return to Egypt. Our verse must be understood as follows: “present yourself in an upright posture exuding confidence, and do not fear or appear to be afraid, for you will never again have reason to fear the Egyptians.”
   
   14,15. מה תצעק אלי?, “what is the good of your crying out to Me?” Ibn Ezra points out that Moses had not been crying out, seeing G’d had already told him that He would bring severe judgments on Pharaoh and all those with him (verse 4). G’d meant: “what is the point of the Israelites crying out to Me?” Moses, in this instance, is addressed as the representative of the whole people who had been crying out.
   Nachmanides points out that if Ibn Ezra were correct, the people, not having been given the assurance that Moses had been given, would have been entitled to cry out. Why does G’d then criticize them? 
   Our sages comment that Moses was indeed crying out, i.e. offering an urgent prayer, something that was the appropriate thing to do under the circumstances. He prayed for guidance. As to the meaning of the line: מה תצעק אלי, G’d simply criticized the nature of the prayer Moses had offered. He told Moses that instead of uttering a sort of complaint, he should simply have asked G’d how to act in this new set of circumstances, a situation for which he had not been prepared. Seeing that I had given you an assurance that I would deal with Pharaoh, all you had to do was to ask for guidance how to act in this situation.
   
   14,16. הרם את מטך, “raise your rod!” Some commen-tators understand the word הרם as meaning the same as הסר, to remove, so that it would parallel the meaning of Ezekiel 21,31 הסיר המצנפת והרם העטרה, “remove the turban and lift off the crown!” G’d, according to this, told Moses to divest himself of his staff and to use his bare hand instead. i.e. to make it appear as hanging inactive by his side. This would also explain that in response (verse 21) Moses is described as ויט משה את ידו, “Moses inclined his hand.” Seeing that I have explained earlier that in most of the miracles Moses deviated somewhat from the literal meaning of the instruction he had received, unless the Torah writes ויעש כן, i.e. he did exactly as instructed, here too the line “he did as instructed” is missing. (compare Exodus 17, 6 and Numbers 8,3, the only time the Torah reports instructions as having been carried out precisely as given.) The Torah does not criticize Moses for departing slightly from the instructions received, [presumably because unless someone else had heard the instructions he had received, this would not be a desecration of the word of G’d. Ed]
   
   14,19. ויסע מלאך האלוקים ההולך לפני מחנה ישראל, “the angel of G’d who had been traveling in front of the camp of the Israelites, moved, etc.” Some commentators believe that the angel mentioned here was the one that manifested itself as the pillar of fire by night, in order to provide for the Israelites at night. The reason this pillar of fire is called “angel,” is that it descended from the celestial regions just as angels are in the habit of doing.
   During that night the angel took up position behind the Israelites, in order to protect them against the pursuing Egyptians who were closing in on them. As soon as the pillar of fire that had traveled ahead of them had changed position, the pillar of cloud also changed position on their account, taking up position behind them in order that the Egyptians would not be able to see exactly where the Israelites ahead of them were located. Instead of the pillar of cloud departing at night as it had been doing so far, on this occasion it remained “on duty,” but instead of in front of the people, behind them. It darkened the atmosphere making it harder for the Egyptians to see.
   Ibn Ezra describes the angel in question as the שר הגדול, the commander in chief of the celestial armies. He was usually accompanying the Israelites by “marching” in front of them. It is this angel that the Torah had had in mind when writing: “and the Lord was walking ahead of them by day, etc.” (verse 21)
   
   14,24. וישקף ה' אל מחנה מצרים בעמוד אש וענן, “The Lord looked down at the camp of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and the cloud, etc.” The verse describes the removal of the pillar of fire that manifested itself daily at night in front of the Israelites, and, instead, positioned itself as an ”observer” over the camp of the Israelites, and the cloud was positioned in a manner that served the needs of the Israelites during the day.
   
   ויהם את מחנה מצרים, “He caused confusion in the camp of the Egyptians.” They did not know how to cope with the heat radiated from the pillar of fire.
   
   14,25. ויסר את אופן, “He removed the wheel, etc.” The reason why G’d removed only one wheel, i.e. אופן of each two-wheeled chariot, is that had He removed both wheels the chariot would have retained a balance though it could not have rolled. By removing only one of the wheels G’d created an imbalance that the riders found impossible to compensate for. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that the meaning of the words ויסר אופן, is that G’d loosened the wheel from the crossbar it was attached to and the link between the chariot and the horses pulling it. This would enable the horses to flee more easily. G’d’s having created confusion in the minds of both riders and horses worked against the efforts of both to escape to the relative safety of the shore. Every motion required the overcoming of obstacles, i.e. בכבדות.
   
   14,27. ויט משה את ידו על הים, “Moses stretched out his hand over the sea.”
   
   Nachmanides writes that it had been G’d’s will to split the sea by means of a strong easterly wind which would create the impression that the wind’s heat had dried out the sea. The result would be to deceive the Egyptians into thinking that they were facing a natural rather than a supernatural phenomenon, i.e. that the wind had dried out the sea.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi writes that these two verses appear to contradict one another, seeing that one verse makes it appear that the splitting of the sea was G’d’s doing, whereas the other verse makes it appear as if it had been a natural phenomenon. One can reconcile these two verses by positing that initially Moses split the sea by means of a miracle when he stretched out his staff, whereas the hot easterly wind blowing, dried out the bottom of the sea to make it passable. If that natural phenomenon, i.e. the wind, had not aided in the matter, the Israelites would likely have drowned in the bottom of the sea, as it was too muddy after so short a period to have dried out sufficiently. The correct interpretation of the verse therefore is as follows: “G’d made a powerful easterly wind blow across the sea all night long in order to dry out the mud at the bottom of the sea, seeing that the waters themselves had already been split by Moses.”
   
   14,28. לכל חיל פרעה, “of Pharaoh’s entire army;” according to <i>Rashi</i> these words are superfluous, however, this is not an uncommon occurrence in our Scriptures.
   Nachmanides writes that in this instance these words are not superfluous, but that the meaning of the words לכל חיל פרעה is that part of the army described thus was the infantry, as opposed to the cavalry who were riding in chariots. The latter Pharaoh had taken with him immediately he heard about the Israelites having made a U turn at <i>Baal Tzefon</i>, whereas the infantry took longer to catch up with the cavalry. 
   
   לא נשאר בהם עד אחד, “not a single one of them survived.” Ibn Ezra explains this verse as he had explained in 9,7, i.e. “not even a single one.”
   
   14,29. ובני ישראל הלכו ביבשה בתוך הים, “and the Children of Israel walked in the midst of the sea on dry land.” Ibn Ezra writes that the Torah writes this a second time in order to inform us that while some Israelites were still in the dried out sea, at a location quite nearby, Pharaoh was already drowning in that same sea. This is a great miracle in itself, seeing that the easterly wind was still blowing on the part of the sea the Israelites were in the process of walking across on the dried out bed of the sea. At the same time, another wind was blowing melting the frozen waters so that they collapsed on top of the Egyptian army which was struggling, and the waters reversed their course and drowned them. Some of these events are reflected in the song of thanks by Moses and the Israelites in the chapter following.
   
   14,30. ויושע ה' ביום ההוא, “on that day the Lord saved Israel, etc.” until that point in time they had not really been saved, seeing that they were still in awe of Pharaoh.
   
   וירא ישראל את מצרים מת על שפת הים, “Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the shores of the sea.” The Torah does not speak here of the individual Egyptians whose bodies had not been swept back to shore by the waves of the sea. The word תבלעמו ארץ (15,12) means that the earth beneath the waves had swallowed those Egyptians once and for all. Rather the Torah refers to the Israelites standing on the shore of the sea witnessing the death of the Egyptians by drowning. While this is the plain meaning of the text, it does not conform with the interpretations offered by our sages.
   
   14,31. את היד הגדולה, “the great hand, etc.” Ibn Ezra understands the words as meaning “the great plague,” and refers us to Exodus 9,3 where the plague of pestilence is introduced as being יד ה'. 
   
   15,1. אז ישיר, “Then Moses sang, etc.” According to <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> the Torah introduced the subject of man committing idolatry (Enosh) with the word אז (Genesis 4,26) and according to tradition G’d reacted with flooding one third of the surface of the earth. Moses, as an act of restoring G’d’s glory therefore commenced his song with the word אז, seeing this time the drowning of part of mankind had worked for the benefit of the Jewish people. 
   Another reason why he may have commenced his song with the word אז is because he himself had challenged G’d’s masterminding the history of His people by claiming thatמאז באתי אל פרעה, “ever since I came to Pharaoh (in Your name to lighten the burden of the Jewish people) he has made their burden harsher, etc”. (Exodus 5,23) It was Moses’ way of apologizing for having been too rash in criticizing G’d’s ways.
   
   כי גאה גאה, “for He is exalted above the arrogant.” He is higher than the horse which deems itself to be above all those around it as well as its rider, who has a feeling of superiority, arrogance.
   
   15,2. עזי וזמרת י-ה, “My might and His cutting down.”  Ibn Ezra says that the word עזי is part of what precedes it, as well as part of what follows it, as if the Torah had written עזי וזמרת עזי י-ה וגו', so that its meaning would be “my power, and my glory with which I sing a song of praise to Him is directed exclusively in His praise. It is only He Who has been my salvation.”
   
   זה א-לי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I will erect a residence for Him (on earth).” He is my strength and I will enthrone Him in an appropriate residence.” This has also been the G’d of my father and I will aggrandize Him by telling of His exploits. Our sages say that the visions revealed to a simple kitchen maid at the crossing of the sea of Reeds exceeded by far the revelations that the prophet Ezekiel and other prophets were granted. [our author adds of his own that the visions granted to these other prophets compared to what the kitchen maid saw, compare to someone seeing the finger of a person as opposed to someone who sees the whole person. Ed.]
   According to the plain meaning of the text it is perfectly in order to use the descriptive word זה for something inherently invisible, just as the people who demanded from Aaron that he make them a visible image for “this man Moses, etc.” when Moses was presumed to have died on Mount Sinai and was quite invisible. (Exodus 32,1)
   
   15,6. ימינך ה' נאדרי בכח, “Your right hand <i>Hashem</i> is glorified with strength.” According to <i>Rashi</i> [who offers three explanations of this phrase, the one he calls the plain meaning, Ed.] is that the same right hand that is exalted by beautiful strength, is also the very hand which smashes the enemy when the need arises.
   
   15,7. וברוב גאונך, “and in Your abundant grandeur, etc.”  a grandeur superior to anything known on earth, You are able to destroy anyone and anything that might want to offer opposition to You.”
   
   15,9. אמר אויב ארדוף אשיג, “the enemy had said: “I will pursue and catch up, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that Moses quoted the words used by Pharaoh to encourage his people to join him in pursuit of the Israelites. This is also the understanding of our verse by Onkelos who translates אשיג as סגאה, progressing, marching.
   
   Nachmanides writes that it seems to him that the verse, basically, is a repetition of the theme of the beginning previous verse and does not refer to the decision made in Egypt to pursue the Israelites, but to the decision made at the sea to enter into the sea that had been split and stood like walls of ice. Pharaoh ignored or misinterpreted G’d’s having worked this miracle and that it was reversible and that these very waters would spell their doom. The end of verse 8 had explained that the whole phenomenon was an outgrowth and demonstration of G’d’s anger at the Egyptians.
   
   15,10 נשפת ברוחך, “You blew with Your wind.” Ibn Ezra, pointing out that the meaning of the root נשף is used to describe the evening, claims that G’d’s making the walls of frozen waters collapse was caused by a wind blowing in the evening. 
   
   My sainted father, the רא'ש, said that the reason that the Torah wrote the line וברוח אפיך נערמו מים before, while here the Torah writes נשפת ברוחך, [two phrases describing activities of רוח, Ed.] is intended to make the miracle appear as even greater than meets the eye at first glance. אף and רוח אף always suggests something hot. Anger is the result of a person becoming “heated.” When the result is that water turns to ice, as was the case here, this is an even greater anomaly. On the other hand, the רוח הפה, [the רוח associated with נשף without the word אף nose, is the exhaling which is an integral part of speech. Ed.] dissolved these ice-cubes.
   
   צללו כעופרת, “they sank like lead.” They descended into the depths as if they had been lumps of lead. The reason Moses makes mention of this is to tell us that this was a deliberate act of G’d. Although many of the Egyptians did know how to swim, this did not help them at all. No doubt many of them were quite near the shore when all this happened, and yet, not a single one of them managed to escape. Most horsemen would normally be able to save themselves in such conditions, as horses float on the surface of the water, but on this occasion not a single one did. This is the meaning of the line וינער ה' את מצרים בתוך הים, “the Lord poured the Egyptians into the middle of the sea.” (14,28)
   
   15,11. מי כמוך באלים, “who is comparable to You among the celestial powers?” <i>Rashi</i> simply explains the word אלים as חזקים, powerful terrestrial forces.
   Nachmanides writes that while it is true that this is generally the meaning of the word חזקים, in this verse, seeing that the comparison has been made to the Lord, there would be no point if the Torah would only describe the Lord as mightier than terrestrial forces; ordinary celestial forces are known as אלים as opposed to the Lord Who is described as אל עליון, the supreme celestial force. Rather, Moses compares G’d as superior to the mightiest angels.
   
   מי כמוך נאדר בקודש, “who is comparable to You, mighty in holiness.” In the domain of holiness there is no one who can compare to You.
   
   נורא תהלות, “too awesome for praise.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that G’d is too awesome for us to begin praising him, lest we omit some praises and become guilty of belittling Him.
   Nachmanides explains that being awesome in praise means being praised for having performed awesome deeds. The reason why Moses chooses these comparisons is because this is the way Kings of flesh and blood are praised. We do not possess the yardsticks to praise G’d in terms of celestial norms, seeing we have no access to that region.  What is described is that G’d is praised by people who observe how He pays back people who have oppressed others and treated them violently.
   
   15,12. נטית ימינך תבלעמו ארץ, “as soon as You stretched out Your right hand, the earth swallowed them.” Our sages deduce from this that all the people drowned in the sea did enjoy the privilege of being brought to burial.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning the words “hand” and “right” being stretched, do not imply that these organs are necessarily being used in the execution of vengeance. Therefore, it appears that we need to understand what happened as the Egyptians first being drowned and their bodies then being tossed on to the shore as is customary in cases of bodies drowning in the sea. The earth of the dry land, not the bottom of the sea, then swallowed these corpses so that in the end “dust returned to dust.” Although no grave diggers were involved, the surface of the earth after the dissolution of the bodies of these drowned Egyptians could not be told apart from the way it had looked before this had occurred.
   
   15,13. נחית בחסדך עם זו גאלת, “In Your kindness You have guided this nation whom You have redeemed.”  Ibn Ezra mentions that the past mode employed by Moses here about events that have not yet happened, is typical of the usage of future events that are being described by prophets, as they consider the future as real as the past.
   
   15,15. תפול עליהם אימתה ופחד, “fear and trembling gripped hold of them.” According to Ibn Ezra the words תפול עליהם do no refer to the Canaanites, even though they were relatively close to the Israelites, but they refer to the Edomites. Ibn Ezra’s argument is supported from the verse following where the leaders of the Kingdom of Edom are described as confused, frightened. Moses tells us this so that we should know that when the Israelites did not engage in battle with Edom when that kingdom refused the Israelites passage trough its territory, the reason was not that the Israelites were afraid, they knew well that the Edomites’. posture was only for show. The reason the Israelites detoured around the territory of Edom was that G’d had commanded them to. (Numbers Numbers 20,14-21) The Edomites had legitimate reason to fear the Israelites, as their land lay squarely on the route the Israelites now set out to travel.
   
   15,18. ה' ימלוך לעולם ועד, “The Lord will rule forever more.” The meaning is that at this time <i>Hashem</i> had demonstrated that He is the true ruler in this universe. He can take care of all those that serve Him, and He can dispose of all those that oppose Him.
   
   15,19. כי בא סוס פרעה, “for when Pharaoh’s cavalry came, etc.” Ibn Ezra claims that this verse is still part of Moses’ victory song of praise to the Lord, and that the whole people sang this verse with him also. 
   Nachmanides claims that this is not correct, for it is not styled in the poetic manner the previous verses have been styled, and it does not contain any element of prophesy. He also claims that Moses had composed and sung the <i>Shirah</i> on the same day as the Israelites had emerged from the sea bed, and that he had not waited until the day following. [He seems to imply that according to Ibn Ezra the song was composed on the day after the miracle. Ed.]
   According to Nachmanides the words:אז ישיר משה לבני ישראל כי בא סוס פרעה וו' need to be understood as one sentence, the poem being inserted between these two halves of one verse. Alternatively, “after Pharaoh and all his army had drowned in the sea while the Israelites were still marching on the bed of the dried out sea, Moses already began this song.” Accordingly, upon hearing this, Miriam immediately took the drum, etc, and continued leading the women in song.
   
   15,20. אחות אהרן, “Aaron’s sister.” The reason Miriam is described thus is because both Moses and Miriam had already been mentioned in a “single breath,” as it were in connection with the song, the Torah looked for a way to also have Aaron mentioned in this context. It was a way of giving honour to Aaron, her older brother. After all, Aaron too possessed the rank of being a prophet. It is also possible that it is the norm of Torah verses to relate women to their brothers, as for instance in Genesis 36,22 ואחות לוטן תמנע, “Timna was Lotan’s sister.”
   
   15,22. ויסע משה, “Moses caused Israel to journey, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that originally the cloud used to travel in front of the Israelites and the pillar of fire would travel behind them.
    After the Egyptians had been drowned, and the people no longer were in a state of fear from pursuers, and they no longer traveled at night also, the cloud departed and Moses instructed the people which way to move forward in accordance with directions he received directly from G’d. There were only 6 journeys all the way to Mount Sinai. The climate at that time of year was pleasant in that region, neither too cold nor too dry so that those that did not have tents of their own did not even need tents to sleep in at night. When they came to the region of Mount Sinai they made tents for themselves, as they expected to remain in the same location for a number of nights until the Tabernacle would be ready. [According to the Torah’s report they remained encamped at Mount Sinai for 11 months and 20 days. Ed.] Moses had informed them that they would remain there until the Tabernacle would be built. This was the reason why they had brought the <i>shittim</i> beams with them out of Egypt. In order to provide a visible symbol of these, Moses commanded them to construct the huts on the <i>Sukkot</i> festival, as the Torah says in Leviticus 23,43 כי בסוכות הושבתי את בני ישראל, “For I have house the Israelites in huts, etc.”  They certainly could not very well have dwelled in the clouds for all this time. [a reference to the tradition that the Israelites “dwelled” in tents in the desert. Ed.] There is no comparison between “huts” and “clouds.”  Once the Tabernacle had been constructed, G’d made a cloud take up position above that Tabernacle. (compare Exodus 40,38 “for the cloud of the Lord would be above the Tabernacle by day, and fire would be on it at night, before the eyes of all of the Children of Israel throughout their journeys.”)
   Whenever the cloud would move, this was the signal for the Israelites to commence journeying once they had left Mount Sinai, and this is why the Torah describes two pillars traveling with the Israelites, one by day and one by night. These two pillars would alternate with one another by day and by night respectively. If the report is based on historical tradition that these clouds were identical with the ones commonly known as the ענני הכבוד, the clouds proving the Presence of a Divine Presence, שכינה, we will abandon our rational approach to the subject and accept that tradition.
   
   Our sages explain the unusual wordויסע  as proof that Moses had to make the Israelites travel in the  direction of the desert against their will. One reason was that the loot they garnered at the sea was many times more than what they had taken with them from Egypt.
   Other commentators hold that this was not a criticism of the Israelites, but a compliment to them; they had been so enthralled by the spiritual uplift during their miraculous salvation that it had caused them to exclaim “this is My G’d, let me build Him an appropriate residence,” (15,2) that they could not entertain the thought of leaving a location where they had such a wonderful vision.
   
   15,25. ויורהו ה' עץ, “<i>Hashem</i> showed him a tree.” Nachmanides writes: seeing that I do not know of a single instance in which the root להורות means something other than “to teach, to instruct,” (as in Proverbs 4,4 and all other examples) I believe that according to the plain meaning of the text the tree the Torah speaks about here would convert bracken water into sweet water upon contact. This was a beneficial property of that kind of wood, a phenomenon found in nature. G’d taught Moses some lesson in botany.
   According to our sages we are dealing with a miracle, in fact a miracle within a miracle, as the instrument used to perform it was naturally bitter instead of sweet. G’d either told Moses where to find this marvelous tree, or He invented it for the purpose of the miracle.
   
   שם שם לו חוק ומשפט ושם נסהו, “there He established a decree and ordinance for His people, and there He subjected it to a test of faith.” According to <i>Rashi</i>  [based on the Talmud <i>Sanhedrin</i> 56.Ed.] the Jewish people were given a partial list of the laws pertaining to the observance of the Sabbath, the commandment to honour father and mother, purification rites by means of the red heifer, and a number of laws governing inter-personal relations.
   
   Nachmanides wonders why the Torah would not have spelled out some specifics, introducing them by the time honoured introduction: “G’d said to Moses, ‘say to the Children of Israel, etc.?’” According to the wording in <i>Rashi</i> it appears that Moses taught the people laws that would later on be revealed to them as part of the Torah, and he did it in a manner similar to Avraham, who is reputed to have known all the laws of the Torah. What he did when he taught his converts was to teach them what he knew to be the wishes of G’d in his respect. Neither Avraham nor Moses had at that time been authorized to reveal these laws as already being operative, and in the case of Moses, having done so would have robbed the revelation at Mount Sinai of part of its momentum. The reason why the Torah adds that this was in the nature of a test of their faith, was that G’d/Moses tested the reaction of the people to such laws, and if they welcomed them with joy.
   
   According to the plain meaning of the text, upon entering the desert, Moses asked himself by which rules he should lead the Israelites pending their arrival in the promised land, at which time the entire Torah would become applicable. Rules of behaviour are generally known as חק, statute. One example of the use of that word in this context is found in Proverbs 30,8 הטריפני לחם חוקי, “feed me with the bread allotted to me.” משפט, on the other hand, is the term used to describe generally acceptable conduct, as in Samuel I 27,11.
   Alternatively, the meaning of the expression ושם נסהו, refers to the all the tribulations which wandering in the desert involved, especially to test if the people were willing to put up with the discomforts and deprivations without complaining. In this context the word משפט would mean that the people would understand and willingly submit to the need to love their neighbours, honour the aged, be modest and undemanding in their general behaviour, and be welcoming to people who came to the camp to offer their wares to the Israelites. 
   
   ושם נסהו, the Torah recorded that G’d deliberately led the people into regions which lacked basic survival needs, and when He brought them to a place that had water, the water turned out to be unfit to drink. All this is part of “being tested.” Moses referred to this at the end of forty years, when he said: ויענך וירעיבך, “He subjected you to oppressive conditions and He starved you.” (Deut. 8,3) G’d did so in order that the people should better appreciate how He responded to their complaints, and provided constant comforts for them.
   
   15,26. ויאמר אם שמוע תשמע, “He said: ‘if you will surely listen, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra this formulation means: “if you will endeavour to understand the rationale underlying the legislation, etc.”
   
   והישר בעיניו תעשה, “and you will do what is right in His eyes, etc.” A reference to the positive commandments.
   
   והאזנת למצוויו, “and you will give ear to His commandments;” a reference to the negative command-ments.
   In the <i>Mechilta</i> the words  והישר בעיניו תעשה, are understood as a reference to “your business ethics,” the reason being that anyone who practices fair business ethics will be beloved both by his peers as well as by his G’d. He is perceived as having observed the entire Torah.
   
   כי אני ה' רופאך, “for I the Lord, am your healer.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the previous lines can be summed up as if a person would introduce himself to his patient as a doctor, and would tell him that as long as he would obey his warnings not to eat certain foods, etc., he would not need to be concerned about contracting certain illnesses.
   Nachmanides disagrees, saying that this is not the straightforward meaning of these verses at all. The reason why he disagrees is that it is not the nature of a master to assure his servants that if they perform their duties he would not strike them with a fatal disease. There cannot be found a single parallel in the entire Torah which substantiates that this is the type of assurance G’d hands out to His subjects. What our verse does portray is the assurance that if the Jewish people, as opposed to the Egyptians, will hearken to the instructions of G’d, they will not be struck down as had the Egyptians who had maintained a consistently rebellious posture against G’d. G’d confirms this with the words: “for I am the Lord your healer,” making the point that all the diseases which struck the Egyptians were not due to the caprice of natural forces, but to the active intervention of G’d against people who refused to obey His instructions. G’d goes beyond this, promising that in response to the people’s obedience He would even heal those afflictions which would be the result of the caprice of natural forces in the universe.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that the first miracle confirming what G’d had just said was the changing of bitter water to drinkable sweet water, which was the exact reversal of the first of the ten plagues that had changed life-sustaining drinking water to blood. It is G’d’s ability to be effective both by doing one thing and by doing its opposite, which makes Him so unique. This is why you are well advised to always be in awe of Him, not rebel against Him so that He will not quarrel with you. Moreover, you have every reason to love Him, for He will prove benevolent to you, just as He did when He cured the bitter waters.
   
   15,27. ושם שתים עשרה עינות מים ושבעים תמרים, “and there  were 12 wells of water there as well as 70 date palms.” 
   Nachmanides holds that this was not something so special, as there are may oases in the desert where sweet water wells are found, wells that are surrounded by fruit-bearing palm trees. 
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that the number 12 is allegorically significant, as it represents a separate well of water for each of the 12 tribes. The number 70, i.e. seventy palm trees, is a hint at the 70 elders.
   I do not know whether <i>Rashi</i> meant to imply that the wells, their number, and the palm trees, as well as their number were phenomena that came into being miraculously for that occasion. There is even a commentary on our verse in the <i>Mechilta</i> that both phenomena had been created during the six days of creation and that they had awaited being able to serve a useful purpose until that time.
   
   Ibn Ezra is of the opinion that our verse simply tells us that after having encountered an oasis that had first been disappointing, the waters having been bracken, now they found an oasis that offered all the advantages commonly associated with such places in the midst of a desert. When they saw the date palms they knew immediately that the wells provided drinking water, as otherwise the date palms could not have grown there successfully.
   
   16,1. ויסעו מאלים ויבואו...מדבר סין,”they journeyed from Eylim….and they arrived in the desert of Sin.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah in this instance uses a form of abbreviation, seeing that when they departed from Eylim they had been at a location on the shores of the Sea of Reeds, and they now moved inland to the desert of Sin. The desert of Sin is a large desert extending from the sea until the edge of the desert of Sinai. There were several stations where the Israelites made camp on the way, which, however, were not mentioned at this point. [only in Numbers 33,11-15. Ed.] According to a tradition mentioned by our sages, the manna fist descended when the Israelites were encamped at <i>Alush</i>, the second stop in the desert of Sin. The need for the manna was triggered by the fact that at <i>Alush</i> they encamped already for a second time without making any noticeable progress toward their ultimate objective. As a result, the people expressed their dissatisfaction. By describing the people’s complaint as occurring במדבר, the Torah hints that they did not complain on arrival at the first station in the desert, but at a later stage.
   
   16,2. וילונו כל עדת בני ישראל, “The entire community of the Children of Israel complained, etc.”
   Ibn Ezra writes that at <i>Marah</i> only a small section of the people the people had complained, the Torah writing:וילונו העם על משה, ”the people” as opposed to כל עדת בני ישראל, “the whole community of the Children of Israel,” i.e. including the elite of the people. At that point they also complained to Aaron.
   Nachmanides writes that actually the Torah should have written the reason for the people’s complaint, such as that there was no meat to eat, and that there was not enough bread to satisfy their needs, as the Torah had done both when they complained at <i>Refidim</i> and when they complained at <i>Marah</i>.
   
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that when the Torah mentions that this station occurred on the 15th day of the second month, i.e. exactly a month after their departure from <i>Ramses</i>, this was the day that the dough that they had brought with them from Egypt that had been baked on the way into unleavened bread, ran out. This made it superfluous for the Torah to spell out the nature of their complaint.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the Torah mentions the date is to inform us that already a whole month had passed since the people had left Egypt. During that entire period they had subsisted on the bread they had with them and on the meat of the large herds of cattle and sheep they had brought with them. Now they faced real deprivations.
   Personally, I think that the complaints were sparked by the realization of the Israelites now that they would not be marching along well-traveled routes, encountering towns and villages along the way, but they were headed deeper and deeper into an arid unpopulated desert. The word במדבר in our verse does not so much describe a specific location as the cause for their complaints. The very fact that they kept moving further and further into the desert led them to accuse Moses and Aaron that they had been brought there to die in the desert. If they had to die, they would have preferred to die in a place where they could have been buried with dignity. They spelled all this out when they said: “you have taken us out into this desert to kill this whole community by letting them starve to death.” G’d immediately listened to their complaint and set about to prepare food for them for the duration of their stay in the desert.
   
   16,4. הנני ממטיר לכם, “I am ready to make it rain down for you, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the reason why the Torah uses the word ממטיר, a word associated with rainfall, not with solids, was that seeing that the manna originated in the celestial regions it had that much in common with rainfall. At first glance, the people thought that what was descending was rain. [This seems strange, as it descended during the night when the people were asleep, and they only found it  in the morning, unsuspecting. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that we find the expression ממטיר associated with the wicked people, such as the wicked people of Sodom, for instance, upon whom G’d rained down fire and brimstone. Perhaps we must assume that there the expression המטיר was used as the harmful substances described were accompanied by normal rainfall.
   Onkelos is of the opinion that the word המטיר describes anything in the process of falling, regardless if the substance is welcome or unwelcome. He translates the words הנני ממטיר as הא אנא מחית, “I make descend.”
   לחם, “bread.” It is described as “bread” seeing that this is what the people tried to make it substitute for. Every kind of פת is called לחם, not only baked goods made from wheat or barley. We also encounter the term עוגות as describing bread, as in Genesis 18,6, and Numbers 11,8. The term ממטיר is justified, as the Torah describes ingredients which rained down which would subsequently be converted into bread. Our benediction over bread is המוציא לחם מן הארץ, which also does not mean that G’d produces ready-made bread as emerging from the earth, but we thank Him for having the earth produce ingredients fit to convert into bread, i. e .the staff of life.
   Some commentators claim that the word לחם does not refer specifically to bread, but to food in general, and G’d was saying to Moses that the people’s food would rain down from the heaven. The meat G’d was going to provide was also included in the line הנני ממטיר לכם לחם מן השמים. We encounter the expression לחם אשה, “food being burned up on the altar,” many times, and it never refers to bread, but to sacrificial meat. (compare Leviticus 3,11; 3,16; Numbers 28,2) Both the <i>selav</i> and the <i>manna</i> materialized for the people as if dropped literally from “heaven.” For some reason, G’d enlarged on the gift of the manna, which was a necessity, whereas He did not elaborate on the <i>selav,</i> which  was a luxury.
   
   למען אנסנו, “so that I may test it,” (the people) According to <i>Rashi</i> the test would consist of seeing if the people would indeed observe the rules laid down by G’d in connection with this food.
   According to Nachmanides the test consisted of the fact that the people would be left without food that could be stored against future shortages, so that they would be dependent on G’d’s largesse literally from hour to hour. Except for Fridays, they would never receive more than a day’s ration, and anyone trying to put some aside would find that it simply rotted. Anyone would be heard asking “what am I going to eat tomorrow?” would be considered as lacking in faith.
   
   16,7. ובוקר וראיתם את כבוד ה', “and in the morning you will see the glory of <i>Hashem.”</i> This verse does not refer to the manifestation of G’d’s glory in the shape of the ענני הכבוד the clouds of glory, something that accompanied them on a regular and daily basis. Aaron’s addressing the people advising them of all this (verse 10) occurred on the very same day, and suddenly an additional aspect of G’d’s glory appeared, framed by the cloud. G’d’s benevolence was visible in that the people received the first day’s <i>manna</i> portion during the day when there was still time to prepare it into food before evening. [according to <i>Rashi,</i> based on the <i>Mechilta</i> we need to understand the word בוקר here as an expression of visible goodwill, as opposed to the <i>selav</i> which was supplied in the “evening,” i.e. reluctantly, seeing that it was a luxury, not a necessity, and the people should not have demanded it. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation cannot be correct as the Torah specifically wrote that the manifestation of G’d’s glory would take place in the morning, בבוקר. Seeing the <i>manna</i> was not a manifestation of G’d’s glory, but the fact that G’d had created a special food for His special people was such a manifestation.
   
   According to Ibn Ezra the words ובוקר וראיתם do not belong to what follows, but to what had been written previously, i.e. seeing that the people had accused Moses and Aaron of having led them out of Egypt to die in the desert, G’d was going to prove to them how wrong they had been in making such an accusation against Moses and Aaron. They would see evidence, both in the evening and on the following morning, that not Moses and Aaron but <i>Hashem</i> had taken them out of Egypt. The <i>manna,</i> something new in the world, was appropriately revealed in the morning, when a “new” day breaks forth. The word ובוקר is quite separate from the word וראיתם. The fact that G’d’s glory became visible in full daylight was something extraordinary, also.
   Nachmanides writes that the <i>manna</i> was indeed a great miracle, as opposed to the <i>selav,</i> whose appearance in such quantities was remarkable indeed, but it materialized by natural means, i.e. it was the wind that brought the birds. Moreover, the birds had existed and were part of nature, as opposed to the <i>manna</i> which had neither existed nor been sent by natural means, for <i>manna</i> dropping from heaven is not the same as rain falling from the sky. According to our sages in the 5th chapter of <i>Avot,</i> Manna was one of the items created during the dusk of the sixth day of creation, and preserved in a state of suspended animation up until the Jewish people were in need of it during their wanderings in the desert. No wonder that Moses used quite different language in describing the <i>selav</i> that would arrive toward evening, and the <i>manna</i> that the people would experience on the following morning. Experiencing the latter for the first time, was indeed an overwhelming manifestation of the glory of <i>Hashem</i> becoming visible to man. 
   Our sages, in referring to the <i>manna</i> as לחם אבירים, hinted that this was the food that the ministering angels in the celestial spheres depend on for their sustenance. They did not mean this in a literal sense, but they drew a comparison between the angels and the Israelites during those years, saying that just as the sustenance of the angels is their proximity to the radiation of the waves of <i>Hashem’s</i> presence, so the Israelites in the desert were kept alive in body and spirit by this visible manifestation that <i>Hashem</i> was close to each one of them.
   
   ונחנו מה, “and what are we (worth)?” Ibn Ezra comments on this rhetorical question that Moses and Aaron referred to their total impotence in influencing events, indicating that they were merely tools in the hands of <i>Hashem.</i> These words reflect the psalmist saying: מה אדם כי תדעהו, “what is the value of man that You should bother to become intimately familiar with him?” (Psalms 144,3)
   
   16,8. ויאמר משה בתת ה' לכם בערב בשר, “Moses said: ‘when the Lord gives you meat in the evening, etc’.” the Torah reverts back to explaining more details about the line “in the evening you will know that <i>Hashem</i> took you out of Egypt by His giving you meat in the evening and bread in the morning, etc.”
   
   16,12. דבר אל בני ישראל לאמור בין הערבים תאכלו בשר, “speak to the Children of Israel, saying that ‘in the evening you will eat meat, etc.’” Nachmanides writes that what Moses is instructed to say here has already been recorded previously. The reason why it has been repeated here once more is because G’d had stated (verse 4) that He would rain bread from the heavens as if this would be the first item of the agenda and as if He would perform an act of kindness for the people, something not related at all to the people’s complaints. Now, the Torah relates that the people’s conduct in complaining was considered sinful, and that <i>Hashem</i> would do what He was going to do only in response to their complaint. He would do so in order to demonstrate how unjustified their complaint against Moses and Aaron had been. 
   It is possible that originally, G’d had not promised that the supply of <i>manna</i> would be for the duration of their journey through the desert, and that the people had believed that this would be a short-term solution of their problems, lasting possibly only for a few days, and that the miracle involved was somehow tied only to that particular location. Now, we hear more details, including the announcement of the meat they would eat in the evening, i.e. as a regular diet every evening, and that in the morning they would receive heavenly bread on a regular basis. It is the opinion of our sages that just as the people had <i>manna</i> every morning so they had the <i>selav</i> every evening. The reason why the Torah gives many more details about the <i>manna</i> than about the <i>selav,</i> is that the former was supernatural, incomparable to phenomena that exist on earth. 
   This leaves us with the question that if the Israelites actually had a meat diet on a daily basis, what brought on the demand for meat in Numbers 11 and the supply of <i>selav</i> there as a result of which thousands of Israelites died due to overindulging, and the location was named קברות התאוה, ”the burial sites due to craving?”
   Very possibly, the supply of s<i>elav</i> prior to what is described as a surfeit in Numbers chapters 11 and 12, was meager, not nearly enough to satisfy large numbers of the people. By mentioning that the supply of bread in the morning would be לשובע, sufficient to satiate, and failing to make a similar comment regarding the s<i>elav</i>, the Torah indicated that there would be a quantitative difference between the supply of bread and the supply of meat. Perhaps only the pious Israelites collected <i>selav</i> on a regular basis. It is also noteworthy that when Israelites in Numbers are described as weeping over the absence of meat, the Torah never mentioned that the people at large indulged in weeping over the absence of meat, only some did, i.e. some בני ישראל of the elite, and all of the rabble were the most dissatisfied. (Numbers 11,4) On that occasion, and presumably on that occasion only, G’d supplied meat in such quantities that the whole people were literally swamped by meat. 
   
   According to the plain meaning of the text, supply of meat on both occasions was on a strictly temporary basis, whereas the supply of heavenly bread became a daily norm. The people’s principal complaint had been that Moses and Aaron had taken them into the desert to die by hunger.
   It is also possible that Moses had told the people originally that they would be provided for, but that they had not believed him. The reason they did not believe him then was that he had not referred to G’d doing the providing. Only after Moses and Aaron had made it plain by saying נחנו מה that they had not meant to imply that they would do the providing, and had promised the people that they would see the glory of G’d in action, as it were, did the people become convinced that their problems would be solved.
   
   16,14. ותעל שכבת הטל, “a layer of dew ascended;” Ibn Ezra explains that the word means (here) that the dew while dissolving into the atmosphere, revealed what was below it, i.e. a layer of <i>manna.</i> The word תעלני appears in a similar context when David asks not to die before his time, i.e. Psalms 102,25, אל תעלני בחצי ימי, “do not let me ascend to the celestial regions prematurely.”
   
   דק מחוספס, “something thin, exposed;” some commen-tators explain the word מחוספס as something globular, however there is no similar word in Scriptures to which we could compare this expression. Onkelos translates it as something visible through exposure. It would be similar to Genesis 30,37 מחשף הלבן, “exposing the white beneath.”
   
   דק ככפור על הארץ, “thin as the frost on the ground.” Onkelos translates it as above.
   <i>Rashi</i> claims that when Onkelos adds the word גיר this is not a translation of a word that appears in the text, but a word used to illustrate the meaning of כפור. In Isaiah 27,9 we find the expression אבני גיר, the prophet describing the black colour of those stones
   
   Nachmanides writes that גיר, “chalk,” in Hebrew, is not black but white, and that the Torah describes this white colour as sticking to the white limestone, the ones use to grind into what is used in whitewash, but that this exterior is even whiter than the whiteness of the chalk stones themselves. This thin layer appeared to stick to the <i>manna</i> in the manner of a layer of frost. He goes on to draw a comparison between the word כפור, hoary frost, and the word כופר, the insulating, waterproofing material G’d told Noach to employ both on the outside and the inside of the ark. (Genesis 6,14) The common denominator between both words would be that they describe material that is pasted on to seal something off and protect it against harmful substances penetrating it. The word כפור is also understood as being analogous to כאפר, “like ash,” i.e. extremely small particles such as the particles of ash. [the smaller each particle, the more easy it is to create a waterproof and even airproof protective layer made from that substance. Ed.] Hoary frost found on the ground in the early mornings is such an impenetrable substance until it melts.
   There are some other versions where the word דק does not appear but the word is כעדק דגיר, when the connection to the word גלידא as חמרים, small little heaps of frozen water or snow is so much more obvious. This is probably a truer version of Onkelos. 
   
   16,15. ויאמרו איש אל אחיו מן הוא?, they said to one another: ”what is it?” some commentators believe that the word מן is derived from the root מנה as in Daniel 1,10 מנה את מאכלכם, “he has provided your food,” although here the word appears in the text before Moses had told the people that this was to serve as their bread.
   
   Other commentators link the word to the expression מנה אחת אפים, “a gift of SPECIAL  value.” (Samuel I 1,5) The final letter ה is missing in the word מן, according to that interpretation.
   
   16,16. עומר לגלגולת, “one <i>omer</i> (measure) per head.” According to Ibn Ezra this was the amount intended for an adult, whereas there would be a commensurably smaller amount for each child, an amount that would correspond to the nutritional needs of each child.
   
   16,17. ויעשו כן, “they did accordingly.” According to the plain meaning of the text, each collector gathered in accordance with the quantity appropriate for the number of people that were part of his household. Our sages say that something miraculous happened, i.e. that even people who had misjudged the quantity they thought they needed, found out when they returned to their respective tents or huts that they had collected exactly the amount appropriate for their respective families.
   
   16,19. אל יותר ממנו, “do not leave any leftovers from it.”  Moses meant that no one should deliberately leave over from his portion meaning to eat the leftover on the day following. He did not mean that it was compulsory to eat up his whole portion. Anyone who found it impossible to eat up his entire portion was supposed to throw the leftover into the garbage.
   
   16,20. וירם תולעים ויבאש, “it became infested with worms and stank.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that the Torah reports matters in inverted order, i.e. that it began to stink before worms infested it. He bases himself on the following sequence (16,24) ולא הבאיש ורמה לא היתה בו “it did not cause a stink, and had not produced worms.” 
   
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi</i> would be correct if matters had occurred in a natural sequence. Seeing that nothing connected to the <i>manna</i> could be judged by phenomena we are familiar with in our world, there is nothing strange in the Torah also reporting the process of <i>manna</i> going to rot as not conforming to natural phenomena. The reason why G’d arranged for the sequence of decomposition followed by stench, followed by worms, to be reversed, was that had the usual sequence been followed the stench during the night would already have alerted the Israelites and they would have discarded all the leftover <i>manna</i> immediately. In such an event Moses would not have any chance to vent his anger on those people who had disobeyed his instructions. By writing the inverted sequence on one occasion and the normal sequence on the other occasion, the Torah refers to this very point that we are dealing with another supernatural phenomenon and makes this quite clear.
   
   16,22. ויהי ביום הששי לקטו לחם משנה, “when it came to Friday, they found that they had collected a double measure of bread.” Our sages interpret the wording of this verse as proving that only after the people collecting <i>manna</i> had returned to their respective tents, did they become aware that they had gathered twice the normal quantity. At that point Moses had not yet informed them of this. 
   Ibn Ezra claims that according to the plain meaning of the text Moses had instructed them to collect double the usual amount; he uses the words לקטו ממנו, “they collected of it, etc.” to prove his point. Had the matter been a miracle, the Torah would have described their activity on that day as something they had ”found,” as opposed to something that they had expected to be there. As it was, the princes told Moses that the people had done what Moses had told them to do, i.e. collected double the usual amount. They then asked Moses what to do with the surplus, seeing that in their experience any surplus would rot and become worm-eaten.
   Moses replied that G’d had already commanded him and Aaron concerning the work stoppage to be observed on the Sabbath, and that as a result all the food needed for the Sabbath had to be prepared on Friday. He told them to conserve the second <i>omer</i> until the morning of the Sabbath, at which time he told them to go ahead and to eat it, as there would not be any new <i>manna</i> on that day.
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that the words את אשר תבשלו וגו' applied to both days, in other words they were told to prepare food for two days instead of for one. The reason why the people came to Moses on the Sabbath in the morning was that they were not willing to eat stale food, food that had been prepared on the previous day. Moses then explained that this food was not stale food, and that the reason he had asked the people to prepare all of it on Friday was precisely so that it would not be stale food on the Sabbath. The honour of the Sabbath demanded that no new <i>manna</i> descend on that holy day. It is possible that Moses told the people that they could eat as much of the total as they wanted on the Friday, and that any leftover, however small, proved to be adequate for their needs on the Sabbath.
   
   16,28. עד אנה מאנתם, “how long will you still refuse?” <i>Rashi</i> explains that in the Talmud <i>Baba Kamma</i> 92, the sage <i>Rava</i> is reported to have asked <i>Rabbah bar Meri</i> for the origin of the popular proverb that it happens that in order to remove a thorn one has to extract the plant around it also. He was told that the source is a verse in Jeremiah 2,30. [the application to our verse is that G’d addresses the entire nation, instead of the few who had not obeyed the instructions of Moses not to go looking for <i>manna</i> on the Sabbath. Ed.] Actually, G’d blamed Moses for not having instructed the people about the laws of the Sabbath already on the day G’d had revealed them to him.
   
   Ibn Ezra writes that G’d addressed Moses in verse 29 as if he were the representative of the whole nation. The message was that Moses should tell all the people to stay at home on the Sabbath, i.e. not to go out to collect <i>manna</i> that fell outside the perimeter of the camp. The apparently very restrictive language was the result of some of the people having disregarded the instructions not to look for <i>manna</i> on that day.
   
   16,35. עד בואם אל ארץ נושבת, “until they arrived in the land they would inhabit.” 
   The part of the desert the Israelites were walking through had not been home to anyone, ever. They ate <i>manna</i> until they crossed the river Jordan when they found part of the new barley harvest and could make bread from it. Actually, the last portion of <i>manna</i> lasted the Israelites until they made camp at Gilgal, at the border of the land of Canaan.
   
   17,1. ויסעו כל עדת בני ישראל...למסעיהם, “The entire community of the Children of Israel journeyed …on their respective journeys.” The Torah sums up in a few words that Israel made many separate journeys in the desert of <i>Sin</i> culminating in their arrival at <i>Refidim</i>, and this is why the text refers to the word למסעיהם, “according to their journeys.” En route, the people had encamped successively at <i>Dofkah</i> and <i>Alush</i> before reaching <i>Refidim</i>. The purpose of these verses is primarily to serve as background of what happened at <i>Refidim</i>. The journeys through this desert were earmarked by quarrels about lack of bread and subsequently, about lack of water.
   17,2. וירב העם, “the people quarreled.” Ibn Ezra points out that the Torah writes “the people,” as opposed to “all the people” in contrast to the previous occasion when they did not have any more food. (16,2) At that time there were two groups of people, one which did not have any more water to drink, and one which had taken along water from <i>Alush</i> The group that had no drinking water quarreled with Moses, whereas the second group, although they did have water in their vessels, wanted to test G’d to see if He could and would supply water for the people. This is why the Torah, instead of using the familiar term וילונו, “they complained,” (with a measure of justification) now uses the term וירב, “they quarreled,” i.e. without justification. Moses therefore answered them by saying: “why do you pick a quarrel with me, and why do you put the Lord to a test?”
   
   17,3. ויצמא שם העם למים, “The people thirsted for water there.” When their thirst became intolerable, the people ganged up on Moses, wanting to know why, seeing that things were worse for them than in Egypt, he had bothered to take them out of there?
   Nachmanides describes what happened somewhat differently. As soon as the people arrived at <i>Refidim</i> and found that there were no wells of drinking water there, they immediately started a quarrel with Moses, and this is the reason why the Torah reports that the people quarreled with Moses without giving any specific reason. Their demand for water is self-explanatory. This time, as opposed to previous occasions, they demanded water from him, claiming that it was his responsibility to provide this for them. Moses answered them that they had addressed their complaint to the wrong party, seeing that it had not been he who had led them out of Egypt, but that they were in fact putting G’d to the test, seeing that it was He Who had taken them out of Egypt. He suggested that if they would stop pestering him and instead would pray to the Lord, their needs would soon be taken care of. We know that Moses was correct in accusing them of putting G’d’s ability to provide water for them to the test, as it is written in verse 7 ועל נסותם את ה' לאמור היש ה' בקרבנו אם אין, “because of the people putting G’d to the test, wanting to know if the Lord is among us or not.”
   When Moses realized how thirsty the people were, he himself brought their prayer to G’d, and he told G’d how the people had quarreled with him and had accused him of being responsible for their sorry condition.
   
   אותי ואת בני, “me and my children.” On this occasion the people did not speak in general terms as previously, saying להמיתנו, “to cause our deaths,” or “to kill the whole community,” but they added their children as additional victims, all in order to make their complaint appear more urgent. When children have to die in the presence of their parents this is a more tragic situation.
   
   את בני ואת מקני, “my children and my herds.” The reason why they mentioned the herds, separately, was to remind Moses that a great deal of water was needed, seeing that the animals consumed a lot of water. This is why the Torah makes a point that after Moses struck the rock lots of water gushed forth, enough for both the people and their herds. (Numbers 20,11)
   
   17,4. עוד מעט וסקלוני, “if this continues a little longer they are liable to stone me.” Moses did not mean this literally. What he meant was that the people were so embittered that if they had been able to, they would have stoned him.
   
   17,5. עבור לפני העם, “pass before the people, etc.” Nachmanides understands the word עבור here as an instruction to walk ahead of the people, as in Samuel II 18,23 ויעבור את הכושי, “he overtook the Kushi.” We have to remember that the people were encamped at <i>Refidim,</i> whereas the rock from which the water would gush forth was located at Mount <i>Chorev</i>, also known as Mount <i>Sinai</i>, or that <i>Refidim</i> was a small town near the bottom of that mountain. I will still have occasion to describe the topography in detail. At any rate, it was a distance of approx. 4 kilometers from the camp to where that rock was located, and Moses at the head of the elders would walk there in full view of the people. Moses would have the vision of an angel on top of that rock, indicating that he had arrived at the correct spot.
   In our verse here, as opposed to a similar phenomenon almost 40 years later, the Torah, though reporting that the rock produced water, did not mention that this water was adequate for the people’s herds. (verse 6) Nonetheless, it is quite clear that there must have been enough water, not only this, but the people did not have to trouble themselves to march to Mount <i>Chorev</i> in order to be able to drink that water. Otherwise, why would the Torah have to tell us in chapter 19 that the people reached the edge of that desert on the first day of the third month and apparently encamped near the foot of Mount <i>Chorev</i> on the third day of that month. It seems pretty clear that the waters from Mount <i>Chorev</i> flowed to <i>Refidim</i> and arrived there in pristine condition for the people and their herds to be able to drink from. The other rock, at <i>Kadesh (</i>Numbers 27<i>,</i>14) apparently produced a cleft in the rock, which resulted in the rock being like a natural spring, people streaming to it to drink from it directly, as from a fountain. It was this well which the people immortalized in their song in Numbers 21,17. Here the waters flowed directly past the people’s huts or tents so as to make it most convenient for them. Even though both sources of water are part of the concept of בארה של מרים, “the well granted the people through the merit of Miriam,” it is likely that right up until the fortieth year they benefited from the water which originated at Mount <i>Chorev,</i> whereas in Numbers, the people’s conducted merited a certain measure of punitive action, so that the continued accessibility of their water was less convenient than previously. The expression באר חפרוה שרים, “a well which had been excavated by nobles,” may reflect that subtle distinction.
   
   ומטך אשר הכית בו את היאור, “and your staff, the one with which you smote the river Nile, etc.” Even though it had not been Moses personally who had smitten the river with his staff, but Aaron, (Exodus 7,19) seeing that Moses had instructed Aaron to do this, he is the one considered as having initiated it. The reason the staff is described in its relation to having converted water to blood, and nothing is said about any of the other miracles in which Moses’ staff had been featured, is that G’d wanted to show that this very staff which had been the source of harm, would now be playing the role of being an instrument that orchestrated something beneficial.
   
   17,6. הנני עומד לפניך, “behold, I shall stand before you, etc.” seeing that the miracle which was about to occur was one that would be part of their daily experience for the length of time they would be in the desert, similar to the miracle of the <i>manna,</i> it was appropriate that just as the miracle of the descent of the <i>manna</i> was introduced with a visible manifestation of G’d’s glory, so this miracle too should be introduced by a similar visible manifestation of G’d’s glory.
   
   17,9. ויאמר משה אל יהושע, “Moses said to Joshua, etc.” According to Nachmanides it is clear that from this day on when he came to the special attention of Moses, Joshua bore the name Joshua instead of Hoseah. We find him referred to by this name again in Exodus 32,17 when he commented on the sound of the shouting going on in connection with the golden calf. So what do we do with the Torah telling us that prior to dispatching this man as one of the 12 spies, Moses called Hoseah Joshua? (Numbers 13,16)  We must assume that the Torah uses that instance to tell us that the man now called Joshua had already experienced this name change in our portion here, as a result of having become Moses’ personal valet.
   As to the comment by our sages that the additional letters symbolise that his name from now mean ק-ה יושעיך, “may G’d help you!” i.e. that Moses was afraid he might otherwise be influenced by the evil advice of the ten spies, could mean that already at that early stage of the Israelites’ wanderings Moses had feared such a development. It is also possible that as of the time when Joshua became one of the twelve men chosen to spy out the land of Canaan, Moses decreed publicly that he was henceforth to be referred to exclusively as Joshua. 
   The reason why Moses himself did not lead the people in this battle was 1) to enable him to offer the prayers for success on the hilltop, and 2) there was a longstanding tradition that Esau or his descendants would ultimately be vanquished only by a descendant of Rachel. History has born this out, as Amalek was defeated by King Sha-ul, a descendant of Binyamin (son of Rachel). The remnant of Amalek, i.e.. Haman, eventually fell into the hands of Mordechai, also a descendant of Kish, King Sha-ul’s father.
   
   Moses relying largely on prayer, was due to the fact that the Israelites were completely ignorant of the art of conducting warfare. He felt that as long as he was a visible symbol for the people they would make up in faith and dedication what they lacked in skill.
   It is also possible that Moses was deeply concerned that Yitzchok’s blessing that Esau and his descendants would live by the sword would now weigh heavily against the Jewish people. This was the first time that internecine war between the descendants of Yitzchok had broken out, and it would continue at intervals until when the Messiah will come and the remnants of Esau will be resoundingly defeated for the last time. The destruction of the second Temple, the exile we find ourselves in still, are all due to the descendants of Amalek/Esau, and Moses was most aware of the historical implications. [this is why we daily add the relevant verses from the Book of Ovadiah, predicting the defeat of Esau at the end of reciting the victory song by Moses over the Egyptians. Ed.]
   
   17,11. וכאשר יניח ידו, “and whenever he allowed his hand to rest,” according to the plain meaning of the text it was simply physically impossible for Moses to maintain a posture with raised hands all day long. Whenever he was too tired to maintain his posture, the battle tended to favour the Amalekites. This is why he commanded Aaron and Chur to assist him in maintaining the posture with his hands raised in support of his prayer.
   According to the <i>Midrash,</i> where the question is asked rhetorically whether Moses’ hands determined the outcome of the battle, the answer given is that Moses was not suffering from physical fatigue, but that it is forbidden for any man to keep his hands outstretched in prayer for three hours or more without a break. [It is an aspect of עיון תפילה, praying “insistently,” something most unbecoming for man in his relation to his Creator. Ed.]
   
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi explains that the words וכאשר יניח ידו do not describe something that Moses actually did, but these words describe that Moses knew that he could not afford to allow his hands to rest, else Amalek would prove victor, and that in order to forestall such an eventuality, he took Aaron and Chur with him from the start to help him support his hands. 
   Some commentators understand Moses’ raising his hands as referring to the hands with which he was holding his staff as a sign of encouragement to the people. Moses’ staff meant for the people what the flag means to gentile troops. Generally, the purpose of the flag is to serve as a point around which the troops position themselves, to prevent being scattered by opposing forces. The description of Moses being placed in an elevated position even while seated, is to signify that Moses performed the function that a flag normally performs in a battle. This explains why Moses called the altar he built after the battle ה' ניסי. He did not want the people to think that their victory had been due to the visibility of Moses’ staff during the battle, but that it was exclusively due to the help of <i>Hashem,</i> without which the staff would not have proven effective at all. Israel’s “flag” is its faith in <i>Hashem</i>.
   
   17,12. ויהי ידיו אמונה, “His hands ‘was’ steadfast.” Ibn Ezra explains the singular mode of ויהי instead of ויהיו as referring to each of Moses’ individual hands separately.
   Other commentators justify the singular mode by saying that Moses’ hands appeared to the onlookers as if they had been fused to be one  single hand.
   Yet other commentators claim that the word אמונה refers to the faith displayed by the people. Still another commentator compares the expression to what we read in Meggilat Esther about Mordechai’s relationship to Esther, his niece. The text there is: ויהי אומן, “he had adopted her,” as if we were to say that someone supported someone else by carrying them on his hands.
   
   אמונה, ”steadfast.” As in Nechemyah 10,1 אנחנו כרתים אמונה, “we make this pledge, etc.” This matter will endure. Some commentators view the word אמונה here as a promise to Israel that they would emerge victorious.
   Others view the words as derived from אומן in the sense of the artist who possesses special skills, able to perform tasks others are unable to perform as they are not as gifted with skill and imagination. Moses excelled in both spheres.
   According to the <i>Midrash</i>, the word refers to Moses invoking the merit of the patriarchs who, thanks to their abiding faith in G’d, had left us a heritage of merits that we can call on when the situation demands it. The term והאמין בה'appears first in connection with Avraham in Genesis 15, “He had abiding faith in the G’d Who promised that his children would inherit the land of Canaan at a time when Avraham did not even have any children yet.”
   
   17,13. ויחלוש יהושע, “Joshua succeeded in weakening, etc.” He did not kill the Amalekites. Some commentators claim that the soldiers that the Amalekites had dispatched against Israel were demons, sorcerers, whom it was impossible to kill by normal means as they employed all kinds of sorcery.
   
   17,14. כתוב זאת זכרון בספר, “record this in a book for remembrance in the future.” Ibn Ezra writes that the book referred to is the one also known as מלחמות ה', “the Lord’s wars,” a book which has disappeared in the course of time.
   Nachmanides writes that what Ibn Ezra writes here is pure speculation, and that the book referred to is the Torah itself. [he bases himself on the vowel <i>patach</i> under the letter ב in the word בספר, which describes a well known book. Ed.] Compare Deut. 31,26 לקוח את ספר התורה הזה, “to take this Book of the Torah.” G’d commanded Moses to incorporate this historical item in the holy Torah so that the Israelites would forever remember the totally unprovoked attack by Amalek that they had had to endure. This is just another aspect of the commandment at the end of <i>Parshat Ki Tetze,</i> to wipe out the memory of the people of Amalek totally and irreversibly, once the time had come when we were at peace and genocide could not longer be considered an act of revenge motivated by personal motives. (Deut.25,17-19)
   When the Torah here instructs Moses ושים באזני יהושע, “make sure that Joshua hears it well,” this is because the commandment would not become operative until after the Jewish people were settled in their own land, so that Moses, who was not going to take them into that land, would not have a share in performing this commandment. [if not for the sin of the golden calf and that of the spies, carrying out the commandment might not have had to wait until the Jewish people had appointed a king for themselves, well over 300 years after Joshua’s death. Ed.] Seeing that Joshua left much of the land of Canaan unconquered at the time of his death, the commandment in accordance with Deut.25 could not yet have become operative.
   
   כי מחה אמחה, “for I will surely erase, etc.” The reason why Amalek’s deed evoked such a violent response from G’d was that as a result of the drowning of the Egyptians in the sea the whole of mankind including the leaders of Edom, the descendants of Esau, had suddenly been in awe of the power of <i>Hashem.</i> The fact that Amalek had broken this spell by attacking G’d’s people, set back the timetable of the kingdom of G’d on earth to such an extent that the people responsible for this could not be allowed to remain part of mankind’s history.
   We need to understand why here G’d is portrayed as wiping out the memory of Amalek, whereas in Deut. 25,19 this task is one assigned to the Jewish people. Why is this? Some commentators understand this as follows. As long as the Romans had not destroyed the Temple, the task of wiping out Amalek was that of G’d’s people. After G’d’s people had become weakened by loss of the Temple and their independence, it was left to G’d Himself to complete the destruction of Amalek.
   The <i>Midrash</i> explains the apparent anomaly differently; G’d says to the Jewish people that if they will do their best to eradicate the influence of Amalek in the terrestrial world, He on His part, will eradicate any trace of him in the celestial spheres.
   
   17,17. כי יד על כס ק-ה, “for as long as a hand had been raised against the throne of G’d, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i>  this is in the nature of an oath by G’d.
   Some commentators view it as a prediction, i.e. as long as a “hand” is raised against the throne of G’d disputing His right to rule the world, G’d is forced to wage war against Amalek. This will continue in this manner until, eventually, Israel will utterly destroy Amalek and wipe his memory from the slate of history.
   Parshat Yitro
   
   18,1.וישמע יתרו, “Yitro heard, etc.” Our sages are of two minds as to when Yitro arrived at the camp of the Israelites. Some believe that he arrived before the revelation on Mount Sinai, whereas others hold that he arrived only afterwards. The second view is based on the description of the Mountain as “the Mountain of the Lord.” It had not had that name until after G’d had revealed Himself on that Mountain and had given the Torah. The first view is simply based on the sequence in which the Torah relates these events. The fact that Moses told his father-in-law immediately he met him about the fact that he was communicating G’d’s statutes to the people makes it sound as if he had already received all these statutes from G’d first hand.
   Ibn Ezra supports the second view by stating that seeing the Torah had just concluded with the call to the Israelites to blot out the memory of our adversary Amalek, it saw fit to contrast Amalek’s behaviour with that of Yitro who gave the Jewish people not only good advice, but who also converted to Judaism and offered sacrifices to <i>Hashem.</i> Moreover, the Kenites, descendants of Yitro, who lived among the Amalekites were advised by King Sha-ul to evacuate the town so as to save their lives when the Amalekites were all killed. (Samuel I 15)
   
   Nachmanides questions against all this that if that were really so, why does the Torah mention that Yitro had heard about the Exodus, the splitting of the sea, etc., without adding that he had heard about the revelation at Mount Sinai. Seeing that this had been perhaps the greatest miracle of all, the fact that Yitro did not mention it means that it had not yet occurred. It is possible, of course, that as soon as Yitro had heard about the Israelites leaving Egypt, he had set out to join them, and no other news had reached him on the way. No doubt, upon his arrival, Moses first told him about the most recent events, i.e. the revelation, before filling him in on events which had occurred some time ago.
   Nachmanides, feels that the most likely sequence of events was that Yitro joined the people before the revelation, having set out on his journey shortly after having heard about the defeat of Amalek near <i>Refidim</i>. This was an area not far removed from either Mount Sinai or the border with Midian, seeing we know that Moses had led his father-in-law’s sheep into the vicinity of Mount Sinai, where he had experienced the burning bush, and a vision of G’d. The area immediately below Mount Sinai was known as the desert of Sinai. Having reached that area, Yitro sent a message to his son-in-law advising him of his imminent arrival.
   Furthemore, it seems to Nachmanides that when the Torah reports about Moses bidding farewell to Yitro for the first time, this was in the first year of the Israelites’ wanderings, and that Yitro’s purpose at that time was to convert as many members of his family as he could. 
   The second time when we read about Yitro’s having declined to journey to the Holy Land with the Israelites occurred in the second year, shortly before, after a stay around Mount Sinai for almost a full year, when he had declined Moses’ offer to become an integral part of the Jewish nation with full rights. At that time, as the Torah reports, (Numbers 10,29-32) Moses had pleaded with him to remain with the Jewish people not only as a coreligionist but as a fully fledged member of the nation. The fact that the Torah, at that point does not report that Yitro replied to Moses’ entreaty, lends support to the belief that he did indeed join the people, although hundreds of years later his descendants are known to have lived interspersed with the Amalekites in the southern part of the Sinai peninsula. On the other hand, in the days of Yonadav ben Rechev, his descendants, or some of them, appear to have lived in Jerusalem (Jeremiah, 35 compare also <i>Mechilat Shemot 18,28</i>) Possibly, the Kenite who lived among the Amalekites, though related to Yitro’s family, were not direct descendants of his.
   
   למשה ולישראל, “for Moses and for Israel,” he had heard about the miracles G’d had performed  for Moses, seeing that he had faced Pharaoh repeatedly, threatened him with all kinds of plagues, etc., and no harm had been done to him. The same G’d had performed even greater miracles for the people of Israel who had proven to be immune to all these plagues.
   Ibn Ezra understands the letter ל before the words משה and ישראל, as “on behalf of.” He refers to the plagues and the drowning of the Egyptians. No doubt. G’d had orchestrated all these miracles for the benefit of Moses and the people of Israel.
   
   כי הוציא ה', “that the Lord had taken out, etc.” This is a new subject, not connected to what has been written previously, i.e. what Yitro had heard.
   There is a dispute among the sages in the last chapter of <i>Massechet Zevachim</i> about what rumours precisely Yitro had heard. According to one opinion (<i>Zevachim 116)</i> Yitro had heard that the Israelites had successfully defended themselves against the Amalekites, whereas according to the second opinion he had heard about G’d revealing Himself to the Israelites at Mount Sinai. There is also an opinion that he had heard about the splitting of the Sea of Reeds, etc. If the words כי הוציא וגו' were to refer to what Yitro had heard specifically, i.e. the Exodus, why would the Torah repeat something which it had already stated explicitly as something that Yitro had heard about?
   Clearly, the discussion as to what the Torah referred to when it wrote that “Yitro heard all that G’d had done, etc.,” without going into details, cannot refer to the Exodus itself. The Torah only reverts to the point of departure being that G’d had taken the people out of Egypt. Up until that point Yitro’s knowledge of the Jewish G’d had been limited to His name being <i>elohim.</i> After everything Moses now told him, he learned of an additional dimension of this G’d, i.e. His name<i> Hashem</i>. Hence the Torah refers to this attribute when writing כי הוציא השם וגו', not as at the beginning of the verse כל אשר עשה אלוקים.
   
   18,2. אחר שילוחיה, “after she had been sent away.” Seeing that the Torah had told us earlier that Moses took his wife and his children, and started out on the way to Egypt, (Exodus 4,20) the Torah had to inform us that at some point Moses had sent his family back to Midian, to the home of Yitro, his father-in-law. Yitro clearly did not consider Moses having sent his wife and children “home” as proof of a divorce, but considered this as an act of prudence by Moses, something no longer necessary seeing the Israelites were no longer in danger.
   Other commentators understand the words אחר שילוחיה, as a reference to gifts which Tzipporah had sent to her husband ahead of her, to advise him of her impending arrival.
   Yet other commentators understand the words as referring to secret code messages that Yitro had sent ahead to inform Moses that he was on the way to him with Tzipporah and her children.
   Yet another interpretation sees in the plural mode of the word שילוחיה, a reference to two occasions on which Tzipporah had been sent away, once when Moses had left her behind at the inn on the way to Egypt, when he continued on to Egypt without her and the children, and the second time when he had instructed her to return to her father’s home from that inn. (presumably after he had become aware that the liberation of the Israelites would require more time than he had thought at first)
   
   18,3. כי אמר גר הייתי, “for he had said (at that time) ‘I have been a stranger, etc.” Even though this is hardly the place where we would expect to hear about the genealogy of Moses’ children, the Torah introduces the subject now as there had not been an opportunity to inform us that Moses had called his second son Eliezer, seeing that he had not circumcised him prior to his departure from Midian. First he had been too preoccupied with journeying to Egypt, second, because he had that unfortunate encounter with the angel who had threatened to kill him. He had also not been able to give him the name Eliezer as long as he was under the impression that there was still a price on his head, and he was still a fugitive from Egyptian justice, being wanted for murder. The Torah informs us now that when Moses had become aware that there no longer was a price on his head, he named his son in a manner which expressed his thanks to G’d for having saved him from that worry as well as for the other promotions G’d had bestowed upon him.
   
   18,6. ויאמר אל משה, “Yitro said to Moses:” According to Ibn Ezra, by means of a messenger. According to Ibn Ezra, the Torah quotes a letter Yitro had sent ahead of his arrival at the encampment of the Israelites in which he announced his forthcoming arrival together with Tzipporah and her children. If the Torah were reporting the words of Yitro at arrival, it should have said הנני בא אליך, “here I have come to you.”
   In the <i>Midrash</i> the view is expressed that Yitro shot an arrow with the above message attached, and that although normally, the surrounding heavenly clouds would make the camp of the Israelites secure against any intrusion, in this instance, due the nature of the message, G’d allowed the arrow to travel through the cloud cover.
   
   18,7. ויצא משה לקראת חותנו, “Moses went forth to welcome his father-in-law, etc.” He meant to honour his father-in-law, as this is not the way one honours one’s wife.
   
   וישתחו, וישק לו, וישאלו איש לרעהו לשלום, “he bowed low, kissed him, and they enquired after each other’s well being.” <i>Rashi</i> wonders who bowed to whom, and concludes that most likely Moses bowed to Yitro, seeing he is the one who is called איש in our verse. While it is true that in another context Yitro is also called איש by the Torah, (Exodus 2,21) (although the איש in that verse applied to someone called רעואל), that was just another name for Yitro.
   
   Some commentators point out that seeing we find the description of Moses as והאיש משה on occasion, this means that the word ה)איש) was applied to Moses as an alternate name, this proves that whereas Moses on occasion was simply called איש, Yitro was never called האיש without further identification, i.e. the prefix ו.  Personally, I do not think that we need to look for proof as to who bowed to him, as usually the one who comes out to welcome someone is the one who bows to the visitor. 
   
   ויבואו האוהלה ויספר, “they entered the tent, and Moses told, etc.” This teaches that one does not carry on these kinds of conversations while en route to a destination.
   
   18,8. את כל התלאה, “and about all the travail, etc.” Ibn Ezra says that the word תלאה is closely related to the word ונלאו in Exodus 7,18 where the futile search for water by the Egyptians is described as ונלאו מצרים. The letter ת is an additional letter. The whole word describes the frustration experienced when after many efforts one does not succeed in attaining one’s objective.
   
   18,9. ויחד יתרו, “Yitro rejoiced;” Our sages explain the word as describing that when hearing all that Moses told him, Yitro’s flesh broke out in goose pimples, [from the word חד, sharp, prickly, Ed.]  It refers to a popular proverb according to which a proselyte, even a tenth generation proselyte, still experiences some kind of pain when hearing about tragedies that befall his former people.
   Some commentators reject this, saying that not only are we daily witnesses to proselytes and their offspring who are pious Jews in every respect, but Yitro was a first generation proselyte, so where is the comparison to that proverb? The sages who made that comment did not mean to refer to generations, literally, but merely to past associations, the impossibility to rid oneself completely of one’s past, so much so that one no longer feels a shred of sympathy for what has befallen the friends of one’s youth.
   
   18,10. אשר הציל אתכם מיד מצרים, “Who has saved you from the power of Egypt.” Yitro first praised the Lord Who performed the miracles for Moses personally, who was not brought before Pharaoh’s tribunal for murder or manslaughter, nor for having orchestrated the plagues; secondly, he praised G’d for having saved the entire Jewish nation from such a despotic regime as that of Pharaoh. He considered the latter as perhaps the greatest of the miracles.
   
   Ibn Ezra is of the opinion that Yitro first blessed the Lord for having rescued the people as a whole, before directing his attention to personal miracles which G’d performed on behalf of Moses.
   
   18,11. כי בדבר אשר זדו עליהם, “for He retaliated in the manner which corresponded to their deliberate sins.” Yitro explains that what had convinced him of the superiority of the G’d of Israel, was not that He punished the Egyptians for their unspeakable crimes, but for the manner in which G’d made the punishment fit the crime.
   Nachmanides writes that G’d only punished the Egyptians for the excess cruelty with which they drowned innocent infants, and that they made the work imposed on the adults intolerably and unnecessarily onerous. The fact that the Egyptians enslaved the Israelites and demanded that they perform hard labour was not a culpable offense.
   
   18,12. ויקח יתרו חותן משה עולה וזבחים, “Yitro, Moses’ father-in-law purchased burnt offerings and meat offerings.” According to Nachmanides all this occurred before the people had come to Mount Sinai. It is also possible that what is reported here occurred long after the revelation, i.e. after Yitro had undergone a formal conversion and Moses had been on the Mountain several times.
   
   ויבוא אהרן וכל זקני ישראל לאכול לחם, “Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to have a meal, etc.” This was a meal in honour of Yitro’s conversion and circumcision. We know from Tzipporah (Exodus 4,26), that she considered the circumcision as an allegorical marriage between the newly circumcised Jew and his Creator.
   
   לפני האלוקים, “before G’d.” Nachmanides explains the word לפני in terms of location, i.e. that Moses’ personal tent was situated to the east of the Tabernacle.
   
   18,13. ויהי ממחרת, “It came to pass on the morrow, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the “morrow” was the day after  the Day of Atonement, the day when the building of the Tabernacle was authorized. <i>Rashi</i> took his cue from the <i>Mechilta.</i> 
   Nachmanides does not believe that the author of the <i>Mechilta</i> referred to the Day of Atonement, seeing that we had not been told about the existence of a “Day of Atonement,” how could the Torah have referred to this day as the day after a date which did not yet have a significant meaning in the Jewish calendar? Even if that day had already existed as a Fast Day, how could the Torah refer to the day after this meal as the day after <i>Yom Kippur,</i> seeing that the meal we have been told about surely was not consumed on <i>Yom Kippur?</i> Furthermore, according to tradition, Moses brought the Jewish people the second set of tablets on that day. It also could not refer to the day after <i>Yom Kippur</i> of the second year, as by then Yitro had already gone home to his people. The people had moved away from Mount Sinai on the 20th day of <i>Iyar</i> in the second year and Yitro had declined Moses’ invitation to journey with the people (Numbers 10,11, and 10,29). Furthermore, assuming we are speaking about the very day after Moses had come down with the second set of tablets, when had he had a chance to establish the pattern of judging the people which Yitro objected to, seeing that ever since the giving of the Torah up until then, when he had ascended the Mountain for 3 times 40 days, there would not have been a single day available for him to teach the people the laws of the Torah, as he told his father-in-law that he was doing on a regular basis?
   We must assume that the <i>Mechilta</i> does not refer literally to the day after the first <i>Yom Kippur,</i> but to some time thereafter, as distinct to this having occurred prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai over 4 months earlier.
   
   If we assume that Yitro had arrived at the encampment of the people before the giving of the Torah, what the <i>Mechilta</i> had in mind was the day on which Yitro personally obtained atonement, i.e when he converted to Judaism, offered his sacrifices, etc, he was forgiven for the heathen practices he had been guilty of up until that day. 
   [the wording of the author of the <i>Mechilta</i> (Rabbi Yishmael) suggests that he neither wants to decide in favour either of the opinion of Rabbi Yoshua that Yitro arrived as a result of hearing about the defeat of Amalek, nor does he want to come out in favour of the opinion of Rabbi Eleazar Hamoda-i that Yitro arrived at the camp after the giving of the Torah.. Ed.]
   As to Moses having told his father-in-law that he informs the people about G’d’s statutes, etc., (18,15-16), we must assume that he had referred to the laws revealed by G’d while the people had been encamped at <i>Marah.</i>
   If we accept<i> Rashi’s</i> commentary then this whole portion [as several others. Ed.] was not written as a chronological account of what happened in the desert, seeing that according to his view the words ויהי ממחרת cannot be applied to the first year of the Israelites’ being in the desert. I have not understood what he means when he says that the time was the day after the first <i>Yom Kippur</i>. Perhaps what he meant was that the verse describing Moses as bidding good bye to his father-in-law (verse 27) must have occurred in the second year. By contrast then, he meant to emphasize that when the Torah spoke about ויהי ממחרת, that this referred to events during the first year.
   
   18,15. כי יבוא אלי העם לדרוש אלוקים, “for the people are in the habit of coming to me to seek out G’d’s judgment.” Moses answered Yitro that the people, by the nature of things, need to stand in line before me for a considerable period of time as many of them need to have many different problems to be resolved.
   This included appeals to Moses to pray on behalf of sick family members, to see if Moses could help them, something also known as דרישת אלוקים, a service frequently performed for the people by prophets, as we know from prophets being asked if sick members of one would recover from one’s sickness. (Kings I 8,8, 8,9)
   
   18,19. ויהי ה' עמך, “and may the Lord be with you.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this was an advice to govern the people with fortitude, with confidence in his ability to judge them fairly. 
   Ibn Ezra feels that the meaning of Yitro’s words שמע בקולי ויהי אלוקים עמך, were a prayer that Moses would succeed in carrying out his advice. At the tail end of his remarks Yitro suggested that Moses obtain G’d’s consent for adopting his suggestions. This is what he meant when he said וצוך אלוקים ויכלת לעמוד, “when G’d will give you the requisite instructions you will be able to be equal to the task.” He entertained no doubt that Moses would carry out the suggestions and govern the people with determination.
   
   היה אתה לעם מול האלוקים, “you be a representative of the people <i>vis-à-vis</i> G’d.” Nachmanides explains concerning Yitro’s initial reaction to Moses telling him that the people come to him in their search for G’d, that Yitro completely agreed that this was Moses’ function, i.e. to be the intermediary between the people and G’d.  He realized that no one else could take Moses’ place in this respect. He also agreed that not only was it Moses’ duty to submit the people’s requests to G’d, but also to communicate G’d’s answer to them. He further agreed that it was Moses’ task to instruct the people initially in all these matters. He did not agree however, that it was necessary for Moses, personally, to get involved in every little judicial dispute between individuals, i.e. in what Moses had referred to as ושפטתי בין איש לרעהו , “I have to render judgment between man and his fellow.” These matters, Yitro told him he must learn to delegate, else he would undo more than he had set out to accomplish.
   It is also possible that even in matters which did need clarification by G’d directly, Yitro told Moses that this did not need to take place in full view of the people, etc, but that Moses should sit inside the Tabernacle, able to give his full attention to G’d’s answer, etc., instead of being surrounded by a mob of people all the time. He did urge him to exercise extreme caution when handing down decisions so that it would never appear as if he arrived at such decisions arbitrarily. All of this is part of the meaning of והזהרתה, והודעת, etc. You will note that in this connection Yitro did not mention the need to employ judges and law enforcers. He was fully aware that Moses had many officials at his service who would see to it that judgment once pronounced, would be carried out. He allowed that matters beyond the competence of the judges should be submitted to Moses personally for adjudication.
   
   18,21. אנשי חיל, “competent people,” people capable of dealing with the masses, i.e. people who have been endowed with numerous qualities, otherwise they would not be equal to the task. Having summed up the nature of such people, Yitro proceeds to list the specific qualities such people must possess in order to carry out their duties satisfactorily. Before referring to such people’s common sense, he mentions that their motivations must be above board, such as their being G’d-fearing, not greedy for money, truthful, etc., but all this is not enough unless they have been endowed with common sense, such as being נבונים. The latter quality need not be spelled out, as it is self-evident. [both Isaiah 5,21, and Jeremiah 4,22, refer to the basic requirement of this “common sense.” It is also the first  attribute mentioned by Joseph in his advice to Pharaoh to appoint people who would administer the surplus during the seven bountiful years to come. Genesis 41,33. Ed.] When reviewing these events in Deuteronomy 1,12, Moses does mention that he had asked the people to furnish him men endowed with common sense in addition to the other attributes as his assistants. [certain details which Moses saw fit to spell out to the common people, Yitro did not have to spell out to his brilliant son-in-law. Ed.]
   It is also possible that when we read in verse 25 that Moses selected men מכל ישראל, this term already includes that he had narrowed down the selection to the elite of the people, so that he did not need to repeat more than the term אנשי חיל to show that he had taken Yitro’s advice to heart.
   
   שונאי בצע, “men who despise money acquired by unfair means.” According to the plain meaning of the text, what Yitro had in mind were people who could not be bribed.
   Some commentators see in this term a reference to people who despise amassing financial wealth as an investment in the future, people who demonstrate their lack of faith in G’d the provider, by building a “nest-egg.” [after all the idea of G’d providing <i>manna</i> for only a day at time was meant to instill in the people this very trust in G’d as their Provider. Ed.]
   <i>Rashi</i> [according to some views. Ed.] understood the term literally, people who hated the very idea that money would be obtained though legally, only through the intervention of a tribunal which had to assess one’s legal claim to it. A שונא בצע would be a person who pays up rather than allows the claim against him to be decided in court, even when he thinks he does not owe the money demanded. [we may each have our own views about the unworldly nature of such people and their use in judging the people. This editor cannot imagine that Yitro was so naive as to think that such men could be found in large numbers. Ed.]
   Still other commentators understand the term שונאי בצע as referring to judges who resist being intimidated by litigants who threaten them if they do not rule in their favour. [this would be equivalent to Moses warning the judges (Deut. 1,17) לא תגורו מפני איש, “do not tremble before any man.”]
   
   שרי אלפים ושרי מאות, “leaders of thousands, and leaders of hundreds.” This verse answers the problem raised by Ibn Ezra, who could not understand why fully one eighth of the people (78600) were “chiefs” of one kind or another. (compare Deut. 1,15) Here there was no need to spell out how many of these people were appointed as judges, how many law enforcers, seeing that the appointment of judges without law enforcers is something quite futile. Clearly, the people described as ראשי שופטיכם, “your chief justices,” must have been drawn from the group described here as שרי אלפים “leaders of thousands.”
   
   19.1. בחודש השלישי, “in the third month;” actually we would have expected the chapter to begin with the words: “they journeyed from <i>Refidim</i> and came to the desert of Sinai, where they encamped on the first day of the third month after having departed from the land of Egypt.” The reason why the syntax of the Torah was changed in this instance is the fact that arrival at the desert of Sinai, where the Torah was to be given, was a joyous occasion for the people. The manner of reporting this arrival reflects that it was something the people had been looking forward to.
   
   ביום הזה, “on this day, etc.” The day referred to was the first of the month.
   Ibn Ezra suggests that possibly the distance between Mount Sinai and <i>Refidim</i> was greater than the distance covered in all their combined journeys up to that time, so that there was a need to report precisely when the people arrived at this otherwise unremarkable spot.
   
   19,2. ויסעו מרפידים ויבואו מדבר סיני, “they journeyed from <i>Refidim,</i> and they arrived at the desert of Sinai.” According to the Torah’s syntax which we have grown accustomed to, the Torah should have written: “they journeyed from <i>Refidim</i> and they encamped at the desert of Sinai.” The reason why the Torah chose to write ויבואו instead of ויחנו, is to convey to the reader that as soon as the people saw Mount Sinai they were so happy that they decided to encamp forthwith instead of scouting around for what they considered a suitable area for putting up their camp. This is why the Torah adds the words ויחנו במדבר, ”they made camp in the desert, normally not an appropriate site for making camp.
   
   ויחן שם ישראל נגד ההר, “Israel encamped there facing the Mountain.” The people are here referred to as “Israel,” (in the singular mode) instead of as plain “the people,” to tell us that when the riffraff and the fellow travelers, the ערב רב, had chosen to locate some short distance away, the elite, the main body of Israelites, chose to encamp facing the Mountain. [we need to remember that until the building of the Tabernacle, the signal for breaking camp and making camp was not the overhead cloud of G’d’s glory that the Torah describes in Numbers 9,18. Ed.] It is possible that not the entire people positioned their tents facing the Mountain but only the elders and most distinguished members of the people. This may be the reason why the Torah wrote ויחן, singular mode, instead of ויחנו, in the plural mode.
   Nachmanides questions what <i>Rashi</i> wrote as the reason for the Torah having written ויסעו מרפידים, i.e. we needed to know from where the Israelites arrived at the desert of Sinai. He draws our attention to the fact that the Torah normally reports the Israelites’ departure from a certain location prior to reporting their arrival at a new location; so what is so special here? (compare: the pattern of ויסעו מ...ויחנו ב... in dozens of examples in Numbers chapter 33)
   In answering his query, Nachmanides suggests that what <i>Rashi</i> had in mind was, that seeing that all the other journeys mentioned here have been repeated in the list in Numbers 33, something new occurred at each location, whereas  both here and in <i>Massey</i>  this journey is described with identical words, without any change in nuance even, <i>Rashi</i> felt impelled make the comment he did, i.e. that just as the people were in a mood of penitence when they departed from <i>Refidim</i>, they were still in that mood when they arrived at the desert of Sinai.
   
   19,3. ומשה עלה אל האלוקים, “and Moses had ascended to G’d,” this means he had proceeded to the edge of the Mountain. Clearly, there had been evidence that G’d’s presence was resting above the top of that Mountain ever since the day that the Israelites had arrived at that location. Moses’ purpose was to keep in readiness to enter the ערפל, the thick cloud, behind which a manifestation of G’d could be found. (compare 20,18)
   
   ויקרא אליו ה' מן ההר לאמור, “<i>Hashem</i> called out to him from the Mountain, saying:” 
   According to Ibn Ezra G’d had called to Moses already before he ascended, but had not given him any specific instructions. 
   Nachmanides writes that Moses did not receive any call until after he had ascended, at which time G’d told him:כה תאמר לבית יעקב,”you shall say to the house of Yaakov, using precisely these words, etc.”
   לבית יעקב, “to the house of Yaakov.” This was a reference to the Jewish women.
   ולבני ישראל, “and to the Children of Israel.” This was a reference to the men. The reason why the women, in this case, have been mentioned first, is that at the dawn of history, Chavah, the first woman, who had not personally been warned by G’d not to eat from the tree of knowledge, not only ate from it but also gave her husband to eat from it. By telling Moses now to address the legislation to the women first, G’d wanted to ensure that the communication failure in <i>Gan Eden</i> would not be repeated. Seeing that the women had been honored to receive their share of the information before their husbands, this would make them more fiercely loyal to observe the commandments in every detail. The fact that this psychology worked was demonstrated about 43 days later when the women refused to hand over their gold jewelry to help in making the golden calf.
   Another possible way of explaining the difference in meaning between the expression בית יעקב and בני ישראל is that the former refers to the people presently at Mount Sinai, whereas the latter refers to as yet unborn generations of Jews.
   
   19,4. ואביא אתכם אלי, “I have brought you to Me.” To the location where My glory its manifest, this Mountain where My presence is presently in residence.
   
   19,5. ושמרתם את בריתי, “you are to observe My covenant.” According to Ibn Ezra this is a reference to the covenant that would be concluded right after the revelation at the Mountain, as we read in 24,8 [part of the description of Moses spending 40 days on the Mountain. Ed.] הנה דם הברית אשר כרת ה' עמכם על כל הדברים האלה, “here is the blood of the covenant which the Lord sealed with you concerning all these matters”. (Ten Commandments) 
   Nachmanides understands the word בריתי as referring to an existing covenant, the one entered into by G’d with the patriarchs that He was to be not only their G’d, but also the G’d of their descendants.
   
   והייתם לי סגולה מכל העמים כי לי כל הארץ, “you will be for Me a most beloved treasure, more than any other nation, for the whole earth belongs to Me.” Although the entire earth belongs to me, I have chosen you alone to relate to as exclusively Mine, i.e. I personally supervise your fates, and I have not delegated this task to various natural forces at My command, such as constellations of stars, etc. The Torah refers to the latter point in greater detail in Deuteronomy 4,19 אשר חלק ה' אלוקיך אותם לכל העמים תחת כל השמים, “which the Lord your G’d assigned to all the other nations under the entire heaven.”
   
   19,6. ממלכת כהנים וגוי קדוש, “a Kingdom of Priests, a holy nation.” Nachmanides understands the termממלכת כהנים as a kingdom that takes care and preserves intact My statutes, A nation that cleaves to the Holy G’d, as stipulated in Leviticus 19,2  “be holy, for I, the Lord, your G’d am holy.” This implies a promise by G’d to His people covering its existence both on earth and beyond.
   
   19,6. וישם לפניהם. “He presented it before them in clear terms, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra, Moses did this verbally. Some people claim that Moses presented all this to the people in book form.
   Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon, says that the meaning is similar to שימו בפיהם, (Deut 31,19) where it means that G’d had asked Moses to make the people thoroughly familiar with His admonitions.
   Nachmanides says that G’d (Moses) told the people: “I have set out all these precepts for you to choose if you undertake to take these obligations upon yourselves.” The people responded by saying that everything G’d had said they were willing to carry out, just as is reported in Exodus 24,3.
   
   19,8. ויענו כל העם יחדו, “all the people answered simultaneously, etc.“ Moses had called all the leaders, the judges, the law enforcers, etc., in the presence of all the people and had submitted to them all that G’d had told him, and had offered them the choice whether to accept all these commandments. Seeing the commandments concerned the entire nation, acceptance was also required by the entire nation. The people did not even wait until Moses had posed the question to them if they were willing to accept all this, but the Torah testifies that they interrupted Moses to indicate their ready acceptance.
   
   19,9. הנה אנכי בא אליך בעב הענן, “Here, I am about to come to you, within a thick layer of cloud.” Ibn Ezra writes that among the Israelites there were some who had ambiguous feelings about the existence of prophecy and the extent of it, or if indeed some people had been endowed with such powers. This was in spite of the Torah itself having testified that when at the edge of the Sea of Reeds the people appear to have been described as believers, i.e. ויאמינו בה' ובמשה עבדו, “they believed in G’d and in His servant Moses.” (Exodus 14,31) The Torah had refrained from describing all of the people as sharing this absolute faith. Even after the crossing of the sea when the bodies of the dead Egyptians had become visible, the Torah does write “the Israelites saw Egypt dead on the edge of the sea,” (Exodus 14,30) again the Torah had omitted the crucial word כל, “all”, when describing who saw what. This is what is meant when after the revelation at Mount Sinai (Deut. 5,21) the people acknowledge היום ראינו, “on this day we have seen that the Lord has spoken to man and yet man has remained alive.” The fact that they had originally not believed completely in G’d, according to Ibn Ezra, is supported in that G’d had told Moses that as the result of His miracles not only would they have faith in Him but in Moses also. (compare וגם בך יאמינו, “they will also believe in you forever (our verse).” 
   Nachmanides disagrees, saying that the Israelites never doubted either the existence of prophetic powers, as they had the tradition that their patriarchs had all been endowed with such powers. When G’d told Moses to approach him into the thick cloud, this was designed to reinforce the people’s belief in Moses’ superior prophetic powers, a level of prophecy never before attained by any human being. Exodus 4,31 is already testimony that the people had complete faith in G’d. In fact, to a certain degree, all the Israelites had been endowed with some prophetic powers as proven by the fact that they were bidden by G’d to approach as testified by Moses in Deuteronomy 4,10, i.e. that instead of having to depend on hearing G’d’s words through the mouth of a prophet they themselves would hear it directly. This would teach them to relate to G’d with the appropriate degree of awe, as is spelled out there. Once they would do this it would be easy for them to have full confidence in everything Moses would tell them in the name of the Lord. The words וגם בך יאמינו לעולם, mean that not only the present generation would have full faith in what Moses had related in the name of the Lord, but all future generations who had not known Moses personally, would have a similar degree of faith in the words Moses had handed down. This would have the effect that if there were to arise in the future someone claiming that G’d had appeared to him in a dream, or spoken to him while he was fully awake and that the message he had received would contradict the teachings handed down in the name of Moses, such a person would have proven himself to be a liar, a fake, someone totally fraudulent. The people’s experience of Moses’ superiority as a confidant of G’d would guarantee that they would not lend credence to anyone who would attempt to countermand G’d’s orders as conveyed by Moses. The people, because they had prophetic powers themselves, would know for a fact that Gd had spoken directly to Moses. At the conclusion of the revelation, as recorded by Moses to the next generation in Deuteronomy 4, they are quoted as having said that as of that day they had seen with their own eyes that G’d had communicated directly with Moses, and that just as they themselves had survived their own experience during the revelation, they had no longer any doubt that Moses had survived many such direct communications from G’d during his waking hours. Once this degree of trust in Moses had been established, they asked him to approach G’d on their behalf and to relate His words to them as they had become overawed by their own experience, and were afraid that they could not endure any more such experiences and remain alive. (compare Deut. 5,24 where they told Moses to become their intermediary.)
   
   ויגד משה את דברי העם אל ה', “Moses told G’d what the people had said.” Ibn Ezra feels that this is one of many verses in the Torah that should have been written previously but have not, and we must understand them as referring to events which had already occurred and which the reader may already know about.
   Nachmanides does not agree that we are dealing with such a verse here, as he does not understand the line (verse 8) וישב משה את דברי העם אל ה' as referring to Moses having reported the people’s words to G’d immediately, but that Moses had to return first to the Mountain taking the people’s reply with him, so to speak. We must remember that G’d is omniscient, and He did not need Moses to tell Him how the people had reacted to what He had bidden Moses to tell them. On the contrary, as soon as G’d had become aware of the people’s reaction, He immediately told Moses to enter the thick cloud surrounding the Mountain, etc. Upon setting out, Moses told G’d what the people had said to him, assuring G’d that His children had perfect faith in Him and welcomed all the instructions He either had issued already or would issue in the future.
   
   Our sages interpret these verses as dealing with the boundaries erected around the Mountain, to protect overenthusiastic Israelites in their desire to come close to G’d from becoming victims instead. Moses had ascended on the third of the month, and reported the famous נעשה ונשמע, “we will do as soon as we will know what to do,” to G’d. G’d immediately instructed him to draw boundaries around the Mountain beyond which the people were not to approach. Moses descended on the same day and relayed this information. He ascended again on the fourth, informing G’d of the people’s reaction in response to the boundaries. Even though the Torah reports this only later, the fact is that the Torah is under no obligation to narrate events in their chronological order. 
   Some commentators say that initially, Moses told G’d that the people had said to him that whatever G’d would say they would do. G’d, Who can read between the lines, i.e. knows how to interpret what had not been spelled out. He realised that Moses was under the impression that the people referred only to what G’d Himself would say to them, but that they had not obligated themselves to carry out automatically everything they would only hear through Moses. He told Moses of the nature of the revelation, which would have as a by-product that henceforth the people would relate with the same degree of faith and trust to what they would hear from Moses’ lips, as they related to what they would hear from G’d directly. Subsequently, Moses confirmed to G’d that the people had indeed made such a commitment, i.e. that this had been their intention already when they had said that all G’d had commanded they would do.
   
   19,10. וקדשתם, “you will sanctify, etc.” according to <i>Rashi</i> the word here means: “you will make preparations.”
   According to Ibn Ezra the meaning is that the people are to wash themselves with water.
   According to Nachmanides the meaning is that the men should refrain from sexual intercourse with their wives, and should also refrain from contact with anything else that confers ritual impurity upon them. Any person who makes a point of refraining from contact with ritual impurity is described as “holy.”
   
   19,11. ירד ה' לעיני כל העם, “<i>Hashem</i> will descend in full view of all the people.” This means that the fiery spectacle of G’d’s descent to the top of the Mountain will be perceived as a spectacle of consuming fire. The people will obviously not see the essence of G’d, as we have been told in Exodus 33,20 כי לא יראני האדם וחי, “it is inherently impossible for a living human being to see Me.”
   
   19,13. לא תגע בו יד, “a hand shall not touch it” (the fence) some commentators believe that the word בו in our verse refers to the Mountain itself; and that a person doing this is liable to the death penalty, but that the execution must not involve that the person being executed be touched by a human hand in the process. Rather he should be stoned to death, by throwing the stones at him. If the victim escapes the stones by running away, he is to be shot dead by arrows.
   
   במשוך היובל, “upon a prolonged blast of the <i>shofar</i>, etc.” Ibn Ezra says that the word יובל is another word for the horn we know as <i>shofar</i>. It is the horn being blown in the Jubilee year, the שנת היובל. 
   Translators generally [Bible scholars viewed as heretics by Ibn Ezra in his introduction to the Book of Genesis. Ed.] refer to יובל as a sheep, כבש.
   As to the allegorical explanation offered by <i>Rashi,</i> according to which the sound of the <i>shofar</i> at the revelation was the horn which had been part of the ram which Avraham had offered on the altar after G’d had stopped him from slaughtering Yitzchok, Nachmanides writes [as the plain meaning of the text. Ed.] that he does not understand that commentary, seeing that the entire ram had been offered as a burnt offering, i.e. including the horns which were burnt up at that time. He speculates that possibly Avraham or G’d had gathered up the ash from that horn and it had been resurrected to its former condition. [these speculations are pursued already in commentaries on the oldest text of <i>Pirke</i> de Rabbi Eliezer. Ed.]
   
   המה יעלו בהר,”they may ascend the Mountain.” According to Ibn Ezra permission to ascend the Mountain after the revelation was granted only to the elders but not to the people at large. Personally, I do not understand why the ordinary people should not have been allowed to ascend the Mountain after G’d’s glory had departed from it. [I do not understand the author’s reservations, as in my edition of Ibn Ezra a very plausible case is made for the word המה being restrictive, and referring only to Aaron and the elders who already prior to the revelation had been permitted to approach more closely than the ordinary people. Ed.]
   
   19,14. וירד משה מן ההר, “Moses descended from the Mountain, etc.” This is mentioned so that we the readers will know that even the instruction to Moses to ensure that the people sanctify themselves on that day and the following day were issued to Moses while he was on the Mountain. Moses ascended the Mountain every time that G’d spoke to him.
   
   19,17. ויתיצבו בתחתית ההר, “they positioned themselves (beneath), at the base of the Mountain.” This teaches-as our sages have taught us- that G’d had made the Mountain assume a threatening posture, such as an inverted bucket above one’s head. This exerted psychological pressure on the people to declare their willingness to accept the Torah, as they felt that unless they did so the Mountain would crush them. There are sages who feel that in spite of the previously expressed willingness of the people to accept the Torah, this referred only to the written Torah and not to the oral Torah. The threatening posture of the Mountain persuaded the people to also accept the oral Torah. The background to that interpretation is the wording of the people who had said כל אשר דבר ה' נעשה ונשמע, “everything that <i>Hashem</i> has said we will do and learn to do.” They had not said: “everything G’d is going to say we will do, etc.”
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi disagrees, claiming that the people’s acceptance had been comprehensive. The posture of the Mountain is to be understood as something after the event, G’d hinting that the people had done well to accept the Torah already, as a refusal might have had dire consequences, to wit the mountain collapsing upon them. G’d hinted that although He could put up with the refusal of the other nations to accept His Torah, He would not have come to terms with the Israelites’ refusal.
   
   19,19. משה ידבר והאלוקים יעננו בקול, “whenever Moses would speak, G’d would answer in an audible voice.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this line as referring to the Ten Commandments, the ones inscribed subsequently on the Tablets. G’d lent extra power to Moses’ voice [who proclaimed the last eight of these Commandments. Ed.] so that all the people could hear it.
   Other commentators understand the words יעננו בקול to mean that Moses had prepared the people beforehand that they should concentrate, as they were about to hear the sound of G’d’s voice. Immediately thereafter Moses concluded saying this, G’d would intone the Ten Commandments.
   Nachmanides does not consider our verse as referring to the Ten Commandments, but to the message that G’d would descend onto the Mountain on the third day (6th of Sivan) at which time the people were to be positioned at the bottom of the Mountain, whereas Moses would have ascended close to the summit of the Mountain and would speak to the Israelites from that position to instruct them what to do next. The Israelites would hear the sound of G’d’s voice as He answered Moses and instructed him in what is recorded later in the Torah commencing with the words רד העד בעם, in verse 21. Whereas the people hear G’d speaking to Moses, they did not understand what G’d was saying to him. This is why Moses explained to them what he had been told. All of this took place before the giving of the Torah. At the time the Ten Commandments were being given, things were not materially different, as Moses had entered the thick cloud behind which G’d’s glory was hidden, only after the conclusion of the giving of the Ten Commandments. In the interval he had been standing within full view of the people, though partly up the Mountain.
   Ibn Ezra writes that although the sound of the blast of the <i>shofar</i> was overpoweringly strong, so much so that all who heard it were trembling, at the time when G’d spoke to Moses and the people, he alone could hear [understand] the voice of G’d and was not distracted by the sound of the <i>shofar</i> blasts.
   
   19,21. רד, “descend!” this happened prior to the giving of the Torah, and also when the Torah was given Moses did not ascend into the thick cloud where G’d was manifest. He did so only after the conclusion of the Ten Commandments having been given. This is why he refers to himself as אנכי עומד בין ה' ובינכם, “I was standing between you and <i>Hashem.”</i> (Deut. 5.5)
   
   19,23. לא יוכל העם לעלות, “the people are unable to ascend, etc.” Some people have trouble understanding the words of Moses here, for who prevented the people from ascending if they wanted to? We must understand the words of Moses as being the words of a messenger who reports back to the sender that he had carried out his mission, in this instance, that as a result of Moses having carried out his mission to warn the people not to ascend the Mountain, they were as of that point in time unable to ascend the Mountain.
   Ibn Ezra explains that G’d told Moses to descend and to warn the people, but that Moses did not see the need to warn them about anything, seeing that he had already done so. This is why he said to G’d that the people are unable to ascend the Mountain. In response to Moses’ [naïve belief?. Ed.] ] that the warning received was sufficient, G’d told him that the warning had to be repeated. It was only G’d Who knew if the first warning had been sufficient.
   
   Some commentators feel that the warning at this time included an additional warning not even to approach the forbidden area too closely. This is the reason for the additional words פן יהרסו אל ה' לראות, “they shall not break through to behold, etc.” I do not believe that this interpretation is acceptable, seeing that the Torah writes later in verse 24 specifically אל יהרסו לעלות אל ה' פן יפרץ בם, “the people must not break trough in order to ascend, lest G’d in His turn will burst forth against them.” The last mentioned interpretation is tenable only if we assume that Moses had told G’d on his most recent ascent that he had warned the people not only not to ascend, but also not to behold what they thought was the manifestation of <i>Hashem.</i> Seeing that it is impossible for Moses to enforce a ban on looking at something from a distance, G’d would then have amended His command and told Moses to warn them only against ascending.
   An approach to these verses by my sainted father the רא'ש. The words פן יהרסו אל ה' לראות, (verse 21) are problematic, for how could G’d issue a decree that the people would in the main be unable to honour? Such a prohibition was also not included in the warning in verse 12 not to ascend the mountain or to touch its edge. The only thing which had been forbidden then was the ascent and the touching of the Mountain. We find the warning not to ascend the Mountain repeated once more in verse 24. G’d told Moses in addition that the people were not to look at the Mountain. Concerning the second prohibition not to ascend the Mountain, Moses said to G’d that this was impossible as the people had already been warned concerning this. To this G’d replied to Moses that it was necessary to warn them again so that in their understandable enthusiasm to get a glimpse of the revelation, they would not expose themselves to mortal danger. G’d told Moses to descend and to ensure this together with Aaron. When the people would see that Aaron had also descended before the revelation, even though he had previously been allowed to approach more closely to the Mountain, they would realise that if a closer approach spelled danger even for Aaron and the priests, it would certainly be very dangerous for them to expose themselves to G’d’s anger if they were to ignore the warning. 
   
   20,2. אנכי ה' אלוקיך, “I am the Lord your G’d.” This is a positive commandment to believe in and feel absolutely certain of the existence of <i>Hashem</i> as a primordial force that preceded any phenomenon which is part of the material universe, and that He is the sole Creator of the entire universe, that He is our G’d, and that we are His people. We are obliged to serve Him, and He has taken us out of bondage in Egypt. The historical fact that He took us out of Egypt serves as eternal proof of His existence and His express desire to guide our fate. It proves that our Exodus was the product of His will. It also proves that He must have been the original cause in this universe, seeing that once the universe, i.e. the laws of nature had been formulated, no radical changes such as the taking out of a completely assimilated nation such as the Israelites from the midst of another nation was conceivable according to what is considered “normal” in our world. The Exodus was not only testimony to His power, but also to His uniqueness. For all the above reasons, G’d did not commence to identify Himself as the One Who had created heaven and earth, but He identified Himself as the One who had taken us out of Egypt, a visible historical fact witnessed by millions. [No one had been around to watch the universe come into existence. Ed.]
   
   Some commentators understand the emphasis on the word אנכי here as meant to draw attention to <i>Hashem</i> saying that He is the One Who had already told Avraham “I will also judge the people who will enslave your descendants and they will depart from that country with great riches” (Genesis 15,13) At the beginning of the Decalogue, G’d introduces Himself as the One who had fulfilled that promise of over 400 years ago.
   The first two commandments of the Decalogue which were addressed to the people in direct speech, i.e. “I have  taken you out, etc.,” were distinct from the other eight in which G’d appears to refer to Himself in the third person, were spoken by G’d to the people directly, whereas the others were relayed to the people by Moses. 
   The fact that our chapter commences with the words: וידבר אלוקים את כל הדברים האלה לאמר, “G’d spoke all these words to say,” as well as the verse in Deut. 5,19 את הדברים האלה דבר ה' אל כל קהלכם בהר, “the Lord spoke these words to you at the Mountain, etc.,” certainly gives the impression that the people had heard all the Ten Commandments directly from G’d’s mouth. Moses adds that all these words were inscribed on the two Tablets, which proves that as G’d was saying the words He simultaneously was inscribing them on the Tablets.
   Nachmanides claims that there is no question that G’d addressed all of the Ten Commandments to the whole people directly. The problem was that the people did not understand what they were hearing. Moses therefore needed to explain the text to the people, with the exception of the first two Commandments which they both heard and understood directly from <i>Hashem</i> without the need of any intermediary. The point in all this is that at that point in time the people were all on the spiritual level of prophets, who have primary knowledge of the uniqueness of <i>Hashem,</i> and the absolute impossibility to relate to anyone else as something Divine.
   
   מבית עבדים, “from the house of bondage.” Although the people did not need to be told this, G’d reminded them that seeing they had been enslaved by a cruel ruler such as Pharaoh, they could certainly not have any objection of trading such a ruler for <i>Hashem.</i>
    Some commentators see in the words מארץ מצרים the major significance of this line, i.e. seeing that everyone knows that there was no other country in which the Israelites had been enslaved. They therefore stress that the Egyptians being slaves, i.e. being descendants of Cham whose children  Noach had condemned to be slaves, had instead become masters over descendants of Shem, had been an especially degrading experience. The fact that G’d had put an end to this geo-politically demeaning situation, deserved especial mention, and therefore the Israelites’ gratitude. [The Egyptians were fourth generation descendants of Cham. (Genesis 10,6-7) Ed.]
   The Ten Commandments were all formulated in the singular mode, as opposed to the summation of אתם ראיתם,  in 20,19 as well as the formulation (plural) אם שמוע תשמעו, “if you will surely hearken, etc.” (19,5). The reason for the variation in the singular and plural mode is to warn the people that they are both individually and collectively obligated to carry out G’d’s instructions, and to refrain from violating negative commandments. G’d wanted to be on record as if He had spoken to every Israelite individually.
   
   20,3. לא יהיה לך אלוקים אחרים, “You must not have any other kind of divinity.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this as not maintaining (יהיה referring to something already in existence) any idolatrous image, seeing that there is a separate commandment following immediately afterwards that prohibits the construction of such images. This latter commandment would by itself have been insufficient, as it would have left open the option of preserving or even worshipping existing idols.
   Concerning this interpretation, Nachmanides writes that if that were so, G’d’s words: לא יהיה לך, while a prohibition, would not have indicated that violating this prohibition carries the death penalty. Furthermore, why would the Torah first tell us about the lesser sin of not destroying an existing idol rather than inform us of the worse sin of constructing a new idol ourselves? Seeing that the Torah spelled out the death penalty in this world [if tried and convicted by a tribunal. Ed.] and in the world to come [if it was impossible to convict legally or carry out the sentence. Ed.] for worshiping idols, we would have thought that maintaining idols was a minor offense. Whereas there is indeed a view expressed in the <i>Mechilta</i> that the maintaining, i.e. not destroying an existing idol is “only” a warning by the Torah, but not an indictable offense, this is the view of a lone sage, and we do not rule in accordance with that view.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, we need to understand the verses as follows: the meaning of the word אלוהים here is similar to והיה לך לאלוהים or to להיות לך לאלוהים, (Genesis 17,7, for instance) where the meaning is that we must not consider any of the celestial forces which have been imbued with some power by G’d as sharing power with G’d, or even as intermediaries. The fact that these forces are called by the name אלוהים on occasion, as for instance <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> Pharaoh (compare Exodus 7,1) is not a factor in our relationship to <i>Hashem.</i> If we were to allow such celestial bodies, or the like to substitute or to rank alongside G’d, it would not only dilute, but eventually ruin, our belief in G’d the sole and unique Creator. We must never address such celestial forces as אלי אתה, ”you are a celestial force in my eyes.”
   
   Ibn Ezra explains these verses as not viewing anything in nature as a junior partner to the Creator. This warning was necessary as there were theologians or philosophers who, while recognizing the supremacy of <i>Hashem</i> did not recognize His being absolutely exclusive as such. 
   [If there really were such a thing as אלוהים אחרים, “other deities” (plural, as suggested by the plural ending in the word אלוהים), the Torah should have written לא יהיו לך, in the plural, not לא יהיה לך in the singular, i.e. reminding the reader that the idea of other gods is a non-starter. Ed.]
   
   אלוהים אחרים, “other deities.” We must not admit that there are such other deities, even if we refuse to pay any tribute to these supposed deities. It is noteworthy that when the Torah forbids the making of such symbols, such images of other supposed deities, it does not dignify them with the title “other gods, or other deities,” but simply tells us not to make אלוהי מסכה, (Exodus 34,17). There is a subtle difference, in that the making for commercial purposes of a symbol to serve others, when such a symbol is known to be serving others as a deity or symbol of such. When making a symbol of one’s own deity the Torah wants it understood, in addition to the examples mentioned in our verse, that even a symbol of our true faith is totally forbidden to be made. If the Torah had not forbidden to make something אחר, something else, something that is not divine, as a symbol of one’s faith, this would be equivalent to admitting that such a notion would be credible, though foolish. The very idea of עושה אלוהים is laughable, as only The Creator could imbue anything created with divine power if He wanted to, not any creature.
   
   על פני, “in My presence.” We find a similar use of the expression על פני when Eleazar and Ittamar are appointed as priests in the presence of their father Aaron (Numbers 3,4). Here too, the meaning is the same as if the Torah had written לפני, “before Me.” This expression is used in all instances when we are reminded that there is nothing that is hidden from the Lord, and though He is not manifest, nothing does not occur in His presence. The reason why the Torah does not warn against prostrating oneself to idols here, is that it had already included this in verse five which is a conceptual continuation of not making idols mentioned in verse four.
   
   20,5. לא תשתחוה להם ולא תעבדם, “neither prostrate yourself before them nor worship them.” Any kind of worship even if it does not involve a visible form of obeisance such as prostrating oneself. This is forbidden even if one does not mean thereby to in any way diminish one’s faith and devotion to <i>Hashem.</i>
   אל קנא, “a jealous G’d.” We never find the attribute of G’d being jealous in any connection other than with idolatry. He warns us that just as a jealous husband is likely to take revenge on his adulterous wife, so He is going to punish the Israelite who, by breaching the covenant, gives Him cause to display jealousy.
   
   פוקד עון אבות, “Who visits the sin of the fathers, etc.;”  according to Ibn Ezra the meaning of the word פוקד here is the same as that of the word זוכר, i.e. “who remembers.” The word is used in that sense in Genesis 21,1 where it means that G’d remembered the fact that Sarah had not yet been blessed with child. In our verse it means that <i>Hashem</i> allows even the wicked time to rehabilitate themselves through repentance before imposing the punishment for the sins which they deserve. G’d hopes that during the time He holds the punishment in abeyance the sinner will sire a child who in turn will be righteous, thus retroactively making the sinner’s life worthwhile. However, if both the sinner’s children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren continue in the sinful ways of their forbears, G’d will not continue to delay punishment in the hope that this situation will change.
   Nachmanides challenges this interpretation of our verse, saying that if it were correct G’d would be visiting the sins not on the third generation but on the fourth generation. This would mean that the second and third generation of the father who went unpunished would also go unpunished. If that were so, the Torah should have written: זוכר עון אבות ובנים ושלישים על רבעים, “He will visit (show remembrance) of the sin of the fathers and the sons and the grandsons on the great-grandsons.” Perhaps what Ibn Ezra had in mind was that G’d remembers the sin of the father to the offspring by saying to the sinful offspring: “you as well as your (deceased) father or/and grandfather have been guilty of such and such.” As a result, the string of generations will be punished by that line being wiped out.
   However, the Torah does not say that all people, i.e. the sins of all fathers will be subject to an identical consideration by G’d. There are various verses in Scripture which indicate that sometimes G’d will exact punishment from the son or the grandson, as for instance we read in Isaiah 27,1 יפקד ה' בחרבו הקשה  where the prophet announces that G’d will remember to punish the nations who have subjected Israel to violence, or Isaiah 14,21 הכינו לבניו מטבח בעון אבותם, “prepare a slaughtering block for their sons in retribution of the sins of their fathers, etc.” In both of these examples G’d is not described as waiting for four generations with exacting His vengeance. Sometimes the third generation will experience G’d’s vengeance, compare Deuteronomy 5,9, other times some descendants will experience it a generation sooner than their brothers, although to the uninitiated onlooker there appears to be no difference in conduct between them. When G’d indicated to Avraham that the Emorites were indeed guilty and deserved to be uprooted, He added that their guilt was not yet complete, i.e. the guilt of some of them, until the fourth generation had been reached, hence the descendants of Avraham could not be given their land until then. (Genesis 15,16). Any fifth generation experiencing G’d’s wrath is not being punished for the sins of the first of these five generations.
   
   פוקד עון אבות על בנים, “remembering the sins of the fathers to the children.” Ibn Ezra says that the grandchildren are included in the term בנים in this verse. This is the reason why the Torah mentions both third and fourth generations in one sentence, without bothering to mention the second generation at all, seeing that the second generation was already included in the mention of בנים. 
   Nachmanides disagrees with this reasoning, stating that what is referred to as שלשים, is in fact the third generation commencing with the fathers, i.e. the grandchildren of the sinful father. The fourth generation described as רבעים here are the great grandchildren, and the same applies to the list in Exodus 34,7, where G’d reveals to Moses thirteen of His attributes. This is also why Moses, in connection with the sin of the spies, (Numbers 14,18) refers to בנים, שלשים, רבעים.  What he meant was that the grandchildren are the third generation. This is also why our sages say that G’d extends goodness to more generations than vengeance, i.e. whereas the sins of the former generations may not be forgotten for 4 generations, their good deeds are rewarded for as long as 2000 generations (verse 6).
   
   לשונאי, “to those who hate Me.” If the member of that generation is a wicked person and he hates the Lord, previous sins of former generations will also be held against him, whereas if the present generation are righteous none of the sins of former generations will be held against them.
   
   20,6. לא תשא את שם ה' אלוקיך לשוא, “Do not mention the name of the Lord your G’d in vain;” according to our sages what is meant is to swear an unnecessary oath, confirming the truth of something universally known as true, by using the name of the Lord 
   According to the plain meaning of the text what is also included is that the holy name of the Lord must not be mentioned in vain even if it is not part of an oath. The use of one’s mouth or lips for speaking is referred to on occasion as נשיאות קול, raising one’s voice.
   
   The reason why this commandment follows on the heels of the prohibition to engage in anything related to idolatry is to remind us that just as it is forbidden to accord any part of the reverence, respect, etc., due to the Lord, the Creator to any other phenomenon, so we must not bandy about His name for our own purposes, thereby demeaning it, and making use of Him instead of serving Him. Using G’d’s name in order to confirm one’s own words as true, is as if saying that just as He is truth incarnate, so our words are truth incarnate, a real desecration of His Holy Name. Because this is considered such a serious offense, the Torah warns that this sin is beyond G’d’s willingness ever to forgive completely. Punishment for committing this offense deliberately, just like that of idolatry, may drag out through four generations.
   
   20,8. זכור את יום השבת, “to remember the day of the Sabbath.” Having first commanded us to believe with absolute faith in the uniqueness of <i>Hashem,</i> His power, etc., and the fact that He alone is the Creator, and that He knows what is going on in any part of the universe, including what goes on in our hearts, the outward symbol of this belief of ours is to be demonstrated in our observance of the Sabbath as the day which bears the stamp of G’d’s creative power.
   Now G’d commands that we observe the Sabbath day as a weekly reminder of His stature, by emulating certain of the attributes He demonstrated when He created the universe.
   In the first version of the Tablets the formula chosen to refer to this reminder is the word זכור, a positive act of remembering, whereas in the second version of the Tablets, as recorded in the Book of Deuteronomy, the word is שמור, “guard, observe, by not violating,” the negative aspect of emulating G’d’s “repose,” abstention from creative activity on that day.
   Our sages say that when pronounced by G’d on Mount Sinai, both words were said by Him simultaneously. Although the sages could have made this point about a number of changes between the wording of the Decalogue in the Book of Exodus, as opposed to the one in Deuteronomy, which was formulated by Moses himself, they did not bother to draw attention to this, as only in this instance might Moses be perceived as having changed what sounded like a positive commandment to something which sounds like a negative commandment. They were anxious not to portray Moses as having taken liberties with G’d’s revealed word. When G’d commanded the observance of the Sabbath to Moses, having in mind Moses’ exceptional stature, He formulated the commandment primarily as a positive commandment, i.e.זכור לקדשו. When Moses relayed the same commandment to the next generation who had not stood at Sinai, He warned him to present first and foremost the negative aspects of this commandment, i.e. the work prohibitions, etc. Actually, the observance of the Sabbath, i.e. worshipping the Lord by observing the Sabbath, includes service of the Lord from overriding feelings of love, אהבה, the positive aspect of the commandment, as well as the observance of the law out of considerations governed by awe, by reverence, i.e. by יראה. The latter is expressed by not violating the prohibitions associated with observing the Sabbath. This is also the reason why, in <i>halachah</i> when observance of a positive commandment conflicts with the simultaneous observance of a negative commandment, as a rule, the observance of the positive commandment takes precedence and even displaces the observance of the negative commandment.
   The word זכור was written in the first version of the Ten Commandments in the written Torah, as it refers primarily to the Sabbath as a remembrance of the מעשה בראשית, G’d’s having created the universe, something concerning which the Torah writes elsewhere זכור ימות עולם, “remember the history of the universe,” (Deut. 32,7) whereas the word שמור was the one written in the second version of the Ten Commandments, as the second aspect of the Sabbath is its commemoration as an historical event experienced by the Israelites with both their bodies and their souls.
   Nachmanides writes that he is not sure if the word שמור in Deuteronomy was spoken by G’d Himself at all, seeing that it was not written on the Tablets [after all the Book of Deuteronomy, according to tradition was composed by Moses, the text being approved by G’d afterwards. Ed.]  He concludes that it is even possible that the word שמור appeared on the original set of Tablets, the word זכור being substituted on the second set of Tablets. It was Moses who told the people that the word שמור had been said to him simultaneously, when he was told what was written on the first set of Tablets, the ones he had smashed. This, in Nachmanides’ view is what the sages had in mind when they said זכור ושמור בדבור אחד נאמרו, “the words <i>zachor</i> and <i>shamor</i> were said as a single utterance.”
   
   זכור, “to remember.” <i>Rashi,</i> in commenting on the infinitive mode of the word זכור used here instead of the imperative mode <i>zechor!,</i> as in Deuteronomy 32,7, comments that the commandment means that the memory of the Sabbath day must be foremost in the mind of Israelites not only on the Sabbath day itself, but must be something that we also think of during the six days of the work week. The practical way in which we are to do this is illustrated when the Talmud tells of Rabbis, who, whenever they came across some delicious food item during the week, bought it immediately, with a view to serving it on the Sabbath.
   Nachmanides, in commenting on that paragraph in the Talmud, (<i>Beytzah</i> 16) in which Shammai and Hillel respectively are described as fulfilling this requirement in slightly different ways, says that the plain meaning of the Torah’s text is that the reason why we must remember the Sabbath day everyday is to ensure that we do not observe the wrong day of the week as the Sabbath. [after all, in nature there is no visible difference between the Sabbath and the other days. It is not distinguishable by seasonal factors nor by the position of the moon in the sky, for instance. Ed.] By thinking of the importance of the Sabbath on an ongoing basis, we will not forget the debt of gratitude we owe the Creator, Who has given us this sign as a gift, reminding us of the dignity of being a creature instead of the product of a mindless act of natural forces. [my choice of words. Ed.] It is a most potent symbol strengthening our faith in <i>Hashem.</i>
   
   The meaning of the word לקדשו in our verse, i.e. “to sanctify it,” is that the existence of this special day be constantly present in our minds, that we think of the day as a sacred day, meaning that on that day we refrain from our mundane concerns which preoccupy us during the other six days of the week. We are to devote this day to enhance the spiritual concerns which we are capable of enjoying, and which we are bidden to devote our attention to. Included in this meaning of לקדשו are such activities as visiting our Rabbis, our spiritual mentors, and listening to their words of enlightenment and cheer, by means of which they improve our capacity to enjoy a day of “rest.” The farmer who asked his wife –not knowing that their son had died-why she was visiting the prophet on a day that was neither the Sabbath nor the New Moon, shows clearly that the Sabbath was used as a day on which the ordinary Israelite recharged his spiritual batteries by interacting with the spiritual elite of the nation (compare Kings II 4,23) The reason why the sages declared that observance of the commandment to remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, and not to violate the work prohibitions on that day is equivalent to all the other commandments in the Torah, is precisely this function of the Sabbath to renew our spiritual batteries.
   We are taught in the <i>Mechilta</i> that part of the sanctity of the Sabbath is that we do not count the days of the week as do the gentiles, but we relate each day to its position <i>vis a vis</i> the Sabbath, as for instance “today is the first day after the Sabbath, today is the second day after the Sabbath, etc.”
   Our sages, taking a cue from the word לקדשו, “to sanctify it,” tell us that this is why we must recite the sanctification of the day over a cup of wine before both the evening meal and the main meal on the Sabbath day. This ”sanctification” is known as <i>kiddush.</i> (compare Maimonides <i>hilchot Shabbat</i> chapter 29) Whereas the sanctification of the Jubilee year every fifty years requires a court of sages to declare it holy, the Sabbath is sanctified by every individual Jew every week. Remembering the Sabbath and sanctifying it are two separate aspects of Sabbath observance
   
   20,9. ששת ימים תעבוד, For six days you will work (for your livelihood).” The word עבודה refers to activities not performed because of bodily needs, such as tilling the soil. The Torah says that such activities as tilling the earth, or similar type of activities should be performed for six days during the week. On the other hand, the words:ועשית כל מלאכתך, refer to activities which are needed to maintain the body in healthy condition, and activities designed to make life more comfortable and enjoyable. The Sabbath is a day on which neither of these two kinds of activities is to be performed. The prohibition extends to male and female adults as well as their children even while they are minors. It includes even the slaves in a Jewish household who have been circumcised and have undergone the ritual immersion and have thus become subject to the prohibitions applicable to the Sabbath. This is spelled out specifically in the second version of the Ten Commandments in Deuteronomy 5,14.  Actually, it could be argued that such people deserved to be addressed by G’d directly, just as the Israelites, in order to commit them more deeply to this commandment. However, seeing that the slaves are subject to constant directives by their masters, their employers, the Torah preferred to inform them of their duties <i>via</i> their masters who are in the habit of giving them instructions as to what to do and when, all the time. Furthermore, seeing that at the time when G’d addressed the Ten Commandments to the Jewish people they did not have any slaves, it would have been impractical to orchestrate a special revelation for such slaves at a later time in history.
   וגרך אשר בשעריך, “and the proselyte within your midst.” According to the plain meaning of the text, whenever mention is made of a גר, literally “a stranger,” in connection with the word שער the gate to your cities, it is assumed that the reference is to a גר תושב, a resident gentile, who has obligated himself to observe the seven Noachide commandments. Seeing that this is so, he is not included in the category of people to whom certain activities known as <i>melachah</i> in <i>halachic</i> terms are prohibited. After all, he is not part of a Jewish household described as applying to האזרח והגר, “the natural born Jew or the stranger who underwent basic conversion.” He is allowed to do for himself what he is not allowed to do on behalf of a Jew. As to the verse which speaks of וינפש בן אמתך והגר, “and the son of your maidservant as well as the stranger, shall recuperate, catch his breath as it were,” (Exodus 23,12) this refers to the fully converted gentile, who is subject to all the laws of the Torah from the moment he has converted.
   However, our sages in the <i>Mechilta</i>, understand the meaning of the word גר on each of these occasions, exactly in the reverse order. They understand the words וגרך אשר בשעריך as applying to a one time gentile who has fully converted, whereas the word וגר in Exodus 23,12 they understand as referring to a גר תושב, a resident stranger, i.e. one who has embraced the seven Noachide laws. Seeing that this latter stranger is an uncircumcised person, he has been compared by the Torah to the beast mentioned in the same verse as entitled to physical rest, וינפש on that day, and just as beasts must not perform work for Jews on the Sabbath, neither must resident strangers. The resident stranger is free to pursue his own agenda on what is the Sabbath for Israelites.
   
   20,11. כי ששת ימים עשה ה' את השמים ואת הארץ, “for <i>Hashem</i> made heaven and earth during six days, etc.” Here the whole concept of the Sabbath is linked to the creation, as opposed to the version in Deuteronomy where it is linked to the Israelites’ Exodus from Egypt. In other words, seeing that the slave does not enjoy a day of rest during the week, the Torah underlines that a by-product of the redemption from Egyptian bondage was the entitlement to a weekly day of rest, a day free from the claims on our time and skill by human masters.
   It is also possible that the reason that the wording of the Decalogue in Deuteronomy is so materially different, when it comes to providing the rationale, is to caution us not to treat our own servants in a manner comparable to the way we have been treated while in bondage in Egypt, but to ensure that our servants enjoy a day of rest per week just as we do..
   
   ברך ה' את יום השבת ויקדשהו, “<i>Hashem</i> blessed the Sabbath day and sanctified it.” To make it a blessed day and a sacred day by means of mentioning its holiness and by pronouncing it holy and abstaining from all the activities which have been categorized as מלאכה. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that it is G’d Who blessed the day and sanctified it as He conditioned it so that man’s body can host an additional soul on that day, a soul that enhances his spiritual capacity.
   
   20,12. כבד את אביך ואת אמך, “Honour your father and your mother.” After G’d had completed the list of duties we have <i>vis a vis</i> Him, He begins a list of primary obligations we have concerning our fellow man. He begins the list with an obligation to honour one’s biological father, as the father is G’d’s partner in the creation of any new human life. Whereas <i>Hashem</i> is mankind’s original father, the biological father is his final, most recent father. It follows that just as G’d commanded us in His capacity as our Creator, our father is entitled to a commensurate degree of honour and respect, as he fulfilled this role on earth. [It goes without saying that man’s mother is the third partner in the creation of every human being after the first pair of humans. Ed.] The Torah does not go into specifics of how such respect is to be shown to one’s parents. A major component of such honour accorded to one’s father is to publicly acknowledge him as such, just as the basic honour we accord G’d is that we publicly acknowledge Him as the Creator. We must not accord similar honour to other males in order to be recognized as the heirs of another male, for instance, for the sake of reaping some other benefit by such recognition of someone who is not our biological father as such. If one swears by the life of one’s father, one must not portray someone else as one’s father, for instance. Our sages have furnished us with a list of other activities the performance of which is considered proof of our observing this commandment.
   Our sages, in stressing the importance of this commandment, have compared the parents’ claim to be honoured by their children to G’d’s claim to be honoured by His creatures. They derive this, for instance, from the use of the attribute <i>Hashem</i> in this commandment, an attribute which does not occur during any of the last five Commandments, the reason being that those concern inter-personal relations, not man’s relations with his Creator. Seeing that in essence, the performance of the commandment to honour one’s parents concerns itself with issues of relevance in our lives on this earth, the Torah, in its promise of reward also describes this reward in terms of advantages to be enjoyed in our life on this earth, i.e. long life in the land of our forefathers. 
   Our sages say that the promise of the reward is to be divided into two separate promises. 1) Long life; 1a) life in the land of Israel. These two aspects of the reward speak about the terrestrial world, whereas 2) the word יאריכון in itself speaks of a domain in which time is unlimited, the world to come in the celestial regions in the words of the sages: בעולם שכולו ארוך, a world which is not bound by time. Moses elaborates on this further in Deuteronomy 5,16 by adding the words ולמען ייטב לך, “and in order that it will be good for you.”
   Seeing that there was no obvious need to append the letter ן in the word יאריכו, our commentators see in this a hint that the mother is included in all that is written here.
   
   20,13. לא תרצח , “Do not commit murder.” The order in which the Torah lists the following prohibitions needs to be understood as follows: The Torah, implies that the listener (reader) has appreciated that first and foremost G’d had insisted that He be recognized as THE Creator of the universe and all that there is in it. 
   Next, He had commanded that the parents be accorded honour and respect seeing they are partners in the creation of new human life. It follows that you, human being, must not do things which directly result in your undoing what I had done. First and foremost do not shed the blood of a human being who was created in order to honour Me. You would deprive Me of the honour due to Me by My creatures. 
   The prohibition against committing adultery is similarly motivated, as violating the wife of your fellow man not only is a serious injury, affront to the contractual bond between that wife and her husband, but it undermines the whole principle of enabling children to know who these parents are to whom they are duty-bound to show respect. It introduces lies as something normative into this world, whereas G’d stands for truth, and we are to emulate Him if we claim to be His partners. 
   Stealing, i.e. kidnapping, preventing human beings to live the kind of life G’d wishes them to live, similarly deprives G’d of the worship of Him by the kidnapped person held prisoner.
   Similar considerations are at the core of the laws not to testify falsely nor to plan to deprive others of their rightful possessions. Such actions proclaim the lie as an acceptable means to achieve one’s ends, the opposite of G’d’s outstanding attribute of אמת, “truth,” the attribute we are to emulate if we really want to be His partners.
   The first three negative commandments refer to actions performed with one’s body, i.e. with one’s external organs, such as stealing, followed by sins committed with one’s mouth (testimony) and with one’s heart (coveting).
   In the next portion the Torah deals with a long list of  משפטים, violations of the norms of inter-personal relations which need to be judged by a court. As long as one violates only the commandment not to covet without taking action to illegally or even legally acquire the desired object no judges will be involved.
   In commenting on the sequence of items coveted, described in the Tenth Commandment, Ibn Ezra says that the reason that the house of your fellow man is mentioned first, even before the taking of your fellow man’s wife, is that any intelligent person makes certain that he has suitable accommodation to offer a woman before he asks her to marry him. Only after he has acquired a wife does he acquire man and woman servants to assist in the household chores. The reason why this order is reversed in the version of the Ten Commandments in Deuteronomy is that there the Torah addresses young men, who, in their urge to find a mate to marry, do not have the patience to wait until they are economically well established. It is also possible that there Moses talks about someone, who because he lusts after a woman forbidden to him, makes her the focus of all his desires.
   
   Nachmanides writes that the first 5 Commandments are designed to honour the Lord, the Creator, the fifth doing so indirectly seeing that in honouring parents one does so as they are the nearest link to the Creator that we have. In honouring them, we indirectly honour Him. All the remaining 5 Commandments are designed to enhance the dignity of the individual person.
   In some of the Commandments the consequences of observing it or not are spelled out, such as that G’d is jealous and will demand an accounting from those who slight Him, or that He will not easily forgive someone who uses His name in vain, or that the reward for honouring father and mother, though almost a natural in most instances, will be extremely worthwhile. On the other hand, most of the Commandments are not accompanied by promises of reward if observed or threats of retaliation if ignored. This may be explained in that acceptance of the first Commandment and non violation of the second Commandment are really two sides of the same coin, i.e. he who does refrain from all that is forbidden in the second commandment has in fact observed the first Commandment without lifting a finger. The absence of a warning of specific penalties for violations, or the mention of any reward, is also because Sabbath observance, i.e. recognition of G’d as the Creator both by sanctifying the day and by abstaining from work performed as a duty on the six days of the week is actually a way of fulfilling both the first and the second Commandment.
   The first 5 Commandments appear on the first of the Tablets, whereas the second five appear on the second Tablet [although if the numbers of words or letters were to be matched evenly the arrangement would have at least the fifth Commandment on the second Tablet, Ed.] This is to remind us that the Commandments on each of the Tablets correspond to one another. The Commandment not to commit murder parallels the Commandment of believing in the Lord the Creator, as murdering G’d’s creature undoes some of His work, diminishes His stature. The Commandment not to be disloyal to one’s wife or husband is parallel to the Commandment not to make or serve other deities. We are under oath to the One and Only Creator. The commandment not to use the name of the Lord in vain is parallel to the Commandment not to steal. Eventually, every thief will commit false testimony when he denies the accusation of having stolen. The Commandment to honour father and mother parallels the Commandment not to covet one’s neighbour’s wife, for if he does so successfully and illegitimate children are born from such a union, these children will eventually curse their parents instead of honouring them.
   
   20,15. וכל העם רואים את הקולות, “The whole nation was able to see the sounds, etc.” This is not the only time that the term “seeing” is used instead of “hearing.” Another such instance is found in Genesis 42,1 where Yaakov is described as “seeing” that there was food for sale in Egypt, a distance of hundreds of kilometers from where he was at the time. What was meant is that he had heard about it, from returning travelers.
   Our sages understand the verse literally, i.e. that during these exalted moments the people actually saw the sounds, the words.
   Nachmanides writes that our verse does not describe what the Israelites had seen during the revelation, but what occurred later, and that this is what Moses referred to in Deut.5,20 ותקרבון אלי וגו', “you approached me, etc.” They told Moses at that time that they could no longer endure the voice of G’d and were afraid to die unless Moses from then on would act as their interpreter. Personally, Nachmanides’ opinion is not acceptable to me, considering the fact that the Torah quotes the Israelites as saying words of a similar nature already in our paragraph immediately after the conclusion of the Decalogue. At that point nothing was said about the Israelites being afraid to die as a result of the overwhelming impact of what they had experienced. Furthermore, Moses is already telling the people: “אל תיראו, “do not be afraid (that you will die).” G’d had already commented that the people had done well in requesting that Moses be their interpreter of G’d’s words. (Deut. 5,25)
   I believe that the chronological sequence of what is reported in these paragraphs is as follows: the paragraph commencing with the words וכל העם (20,15) reports something which had preceded the actual giving of the Ten Commandments. As an introductory preamble, the Torah, i.e. Moses relates all the instructions he had received concerning the fencing off of the Mountain, followed by the proclamation of the Ten Commandments. Now Moses reviews what the Israelites had been saying to him in the course of this whole procedure, reminding them that from the moment they saw thunder and lightning they had trembled, retreated backwards, and taken up a position quite some distance from the bottom of the Mountain, way beyond the security fence Moses had erected. The secret to understanding all this lies in the fact that from early morning on the day of the revelation there were continuous explosion-like sounds of thunder, tremendous flashes of lightning, all of which preceded the manifestation of G’d’s presence. The people reasoned, understandably, that the intensity of these phenomena was likely to increase still further once the <i>Shechinah</i> began to manifest itself. Moses, in order to demonstrate to them that they had nothing to fear, led them closer to the bottom of the Mountain, a location from which the descent of the <i>Shechinah</i> to the top of the Mountain could be observed as a spectacle resembling the smoke arising from a crucible (19,18) all the way to heaven. The very Mountain started trembling, as if they were experiencing a major earthquake. David, in Psalms 114,4 describes the mountains of the Sinai range as dancing like rams. Seeing that, as reported, the sound of the <i>shofar</i> instead of receding, continued to become ever louder, the people reacted accordingly. The description by David in Psalms is not allegorical, just as the description of the sea fleeing from G’d at the time He split the Sea of Reeds, (Psalms 114,3) is not allegorical, but is a factual description of what had occurred. At that point, the people turned to Moses in awe, begging him to become their interpreter. They were willing or even eager to skip the experience of hearing the Lord address them directly. They had not even wanted to respond to Moses’ encouraging overtures to approach the Mountain somewhat closer to the edge of the fence. They observed Moses approach the thick cloud within which the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> was concealed. He did however, not enter it. 
   At that point, G’d began to recite the Decalogue.
   The Torah, at this juncture does not report at all what the elders had been saying to Moses, i.e. the recollection of events as presented in Deuteronomy to the new generation, shortly before he himself was to die.
   At this juncture the Torah’s major concern was to begin to elaborate on all the commandments, primarily the ones dealing with inter-personal relations that are set out in the portion called משפטים in chapters 21-23.
   In the Book of Deuteronomy, however, Moses does relate that all the leaders of the people after the revelation approached him, expressing their profound fear that if they were to be exposed to more mind-boggling experiences like these they would not be able to endure this. The reason they approached Moses at that time was that they thought G’d would address all the Commandments to them in the manner experienced at the Mountain. They therefore gave Moses their leader <i>carte</i> blanche to accept all these Commandments on their behalf committing themselves to observe any and all of these Commandments they had not been informed of as yet. G’d agreed with the feelings the Israelites had expressed. It had been His intent all along that the people would only hear the Decalogue from His mouth directly.
   
   וינועו, “they trembled.” Our sages (compare <i>Rashi</i> quoting<i> Mechilta)</i>) understand the word as related to זיע, It appears in a similar sense in Isaiah 24,20 נוע תנוע ארץ כשכור, “the earth wobbles like a drunk.” People retreated from that spectacle out of fear.[the word poses many problems even in the <i>Mechilta de Rabbi Yishmael,</i> compare <i>Torah Shleymah,</i> Rabbi Menachem Kasher  Ed.]
   According to the followers of the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, the word is related to תנועה, motion, i.e. the people moved away from this spectacle.
   
   20,17. לבעבור נסות, “in order to test, etc.” <i>Rashi,</i> basing himself on the word נס, a banner, something one looks up to, understands the meaning of the line as “in order to elevate you, to grant you greater stature.”
   Nachmanides understands the meaning to be: “to get you used to supernatural manifestations in order to strengthen your faith.” People who have been granted such revelations will have their belief transformed into knowledge. As a result, they will cling more closely to their Creator.
   
   ובעבור תהיה יראתו על פניכם, “and in order that the awe of Him shall be on your faces.” When you realize that He alone is G’d in heaven and on earth, you will be appropriately respectful. This would recall their fiery vision on that occasion.
   Alternately, the meaning could be related to נסיון, familiarity, being used to something from experience.  Compare: לא נסיתי ללכת באלה, “I am not used to wear these.” (David declining King Saul’s armour or uniform before battling Goliath Samuel I 17,39).
   Maimondes explains the words בעבור נסות אתכם, to mean that “when I want to test you by sending you a false prophet, I steeled you against being misled by allowing you to witness the revelation as a safeguard against any claims by false prophets in the future.” The experience you had at the revelation at Mount Sinai will enable you in all future to be able to resist the lure of the promises that a false prophet is liable to make to you.
   In addition to this Nachmanides writes that the word refers to a real test, in the constructive manner of the term, and when David declined Shaul’s armour, he meant by saying לא נסיתי ללכת באלה, that seeing he had not had the proper training in handling such garments, he would not want to risk his life by wearing it without first having tested it. When a master assigns a difficult task to a servant in order to see if the servant is equal to the task, the intent may be to bolster the servant’s self-confidence, when he sees that the master expects him to be able to carry out such an assignment. The revelation at Sinai, in a manner of speaking was a compliment by our Master, <i>Hashem</i> Who demon-strated His faith in our being able to endure such a test.
   
   20,18. ויעמוד העם מרחוק, “The people stood at a distance.” Even though we have read this statement before (19,15), the Torah repeats it to tell us that due to the overwhelming impact of the spectacle they had seen and heard, they had retreated even further from their original position and taken up a new position still further away from the base of the Mountain. Moses meanwhile performed what they had initially been supposed to do themselves.
   
   20,20. לא תעשון אתי, “Do not make (images) of what is with Me;” our sages understand this to mean that we must not reproduce images of phenomena we see in the skies, i.e G’d’s primary domicile.
   
   אלוהי כסף ואלוהי זהב לא תעשון לכם, “gods of silver and gods of gold you shall not make for yourselves.” Nachmanides writes that after the Israelites had seen that <i>Hashem</i> spoke to them from the heavens and that He is Overlord in the heavens, do not assign anything to Him as a partner, i.e. such as silver or gold. The message of our verse is that the Jewish people have no need for additional external help such as is provided by material wealth represented by silver and gold. The reason why the expression לא תעשון, “do not make, construct,” is repeated twice in the same verse, is because the first time it refers to the faith people have in such values, whereas the second time the warning is not to make visible symbols of such faith in material goods. The Torah also separately forbade the making of a hewn deity which represents an abstract belief. (Verse 4)
   Ibn Ezra explains that G’d uses the fact that He spoke to the people directly, without intermediary at Mount Sinai as proof that the people have no need to revert to intermediaries, neither astrology nor material goods in this terrestrial world to assure their well being and to deify such values as the source of their good fortune. Idolaters are foolish enough to expect such images representing what they perceive to be independent values to intercede on their behalf with the Creator.
   
   20,21. מזבח אדמה תעשה לי, “an earthen altar you shall make for Me.” Some commentators see in this verse a message not to decorate the altar with any artwork on its walls, etc., and this is why the verse is followed by the injunction that if the altar is made of stones these stones are to be smooth, without engravings of any kind, either recessed into the stone or protruding from the stone.
   Other commentators understand the whole verse as G’d telling us that He does not expect us to erect fancy buildings for Him, buildings made of gold or silver, but to erect the most simple structure for Him which He will be happy to take up residence in on earth, the only condition being that we will offer our sacrifices to Him, exclusively.
   Nachmanides writes that Ibn Ezra means that the entire verse is to be understood in conjunction with the report in <i>Parshat Mishpatim</i> (chapter 24) where Moses is described as erecting an altar (central) and 12 smaller altars, one for each tribe, called מצבה, on which the priests, i.e. the firstborn offered meat-offerings to <i>Hashem</i>, most of these animals being consumed by their owners. These offerings represented the sealing of the covenant entered into by the people with G’d at the revelation. Assuming that the Torah reports the events surrounding the revelation in chronological order, the sequence is as follows: G’d tells Moses to remind the people (20,20) that they have seen visual evidence that <i>Hashem</i> spoke to them from the heaven in His capacity, as the attribute י-ה-ו-ה. On the one hand, you must not make beside Me silver or golden gods (material values which you revere as if they were gods), but I do permit you to erect altars made of earth, or of smooth stones in order to offer sacrifices to My attribute of <i>Hashem,</i> be they burnt offerings or meat-offerings, and these may be offered without restriction of location. I will bless you at these sites wherever they are. These blessings will be both of spiritual and material dimensions.
   The Torah writes: ואם מזבח אבנים תעשה לי which creates the impression as if the building of an altar is a voluntary thing, entirely up to you, although it is, of course, a precondition to the offering of sacrifices. The meaning of the line is: “if and when the time comes when you will inherit the land and a Temple is to be built, when the altar will be a solid structure, it must not be decorated with pictures, etc., but the stones must be perfectly smooth. There must not be any steps by which to ascend it. Seeing that the subject of the altar came up, mention is made here already of details of the altar, although we would have expected to hear about it much later, either when the Tabernacle’s furnishings are discussed, or in the Book of Kings when Solomon constructs his Temple and all of these details are recorded for posterity.
   
   בכל המקום אשר אזכיר את שמי, “wherever I permit My name to be mentioned.” According to Ibn Ezra the line means “at any site where there is some memory of My presence to be recorded.” When, in the future, you will have occasion to visit such a site, I will make a point to also bestow My blessings on you there.
   
   20,22. חרבך הנפת עליה, “you have raised your sword over it.” This verse forbids contact of iron tools with the altar. Elsewhere this is spelled out as:אבנים שלמות תבנה, לא הניף עליהם ברזל, “you shall construct it of whole stones, stones which have  not  been worked on with iron.” (Joshua 18,4) The Torah uses the word ברזל and חרב interchangeably, as the sword is made of iron. A sword is an instrument meant to kill, an altar is a means to foster peaceful relations between man and G’d, and between man and man.
   Ibn Ezra offers another reason for this legislation, i.e. the Torah is concerned that part of the holy altar (the parts of the stone chiseled off when making smooth surfaces), should not wind up in the garbage container, whereas the other part of the same stone has become sanctified. Alternately, the Torah does not want people to scoop up these stone chips and to make out of these remains an altar for idolatrous practices.
   Nachmanides queries both the aforementioned commentaries, pointing out that the Torah did not forbid the altar to be made of hewn stones, it only opposes the use of iron when hewing these stones. This point is made explicitly not only here, but also in Deut. 27,6. [not quite. Ed.] Accordingly, not only the legendary <i>shamir’s</i> glandular secretions are acceptable as tools to shape the stones for the Temple, but so are tools made of silver of copper. 
   Our sages  (<i>Mechilta</i>) see the reason for this injunction in the desire of the Torah to fulfill the positive commandment of building an altar in the most perfect manner, bearing in mind that the task of the altar is to become an instrument to lengthen our lives on this earth. How does it look when we use as tools to achieve this objective instruments that are designed to shorten man’s life?
     My personal feeling (Nachmanides writing) about this commandment is that the reason that a חרב is called by that name, i.e. something that is מחריב, destructive by nature, and something that was Esau’s primary tool, he being a destroyer, so much so that in blessing him his father Yitzchok expressed the hope that he would at least use the word to lengthen his own life and not die in fruitless battles. The sword’s power extends beyond the terrestrial spheres to the celestial regions for during the ascendancy of the planet Mars, the red planet, the planet that alludes to blood, warriors are notoriously successful. In consideration of all this, neither the Tabernacle nor the Temple built by Solomon contained anything made of iron, the material swords are made of. The only things made of iron that had any function in either the Tabernacle or the Temple were the knives used to slaughter the sacrificial animals. [even these were not used inside the structure itself but in the courtyard where the altar for meat offerings was situated, and where the slaughtering of such animals took place. Ed.]
     The <i>Mechilta</i> draws attention to the fact that the Torah writes concerning the use of stones hewn with iron tools, that they must not be used in building the altar, i.e. they were permitted to be used in building the Sanctuary and the Holies of Holies. However, Solomon applied a more stringent interpretation of the underlying concept, and did not use such tools in the construction of the Temple itself either.
     
     לא תעלה במעות, “you must not ascend by means of steps, etc;” this legislation was for the honour of the altar itself. Seeing that the altar is the means by which the sins of the Jewish people are atoned for, it is appropriate to treat it not only with courtesy but to accord it honour. [If I understand the thoughts of the author correctly, the emphasis is on the fact that the altar stands “only” in the courtyard. Whereas it does not need special legislation to demand a dress mode inside the Temple which does not reveal any flesh not engaged in the actual performance of the Temple service, one might have thought that the rules pertaining to the altar which was outside the building, would be less stringent. Therefore the Torah wrote a special verse telling us that the sanctity of the altar is equivalent to that of the furnishings inside the structure, the היכל and the קדשי קדשים. Ed.]
   Parshat Mishpatim
   
   21,1. ואלה המשפטים, “and these are the ordinances, etc.” The introductory letter ו at the beginning of the word ואלה means that what follows must be understood as a continuation of what preceded it, i.e. the Decalogue.
   Alternately, what follows are new ordinances, continuing the laws which had been revealed already at <i>Marah,</i> where the Torah spoke of two types of laws that were taught to the people, i.e. חוק ומשפט. The reason why the Torah chose to follow this pattern is because at the beginning of the Decalogue G’d had first introduced Himself with the words: “I am the Lord your G’d, etc,” so here too Moses introduces all these laws by reminding the people that they had just recently experienced the revelation, In other words, all that follows originates with the same G’d as did the Decalogue. 
   Moses’ words: אתם ראיתם וגו', corresponds to the first two commandments (i.e. the ones heard and understood by the people spoken to them by <i>Hashem</i> directly.) What follows under the heading of ואלה המשפטים corresponds to such commandments as לא תחמוד, indicative of the final and perhaps ethically most demanding commandment (as it tries to control our feelings and desires that are unspoken) If man does not know the legal aspects of private property, how can he be sure that he does not violate G’d’s will in this respect? This is why G‘d used the term תשים לפניהם, meaning that the laws following must be clearly set out for the people, must be elaborated on. No one must remain in doubt so that he cannot claim that what he coveted was not something belonging to someone else.
   
   אשר תשים לפניהם, ”which you are to set out before them.” Our sages (<i>Mechilta</i>) draw attention to the word לפניהם, meaning “before the Israelites,” but not before the gentiles or the common, uneducated people. Had the Torah wanted that Moses explain the details of the following legislation to unlearned people, it would have written a different formulation, such as אשר תלמדם, which you are to teach them, or אשר תשים להם, a formula used when Moses taught the people some of the laws at<i> Marah.</i> (Exodus 15,25) The expression לשום לפני וגו' is a standard phrase when the Torah means for something to be taught to the judges, the elders of the people. All litigants always have to appear before a quorum of judges, compare Deut. 19,17. The judges are described as יודעי דת ודין, possessing knowledge in matters or ritual law and interpersonal relations requiring legal decisions.
   The reason the <i>Mechilta</i> understands the word לפניהם as excluding gentiles, is to warn Israelites not to have their disputes judged by a court composed of gentiles even if the laws of the gentile host country are similar to ours in that matter. Even if both litigants are agreeable to submit their dispute to a gentile court for a ruling, the Torah does not permit this. If, however these same Israelites agree to submit their dispute to three gentile laymen, (or more or fewer) this is acceptable as G‘d’s jurisprudence has not been slighted thereby.
   Rabbi Joseph Kimchi draws attention to the Torah not having said תשפטם, “you are to render judgment,” but תשים לפניהם, “submit before them,” as the Torah speaks of a situation when the basic <i>halachic</i> rulings were known to the parties. However, this is insufficient, as it allows the owner of a Hebrew servant to claim that had he known that this man’s services would be limited to 6 years, he never would have bought his services in the first place, and that therefore the entire transaction had been based on a misunderstanding. Or, for instance in the case of an ox goring a gentile servant with fatal results, for which the Torah fixes that the owner of the ox which gored has to pay 30 shekel, (a small and fixed amount) even if in the market place such a slave while alive could have fetched several times that amount. Pleading ignorance of the legislation is no reason to revoke transactions that had involved ignorance of the finer points of the law of compensation.
   
   21,2. כי תקנה עבד עברי, ”When you acquire the services of a Jewish labourer,” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah commences the legislation following with this example of the details of setting such a labourer free from his obligations <i>vis a</i> vis you in the seventh year, is that this law contains reminiscences of the Jewish experience in Egypt. This is why the Torah (in Deut. 15,15) writes: “you shall remember that you were a serf in the land of Egypt and the Lord your G’d set you free; this is why I command you this thing this day.” In addition to the reminder of the bondage experience of the Jewish people in the legislation containing the treatment of Jews performing forced labour, there is also a reminder of the 6 days of Creation followed by the Sabbath, the same cycle (in terms of years) applies to the period that a man who has sold himself, or been sold by the Court, has to serve out his term with the same master. The element of the sanctity of the seventh time seven years surfaces once more if said servant voluntarily extends his term of service for the same master. The entire legislation reflects symbolisms, seeing that the number seven surfaces as something intrinsically holy, or as something to be sanctified in terms of years or multiples of <i>shemittah</i> cycles. This is also why the prophet Jeremiah 34,13 warns the Jews that they will be punished with exile (becoming slaves again) for collectively violating the law which required them to release their servants not later than after 49 years, i e in the Jubilee year, as well as the law governing the abstention from working one’s land or orchard every seventh year. The Torah continues with laws governing murder or killing through negligence, which is the most serious of crimes committed against one’s fellow man, followed by the laws about not treating parents with the respect due them, even bodily harming them, followed by the laws about stealing property, etc., one after another in logical sequence.
   
   21,3. אם בגפו יבא, “if he enters service as a single individual,” a reference to his body גוף being unattached. Marriage can be perceived as the reuniting of two bodies separated at the time the first woman was separated from the body of the first man, Adam. Alternately, it means that this person did not own anything but his body, hence he was sold into service for his debts.
   
   אם בעל אשה הוא, “if he was married at that time, etc.” if he was already married to a Jewish woman, his master may assign a non Jewish woman to be his mate. If, however, he had not been married yet, his master must not assign a non Jewish woman for him as a mate. The psychology underlying this legislation is that a normal person does not feel at ease with his fate unless he shares his life with the first woman who became his mate. If the first woman who became his mate is a gentile, he will most likely be so attached to her that even after his term of service he will not want to part from her although she is bound to her master for life. If the same servant had been married before his labour was sold for six years to the same employer, he is likely to yearn for his wife, and will not choose to remain with his master until the Jubilee year.
   
   ויצאה אשתו עמו, “his wife will leave together with him.” From this verse we deduce that the servant’s master had obligated himself to look after the needs of the servant’s wife and children. (not voluntarily, but this was part of the contract the Torah has in mind).
   
   21.6. והגישו אדוניו אל האלו-הים, “his master is to bring him to the Court.” The word אלו-הים here refers to a Court. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the judges in the Torah are often referred to not as שופטים but as “<i>elohim</i>” is because they are G’d’s agents on earth, carrying out His will.
   Nachmanides understands our verse to mean that the master is to bring the servant in question before a judge, a legally constituted tribunal, a site which enjoys the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> and which inspires the judges to ensure that their verdict will be in line with G’d’s wishes. These judges are authorized by G’d to either exonerate or to condemn as evil, as guilty. (compare 22,8) Moses also stated: כי המשפט לאלו-הים הוא, “Justice belongs to G’d,” when he referred to the function of tribunals on terrestrial earth. (Deut.1.17) We also have an explicit verse illustrating this concept in Psalms 82,1, i.e. אלו-הים נצב בעדת א-ל, “G’d stands in the divine assembly.” 
   
   והגישו אל הדלת, “he shall bring him to the door.” According to the plain meaning, seeing that the court holds its session publicly as we know from Ruth 4,1 where the judges sat near the city’s gate, the servant’s ear would be pierced on the door of the city’s gate. This would ensure maximum publicity of the person’s new status.
   Some commentators say that the point of the procedure is to indicate by the hole in the servant’s ear that this individual is charged with guarding the “door, entrance” to the home of his master
   Other commentators claim that the procedure itself as well as where it took place, will ensure that this servant could never claim that the hole in his ear was self-inflicted, as his master by bringing him to the door where the procedure had been performed can demonstrate that the height of the mark left on the door by the chisel that pierced his ear matches exactly the height from the floor to the servant’s ear.
   
   ועבדו לעולם, “he will continue in service to his master until the Jubilee year.” Seeing that the word לעולם in our verse cannot possibly mean: “forever,” the alternate meaning of this word in Scripture is: “until the Jubilee year,” and is applied here.
   Ibn Ezra explains that the word לעולם in the Holy Tongue describes a certain period of time as we know from <i>Kohelet</i> 1,10 כבר היה לעולמים, “it has already existed in antiquity.” In this verse it refers to a well-known point in time, one that recurs every 49 years. In terms of time cycles in the Jewish calendar, or history, it is the longest such cycle, and therefore the word לעולם, commonly translated as “forever, without end,” is most appropriate. At the end of this cycle a new עולם, “world,” opens up before this servant.
   
   21,7. לא תצא כצאת העבדים, “she will not be free in the manner male servants are freed.” Loss by the servant of an eye or a tooth, through violent action by the master, leads to the servant’s immediate freedom. The same rule applies to the male Jewish servant. We need a special verse for this lack of symmetry governing treatment of gentile slaves when abused, and that of Jewish servants similarly abused, as without it we would have deduced from an a fortiori, that if a gentile slave is freed immediately due to his master having rendered a tooth or an eye useless, a Jewish servant would be entitled to at least the same privilege. If this logic were to be applied, the Jewish servant would forfeit his entitlement to compensatory damages, something he does not in fact forfeit. The basic difference in the legislation is that in the case of the gentile slave the freeing of the slave (whose body was owned by his master) is in the nature of a penalty to his master for having abused him. Whenever the Torah legislates a penal measure it cannot serve as a model for other situations. 
   Our verse must be understood as a negative commandment not to release a female or male Jewish servant for loss of eye or tooth, and that doing so, far from being a charitable act, is in fact the violation of a negative commandment. The Torah is stringent with the master, closing a loophole that would have enabled him to escape his financial obligations to the victim of his cruelty or carelessness. The Hebrew servant or female servant is compensated according to the rules prevailing for any other Jewish male or female, and in the event that the compensation exceeds the value of the servant’s labour still to be rendered under his contract, the master (employer) does not have the option of freeing such a servant forthwith. Such a temptation for the master is especially likely when the incident occurred near the end of the forced employment term of said servant.
   Alternatively, the plain meaning of the phrase is that maidservants, unlike men servants, are not supposed to be sent outside, into the fields, for instance, to perform their labours, but are to do this in the house of the master or in his yard.
   
   21,8. לעם נכרי לא ימשל למכרה, “he must not sell it to a member of a different family.” Our sages deduced from this wording that a father must not sell his daughter into service again after she has been released from her first master. Similarly, her first master, instead of releasing her, is also prohibited to sell her services to someone else, seeing he has not kept the promise that was implied when he first acquired her services contractually from her father. He had betrayed her trust by not marrying her when she attained the age of puberty or shortly thereafter.
   It is also possible that the meaning of our verse is to inform us that the criteria which apply to someone who sells himself, occasionally even to a gentile (Leviticus 25,47) if he cannot find a Jewish employer who pays his wages years in advance, so that he can pay back money he owes, are not the criteria that apply to a young girl’s father, or her employer, although, basically, her father had the right to sell her services as had her employer to buy her services, effectively preventing her from quitting he employment prematurely. This is why the Torah warns that no father has the right to sell the services of his daughter to a gentile. The Torah adds that if the father had bought his daughter out of her original contract (when it became clear that her employer had no intention to marry her, for instance) he is not allowed to sell her services to a gentile instead. He cannot do so even for a very short period of time.
   Another possibility of understanding our verse is: “when a father is about to sell the services of his daughter the minor, his authority is restricted to his doing so to a Jewish employer.” At any rate, at all events we derive from this verse that a second sale of the same girl by either the father or her former employer is absolutely prohibited. The extra wording in the verse that enables us to derive this rule is בבגדו בה, “seeing he has betrayed her.” The prohibition not to sell her to a gentile would have been clear from the words לעם נכרי לא ימשול למכרה, “he has no authority to sell her to a gentile.”
   
   Nachmanides writes that the plain meaning of the verse is as follows: when a man sells his daughter’s services the rules of her release from service are not identical to those applying to males mentioned earlier, such as her being wed by her employer, for instance. If this is the case, the father cannot redeem her by some means to prevent her becoming married to said employer. [the girl herself can, of course, decline such offer of marriage. Ed.]  If she does not find favour in the eyes of her employer so that he wants to marry her, the father cannot sell her services instead to anyone else, seeing that he had betrayed her originally by selling her services to someone who had no intention of making her his wife. 
   
   21,9. ואם לבנו ייעדנה, “if he had intended her as a wife for his son;” the expression ייעדנה is equivalent to the Torah writing “הזמינה,” “invited her.” The expression occurs in this context in the Scriptures in Samuel II 20,5 מן המועד אשר יעד, “than the time planned for him.”
   
   כמשפט הבנות יעשה לה, “according to the rights of young women he shall treat her.” A reference to the master’s son. The entitlements of the young women are spelled out as שארה, כסותה, ועונתה, her food, clothing, and marital rights.” She is not to be derived of all or any of her statutory rights. He must, in the event that he does not personally marry her, provide her with the equipment given to Jewish daughters when they are about to marry. These endowments are known as מוהר בתולות. These rights are parallel to the economic stake a master has to give a male servant upon his release from service after the requisite number of years, (usually after 6 years.) All of the above legislation is a demonstration of G’d’s loving concern for the economically underprivileged, whose experience in service was, after all, a result of such under privilege.
   
   Nachmanides writes, that according to the plain meaning of the text one may understand the legislation as the employer of the girl who intended her as a bride for his son having to give her a dowry out of his own pocket.
   
   21,10. שארה, according to <i>Rashi</i> this is a reference to her entitlement to food. According to Nachmanides [who considers the opinion expressed about this as that of a single scholar, not binding, and not <i>halachically</i> accepted as being of such axiomatic nature. Ed.], this line according to the plain meaning refers to conjugal marital rights, the word שאר normally meaning גוף, body, especially when referring to family relations. Nachmanides views the meaning of the word as an expanded version of one’s own personal flesh, i.e. genetically related relations, “blood relations.” We know from Lavan that he said to his nephew Yaakov “אך עצמי ובשרי אתה,” “after all you are my bone and my flesh.” (Genesis 29,14). Flesh that is consumed, eaten, is also called שאר as we know from Psalms 78,27: וימטר עליהם כעפר שאר, “He rained meat on them like dust.” [a quantity of meat as generous as the dust on earth. A reference to the Israelites in the desert, compare Numbers chapter 11. Ed.] The reason why it is called this is that meat has a tendency to attach itself to other food.  Blood relations also have a tendency to cling to one another. The description by the Torah of conjugal rights of intimacy by the wife as something anchored in law is therefore quite understandable. Naturally, this right is mutual, the husband being reciprocally entitled to intimacy with his wife’s body.
   
   כסותה, “her covering,”  i.e. bed covers.
   
   עונתה, “her entitlement to conjugal relations.” At least after her having ritually immersed herself.
   
   לא יגרע, “he must not diminish.” He must not marry another woman in addition, and thereby reduce this former servant’s status to that of a concubine both in appearance and by her reduced conjugal rights The second wife is not to sit on the bed of the first wife, thereby causing her mental anguish. Any marriage to an additional wife must not be at the expense of the first wife.
   
   21,11. שלש אלה, “these three,” the three options the Torah provided to the master-employer, 1) to marry her herself; 2) to make her his son’s bride; 3) to release her before her contractual 6 years of service have expired if she showed premature signs of puberty. No compensation for time not served is due her master/employer in such or similar circumstances.
   
   21,12. מכה איש ומת, “if one strikes a man with fatal results, etc.” According to our sages the conceptual linkage between these apparently unrelated subjects is that when a capital punishment is imposed on someone for a crime normally involving compensatory financial damages, the sinner does not also have to pay financial compensation to his victim. The repetition of the words מות יומת implies that with his judicial death he has paid for all his crimes.
   
   21,15. וגונב איש ומכרו, “and he who kidnaps a person and sells him, etc.” The Torah inserts this verse (subject) between the verse dealing with murder, and the one dealing with physically assaulting one’s parents, or cursing them. Some commentators feel that the point of the sequence is to list two crimes both of which are punishable by strangulation of the sinner together. Cursing parents, on the other hand, is punishable by the guilty party being stoned to death, a more painful and demeaning manner of execution. This commentary does not seem very convincing to me, as if that were the reason the Torah adopted this sequence, the verse dealing with kidnapping should have preceded that of describing parents being assaulted. In that way the verses dealing with improper behaviour against parents could have remained part of the same sequence, and the two crimes for which the punishment is strangulation could also have been written sequentially.
   Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon explains that seeing most victims of kidnapping are small children, who as a result of being sold, will be raised far from their parents’ homes, not even able to recognize their parents, the chances that at sometime during their lives they will curse or physically assault a parent, not even being aware that the person they cursed was a parent, the kidnapper deserves the penalty which otherwise would be applicable to the victim of the kidnapping had he done what he did deliberately. This is why the Torah chose this apparently obscure sequence.
   The penalty for a son who curses his father without laying a hand on him is more severe than the penalty for physically assaulting one’s parent, because this offense is more commonplace than the one of actually raising a hand against a parent. In order to act as a deterrent, the Torah imposed a harsher penalty.
   It is also possible that the reason why the penalty for cursing one’s parents is harsher than for striking them, is that cursing involves using the holy name of the Lord for such a nefarious crime. [<i>Halachically</i>, “cursing” means to curse someone in the name of G’d, to try and call down G’d’s anger against the person one curses. Ed.] He who curses parents has committed two major sins simultaneously.
   
   ומכרו ונמצא בידו, “and he sold him but the kidnapper is apprehended while still having the kidnapped person under his control.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the victim is found in the kidnapper’s possession before the sale.
   Nachmanides writes that if this were so the Torah would not have needed to bother to write the line ונמצא בידו, “the victim was still in the kidnapper’s control.” Seeing that we obviously have witnesses to the crime, the kidnapper had both kidnapped and sold the person concerned, he clearly was under his control. He therefore understands the meaning of the words ונמצא בידו to mean that the kidnapper has brought the kidnapped person into his private domain to mean that until the kidnapper had brought his victim into his private domain he is not liable to the penalty the Torah decrees. The rule is parallel to someone who has stolen and then slaughtered or sold the animal in question. His penalty of making 4 or 5 fold restitution is also applicable only if the stolen animal had first been transferred to the private domain of the thief.
   
   21,18. או באגרוף, “or with a fist.” According to our sages the word אגרוף refers to a fist, i.e. a palm balled into a fist. It describes the injury being caused as like a punch by a boxer. The reason the Torah mentions either a stone or a fist as being the cause of the non-fatal injury, is that both a stone and a fist when used in a fight are proof of a degree of premeditation. Even though, generally speaking, a stone inflicts a more serious injury, both of these weapons do not as a rule cause fatal injuries, although, admittedly, being hit by a stone appears to be more serious.
   Some commentators understand the word אגרוף as referring to dust, the word occurring in this context in Joel 1,17 עבשו פרודות תחת מגרפותיהם, “the seeds have shriveled under their clods of earth.”
   
     21,19. על משענתו, “on his cane.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the Torah means that the injured person can manage to walk without any external assists, as distinct from sick and weak people who require canes or “walkers.”
   Nachmanides writes: “it appears to me that the Torah means that if this injured person is able to walk even only with the help of a cane, or “walker,” that the person who has hit him is exonerated from the charge of manslaughter (if eventually, more than 24 hours later the victim dies) The Torah’s example is based on the most likely result of injuries sustained by being struck by a stone or a fist. The immediate result may be a short sojourn in bed followed by a rapid recovery. The fact that the victim has ventured outside before he died, is an indication that any danger he had been in had already passed before that stage. If he had only been able to hobble around indoors, the attacker is not exonerated from causing the death of his victim.
     
     רק שבתו יתן ורפא ירפא, “he only has to pay compensation to the victim for time lost from work, and for his medical expenses.” The Torah refers only to the fee of the attending physician, not to the cost of medications, which, if prescribed by the physician will also be supplied by him. The victim is not entitled to forego the medications and retain the cost of them. Unless he uses them, the attacker is not liable for their cost.
     Our sages derive from the wording ורפא ירפא that the physician is permitted to practice his art, and that we do not adopt the attitude that if G’d wants him to recover he will recover and if not he will die, i.e. that it is not up to us to interfere. (<i>Baba Kama</i>105). The comment in the Talmud is strange as we have a law (Leviticus 19,16) that one must not stand idly by when a fellow Jew is in mortal danger and could be saved when one takes the appropriate action. The answer given is that the verse ורפא ירפא is needed to make clear that if through lack of skill or misdiagnosis the patient dies after receiving treatment, we do not hold his physician responsible for the death. Another interpretation of the line is that the physician is entitled to charge for his services. If not for this verse we would have assumed that it is one’s moral and ethical duty to heal for free, just as judges do not get paid, and just as Torah is taught for free. [the latter, no longer common, is excused by Abravanel on the grounds that if the teacher of Torah is economically underprivileged, lives in dire circumstances, his students will not want to “buy his wares,” i.e. his Torah, believing that Torah scholars are slated for a life of poverty. Ed.]
     21,20. וכי יכה איש את עבדו, “if someone strikes his (gentile) slave, etc.” The subject of this verse is only a gentile slave, whose body is owned by his master. The Torah teaches that although the stick had been used as a disciplinary rod, and the stick was not a walking cane (whose use as a disciplinary means might inflict far more pain and injury,) the owner must take care not to inflict the kind of injury that might prove lethal. Otherwise, the death is to be avenged.
     21,21. אך אם יום או יומים יעמוד, “but if he will survive one or two days, etc.” seeing that if a survival of a single day suffices not to treat this death as manslaughter, why does the Torah add the words “or two days?” Our sages answer that what the Torah refers to is a day that is comparable to two days, i.e. the minimum period of survival is 24 hours, even on two successive calendar dates. (<i>Mechilta</i>)
     21,22. כאשר ישית עליו בעל האשה, “according to the assessment levied upon him by the husband of the pregnant woman whose fetus died.” The Torah emphasizes that the injured party herself, i.e. the woman, is not allowed to determine the scale of compensation as she has no ownership rights concerning her children. [she is not allowed to “sell” her daughter, for instance, whereas the father is.  However, she is compensated for pain, etc. Ed.
     Ibn Ezra explains that our verse allows for a mutually agreed settlement between the husband of the woman and the one causing the injury, failing which the court, i.e. בפלילים will assess the amount of damages payable. 
     Nachmanides explains that the new aspect of this legislation is the fact that although the damage is not definite as no one knows if the woman would have successfully carried out this fetus, and normally when the value of the damage cannot be assessed with precision, no financial damages are payable, the nature of this payment is under the heading of “punitive damages.” The Torah gives the husband leeway to determine the amount of punitive damages due to him. The reason is that he is presumed to have a greater stake in the loss of this fetus. The reason that the Torah also involves the court, בפלילים is to ensure that the husband does not make unreasonable demands, above the value of such a fetus if it had been born already, for instance.
   21,26. וכי יכה איש את עין עבדו, “if an owner strikes the eye of his slave, etc.’ The Torah speaks of a gentile slave. The legislation pertaining to the destruction of such a servant’s eye formulated here applies equally to 23 other parts of the body enumerated in the Talmud. The reason the Torah chose the eye as the example of the organ whose loss results in the slave’s being freed forthwith, is that when Cham, Noach’s younger son, saw his father in a state of nudity due to his being drunk, instead of covering him he told his brothers i.e. he employed his teeth in doing so. This is why even the loss of a tooth is considered so important by the Torah, (verse 27), as it too is an organ capable of causing serious harm.
   21,29. וגם בעליו יומת, “also its owners shall be executed.” This execution would be at the hands of heaven, not by human tribunal. [clearly, the owner could not have been warned of what his ox was going to do and that he would be executed if he did not prevent it so that legal proceedings against him would result in a death sentence. Ed]
   Nachmanides writes that he cannot follow the translation of Onkelos who takes the text decreeing execution of the ox’s owner literally. He speculates that possibly Onkelos meant that the owner deserves to be executed. Instead, the Torah, in this instance, provided monetary compensation to be paid by the owner.
   Alternately, what Onkelos meant to say was that this owner, when the day would come when he was meant to die, would die a violent death instead of dying from natural causes. In other words, by his negligent conduct with this aggressive ox he made himself liable to G’d’s direct intervention in causing his death.
   21,30. אם כופר יושת עליו, “If monetary atonement be assessed against him, etc.” The introductory word “if” presents a problem; what is “iffy” about this? The matter is similar to the atonement for sins obtained through the offering of a sin offering for instance. When such an offering has been legislated by the Torah, the court does not send enforcers to see to it that the party obligated to offer it does so. If he does not, he will not attain atonement. Similarly, in the case of the owner of the ox. If he fails to pay the assessment he remains out of grace with his Creator, but the court does not check if he has in fact made the payment decreed by the court. This is why the Torah prefaces the legislation with the word אם.
   21,31. או בן יגח או בת יגח, “whether it gores a boy or it gores a girl, etc.” The Torah considers the death through an owner’s negligence of a minor as just as serious as the death of an adult. The reason why we needed a specific verse for this legislation to be spelled out is that when an ox kills a man it is as if a bear enraged through the loss of one of its young goes on a rampage, i.e. disregarding danger to itself. On the other hand, I might have thought that when an ox gores a minor this was not such a serious departure from its normally tame behaviour that the owner forthwith has to guard it with all the means at his disposal. The Torah therefore informs us that any animal which kills any human being, even a minor, has changed its status to becoming a שור מועד, an aggressive ox, with all that this implies for the precautions its owner has to take to neutralize it as a source of danger.
   21,33. או כי יכרה איש בר וגו', “or if he digs a pit.” The word for “pit” here is spelled without the customary letter ו, the only instance in the Torah when it is spelled in this manner. The reason is that the Torah implies that even if the digger of this pit dug far less that the minimum depth required for the pit to become a lethal hazard, (10 <i>tefachim,</i> 40 cm) it is the last such <i>tefach</i> which makes him liable for the consequences, even if he had only deepened an existing pit by a single <i>tefach</i>. The sages rule that in such an event it is also the last digger who is responsible for the damages caused. (<i>Baba Kama 51</i>)
   22,2. אם זרחה השמש עליו דמים לו, “If the sun illuminated the burglar, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the assumption of the Torah is that if someone breaks into a house at night he means to kill the owner (if he obstructs him in his attempt to steal) The murderer plans to flee by daylight when his being about does not arouse any suspicion. If the owner of the house kills the intruder, this is considered self defense even if the intruder had not yet laid a hand on the owner. When the intruder came by day, it is presumed that he had no intention to kill, and if nonetheless, the owner killed him, he is guilty of having shed his blood.
   22,6. כי יתן איש אל רעהו כסף או כלים, “When a man entrusts his neighbour with silver or chattels for safe-keeping;” the first paragraph in this sequence deals with someone who does not receive compensation for looking after his friend’s valuables in his own house. The reason why the Torah singled out money or vessels is that these are the most common items a person asks his neighbour to keep for him during his absence from home. The next paragraph deals with a situation where the guardian of his friend’s property is compensated for his trouble. This is why the Torah chose domestic animals as the example of what is to be guarded, as these require time-consuming care, not like money or vessels. It may therefore be presumed that the owner offered to compensate his neighbour for his trouble.
   22,12. אם טרוף יטרף, “if it is thoroughly torn;” the Torah describes the animal’s death as due to the kind of accidental death that the guardian could neither have foreseen nor prevented. This frees him from the need to compensate the owner, if his claim can be substantiated. The same rule applies if that beast had been kidnapped by armed thugs, or if it died of natural causes. In the event that the custodian claims that the animal in his charge had been killed by a predator, and there are no witnesses, he has to swear an oath in support of his claim. The Torah describes a scenario of, say, a lion attacking a sheep in a flock. Usually, there are more than one shepherd in the vicinity who can testify to what occurred. If the animal sustained a fracture or died of natural causes, this would likely have happened in the privacy of the custodian’s house so that there is hardly a chance to produce a witness testifying to the innocence of the custodian. Hence the Torah writes: אין רואה, there is no outside witness. 
   Ibn Ezra understands the line יביאהו עד, “let him bring a witness,” not as an unreasonable demand, but as referring to part of the mutilated animal. It can be determined by examining the remains how this animal met its death.
   22,15. מהר ימהרנו לו לאשה, “he shall make all the preparations required to marry her.” Nachmanides understands this as the seducer (groom) sending the girl the customary gifts סבלונות, a groom sends prior to the wedding. These are expensive gifts, not boxes of chocolate or a bunch of flowers. They are items that the bride needs as part of her outfits to prepare her for a dignified wedding ceremony. The wedding canopy would usually be erected after the bride had received these gifts from her husband to be. The reason why the Torah phrased this procedure in the way it did, instead of writing: “he must marry her forthwith,” is because it is not the seducer’s duty to marry her unless she has indicated her willingness to become his wife. If she does not agree to marry her seducer, the latter must still send her these gifts, as by seducing her he has greatly diminished the chances that another young man would want to marry this girl whose virginity has been jeopardized. Such a girl‘s father would have to tempt prospective suitors with a much larger dowry in order to make them consent to marry his daughter.
   Our sages say that the value of the <i>mohar</i> described in our verse is 50 shekel (<i>Ketuvot</i> 38), similar to the amount payable by a rapist to the father of the girl whom he had raped. The difference in law between the rapist and the seducer is merely that the former cannot ever divorce his wife (whom he had raped before she became his wife) against her will The seducer has a choice both in marrying his “victim” and eventually divorcing her if he so desires. The reason suggested for this rule is that it is not uncommon for young men to seduce girls who are of marriageable age. It would not be appropriate that the sinner should benefit by his deed in forcing marriage of his “victim” against her will. We must not forget that the girl who allowed herself to be seduced had been guilty of frivolous conduct also. This is why the Torah did not apply the same harsh rules to him that it applied to the rapist who forced himself on his victim. It suffices that he is made to pay a hefty financial fine. Moreover, rapists, as a rule, force their attentions on girls who are minors, and it would not be fair to force such a victim to be married to her violator against her will. If we were to do this she would become a victim of the same person a second time. Both she and her father can object to the rapist marrying her, whereas the rapist himself has no choice in the matter. In both situations the Torah limits these rules to when the girl in question is not yet older than 12 and a half years. In the verses dealing with rape this is spelled out in detail, i.e. הנערה  (Deut. 22,28) Fully adult girls, (12 and a half+ receive the compensation themselves, not their father). In our verse here the Torah does not need to write the word נערה to indicate that this is the oldest girl to whom this legislation applies, seeing that if she were older the father would not be in the picture as the recipient of the fine stipulated by the Torah. She would not herself qualify as a potential recipient of a fine, seeing no crime had been committed against her interests. All she had had to do was to decline the invitation to engage in intimacies with the man in question.
   22,17. מכשפה לא תחיה, “Do not allow a witch to remain alive. Contrary to other examples of people guilty of the death penalty, where the Torah describes their fate in positive terms, i.e. “you must execute them,” in this instance the Torah chooses a negative way of describing its objective writing “must not be allowed to live.” In practice this appears to mean that failure to execute someone guilty of a capital offence is accounted merely as the failure to observe a positive commandment, i.e. negligence by the court, whereas here failure to execute a witch is described as the violation of a negative commandment, i.e. an act of insubordination against G’d. The reason the practice of witchcraft is so abhorrent in the eyes of G’d, is that these people not only sin but cause all those whom they mislead into believing in their powers to abandon their faith in the true G’d; in other words they present themselves as G’d’s competition. Another such category of sinner is the מסית, the person who actively solicits others to abandon the faith of his fathers. There the Torah categorically demands that no possible ameliorating circumstances be allowed to be presented in defense of the accused. (compare Deut. 13,7-12) In our case, the wording of the Torah implies that all means of killing such a witch must be employed if it proves impossible to convict her by the normal legal processes and the stringent demands of testimony normally applied in prosecutions that can result in the death penalty
   
   22,19. זובח לאלוהים, “someone offering sacrifices to gods, etc.” The use of the vowel <i>patach (kametz)</i> under the letter ל is proof that the Torah refers to known deities, the ones which had been previously mentioned, and whose worship had already been forbidden.
   
   יחרם, “he shall be destroyed.” The individual is to be executed. The reason why the Torah chose the unusual term יחרם here is a play on words, seeing that the individual has seen fit to deify “dead” gods, he too is to be equated to the deities whom he had worshipped. We find that the Torah indulges in such play on words, for instance when describing how we are to relate to certain forbidden foods, living creatures of a lower order; or the offering of such creatures as sacrifices. In Deut. 7,26 the Torah forbids the presentation of such living creatures as sacrifices to the Lord, the reason being given כי חרם הוא, ”it is something that is viewed as slated for destruction.” People who are so misguided will wind up exactly where these sacrifices wind up, i.e. יהיה חרם כמוהו. He who deifies these creatures as substantive will wind up losing his own substance, just as these gods that never had any substance. The verse also implies that such gods are totally out of bounds, i.e. one must not derive direct or indirect benefit from them.
   Nachmanides writes that actually the vowel ל under the latter ל before the word אלוהים frequently indicates that the word אלוהים following is a celestial being such as an angel. He quotes numerous examples. Offering a sacrifice to an angel, as was the intention of Manoach in Judges 13,15 is equally prohibited. The only address for sacrifices is the attribute <i>Hashem.</i> The Torah had to make this plain, as many well meaning people believe that by honouring angels they also honour their Creator. They consider the angel as being a go-between man and G’d, whose task it is to inform man of what is pleasing to G’d. Their error consists in their assumption that by presenting gifts to intermediaries they are actually serving G’d. In order to prevent such errors from being practiced by Jews, the Torah had to make plain that <i>Hashem</i> is the only address for such offerings.
   
   22,20. כי גרים הייתם בארץ מצרים, “for you had remained strangers in the land of Egypt.” Nachmanides writes that not all proselytes have become potentially fit for conversion because we, the Israelites, were strangers only in the land of Egypt. 
   Personally, (Nachmanides speaking) I think that the moral/ethical message here is that we must not taunt the proselyte, reminding him of his lack of illustrious ancestors, seeing that we ourselves not so long ago were no better than he while we were idol worshipping aliens in Egypt. I, the Lord, have saved you from there because I took note of your pitiful state. Similarly, any proselyte will certainly also enjoy My full protection a soon as he turns to Me complaining about being discriminated against. G’d promises similar immediate attention to the pleas of widows and orphans. Their claim for Divine assistance is based on the circumstances in their lives preventing them from taking the kind of initiatives that promise to improve their social and economic status among their peers. Elsewhere the Torah writes:ואתם ידעתם את נפש הגר “you know the mental state of the stranger,” meaning that his mentality is devoid of self-confidence, and that he is therefore liable to cry out to G’d for help at frequent intervals. (compare Exodus 23,9)
   
   22,21. כל אלמנה ויתום לא תענון, “Do not oppress any widow or orphan.” The word כל, “every,” is meant to include wealthy widows and well to do orphans. It teaches that contrary to appearances, such people are keenly aware of the loss of companionship and moral support they have sustained, and that cannot be compensated for simply by earthly possessions. The Torah addresses people generally, society, hence the word תענון, is in the plural mode.
   Ibn Ezra comments that the penalty for someone witnessing such oppression without protesting the behaviour of the party guilty of it, is the same as the person actually guilty of such oppression of the orphan and widow.
   
   22,22. אם ענה תענה אותו, “if you as an individual will be guilty of oppressing such an unfortunate person, etc.” the Torah addresses every such individual not only as a member of society, but in his capacity as a heartless individual. 
   
   22,23. והיו נשיכם אלמנות, “your own wives will become widows, etc.” This will be the penalty exacted as a result of widows complaining to G’d.
   ובניכם יתומים, “and your children will become premature orphans.” This will be the result of an orphan complaining to G’d about being treated unfairly.
   This type of retribution is quite different from death sentences handed out by a heavenly court of law. Concerning such penalties the Torah employs such syntax as ומתו בו כי יחללוהו, “they will die on account of having profaned it or Him.” (Leviticus 22,9) Examples of how such decrees are carried out would be soldiers dying in battle, (i.e. before having completed a normal life cycle).
   
   אם ענה תענה אותו, <i>Rashi</i> comments on that line in verse 22 that it contains an abbreviated dire warning without spelling out the kind of penalty resulting. The penalty mentioned in verse 23 refers only to G’d’s response to a complaint by the injured party, whereas no mention is made of the penalty imposed when the injured party did not complain to G’d about being maltreated.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi</i> is not correct, but that the words אם ענה תענה אותו, have to be understood as in lieu of the words “if he will complain to Me” preceding the punishment of the offender in time, that G’d threatens that He will immediately respond to the complaint if the oppressed orphan even before he has finished complaining. The apparently illogical sequence of this line underlines the immediacy of G’d’s response. The reason for G’d’s “haste” in responding to the outcries of widows and orphans is that whereas ordinary people try to mobilize their social contacts or their wealth to help them over temporary difficulties, the orphans and widows have no such means to fall back on.
   Only G’d will avenge the wrong done to them
   
   22,26. ושמעתי כי חנון אני, “I shall listen for I am compassionate.” G’d is concerned that the reader should not conclude that G’d’s concern for the property and comfort of the righteous does not also extend to the not so righteous, such as in the legislation not to take as a pawn for a loan which is overdue certain necessities. (compare Deut. 24,17)
   Some commentators interpret the line והיה כי יצעק אלי to mean that if the individual in question was in the habit of thanking the Lord for the acts of kindness he had experienced that had been performed by you, such as not taking your bedclothes as a security for a loan, He in turn would respond to the prayer when he asks for help.
   
   22,27. אלוקים לא תקלל, “You shall not revile G’d; nor shall you curse a legally appointed dignitary of your people.” This is a warning not to curse a judge who has found you guilty in litigation.
   
   ונשיא בעמך לא תאור; not to curse the king if he imposed some penalty on you. Not only the king, any legitimate official is meant. Even a member of a religious court, i.e. one dealing with ritual matters, is included in this prohibition.
   
   22,28. מלאתך, “your fullness offering, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this word is applied also to seed as in פן תקדש המלאה הזרע, (Deut. 22,9) “lest the growth of the seed that you plant become forbidden.” The expression is also found in connection with the יקב, the winery, i.e. the wine press or the oil press. Apparently, produce from field or vine is called both תבואה because it is “brought” home to be stored, and it is also called מלאה as it has to be gathered and collected, to wit סוכות is the festival called חג האסיף the holiday of ingathering. We encounter the expression מלא רועים referring to a gathering of shepherds. (Isaiah 31,4)
   It is also possible that they are called מלאה as an expression symbolizing the blessing represented by the farmer filling his granaries and vats.
   
   ודמעך, “your priestly heave-offering.” A reference to grape and olive harvests, the juice of which is perceived as flowing out like tears, a little at a time.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word מלאתך as the grape harvest that due to its abundant moisture needs to be transferred to vessels for storage before irretrievable loss of juice occurs. The word דמעך, refers to the olive harvest in his opinion, as oil drips very slowly, drop by drop similar to tears.
   
   לא תאחר, “do not delay in offering.” Our sages understand this to mean that they are not to be offered in reverse order. (<i>Terumot</i> 3,6) [such as tithes being given before the <i>terumah</i> to the priests. Ed.]
   
   According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah simply warns not to eat of any of these fruit before the requisite gifts have been set aside enabling the farmer and ordinary individuals to eat from all this. The reason why the Torah speaks about redeeming the firstborn, calling it a gift to G’d, in the same breath, is that just as the harvest of what grows in the field and orchard must be freed for secular use only after the various tithes have been set aside, the same rule applies to the “harvest” of the union of husband and wife, the first born male child.
   
   22,30. ואנשי קודש, “and “holy” people, etc. The reason that the Torah suddenly refers to the status of holiness, sanctity, is that up until now in this portion when we spoke about laws governing interpersonal relations this consideration did not enter the ordinances revealed in our chapter. Now, when forbidden foods are mentioned, the rationale which serves as the background to such legislation is the fact that Jews are spiritually on a higher level than gentiles, i.e. they are in varying degrees “holy.” A person is to eat the kind of food that not only assures his physical health, but also that which contributes to his spiritual health. This “spiritual health” is referred to generally as טהרה, ritual purity. Avoidance of the foods mentioned by the Torah is intended to forestall the body of Jews becoming gross, uncouth, something which the intake of certain animals prohibited by the Torah would facilitate, even if the same animal when healthy, unblemished, is fit to be consumed. The Torah’s message is that <i>Hashem</i> desires us to maintain a level of spirituality that enables us to cleave to Him in the desired manner.
   
   23,2. לא תענה על ריב, “do not respond to a grievance, etc.” The Torah speaks of a grievance that you are asked to get involved in as one of the arbiters, with the understanding that a majority opinion would be decisive. You must voice your opinion regardless of being outvoted.
   Some commentators understand the verse to mean that one must not decide such matters alone, but in a quorum in which the majority opinion is accepted.
   
   23,5. וחדלת מעזוב לו, “and you would refrain from assisting him;” this is a veiled warning that you must not dare abandoning him to his problems just because the owner of the beast has a record of being hostile to you. On the contrary, you must make every effort to assist such a person, provided he too does his share in enabling the overloaded beast to get rid of its burden.
   
   23,11. תשמטנה ונטשתה, “you shall leave it untended and unharvested.” You must neither plough and seed it nor fertilise the earth for future use.
   Nachmanides questions that the only work prohibited by Biblical decree is ploughing and seeding. Other work in the field during that year is prohibited by Rabbinic decree. He therefore explains that what the Torah speaks about here, [seeing that the first mentioned prohibition of seeding and harvesting has been spelled out in Leviticus 25. Ed.] is the subject dealt with in the previous verse where seeding for 6 consecutive years has been permitted or even ordained. During the seventh year, neither seeding nor harvesting is allowed. Whatever has grown in the field during that year must be left for the poor, and if there are not enough poor it must be left for the beasts roaming the fields.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word תשמטנה to refer to the foregoing of seeding, planning, the root שמוט implying withdrawal from activity. This is the way in which an owner signals that ultimately his field is G’d’s.
   
   23,13. ובכל אשר אמרתי אליכם תשמרו, “be careful concerning all that I have said to you.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this is a warning concerning every positive commandment, i.e. each positive commandment implies violation of a negative commandment if it is ignored. [based on <i>Mechilta</i> chapter 20 by Rabbi Eliezer. Ed.] 
   Nachmanides questions this whole concept, claiming that contrary to the meaning of the word השמר when used in connection with a negative commandment, when used with a positive commandment it leaves the positive commandment intact as such. He adds that unless, according to <i>Rashi,</i> this would be a general negative commandment, it would follow that every violation, i.e. failure to observe a positive commandment would automatically be punishable by 39 strokes.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, this line covers all the words commencing with ושם אלוהים אחרים in our verse.
   
   ולא ישמע על פיך. “your mouth shall not cause it to be heard.” The Torah means that even if the name of such a deity is mentioned without any attribute identifying it as such, it is still prohibited to mention it as such in the presence of people who worship such a deity. These considerations prompted our sages to advise not to enter into a business partnership with a gentile, in order not to inadvertently violate this commandment. (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 63) 
   It is possible to understand the word תזכירו here as a transitive verb, meaning that you must not mention the name of the deity to the person who worships such a deity anyway by, for instance, saying to him: “why don’t you pray to your god for help?”
   
   23,15. חג הקציר. “the harvest festival.” Nachmnanides  explains why the name of this festival has not been mentioned here. It is because all the legislation about festivals does not appear in the Torah until much later in Leviticus and in Numbers, at this point the Torah only alluded to it, without naming something we are not yet familiar with. Nonetheless, it was important to indicate that as soon as the harvest has begun, the duty to set aside for G’d or His representative on earth, i.e. the priest or Levite, whatever is due to Him. The command to “make” such a festival resurfaces in Deut. 16,10, i.e. ועשית חג שבועות לה', “you are to make a festival of weeks for <i>Hashem.”</i>
   Perhaps, in view of the fact that the Torah writes here already that there are to be three festivals involving pilgrimage to the place where G’d is in residence on earth, and the Torah had mentioned that the <i>matzah</i> festival occurs in the spring, the second such festival occurring during the harvest season, mention of the third such festival is related to the end of the harvest season, the Torah introduces already the first such festival with the warning, i.e. תשמור, meaning that we must make certain that all of these festivals are observed according to the seasons, i.e. the solar calendar. [with a certain degree of latitude. Ed.]
   They are named here in accordance with agricultural activities which predominate around the calendar dates when these festivals are being observed. Each progressive stage in food production from the earth which G’d has put at the farmer’s disposal, qualifies for an expression of thanksgiving by the farmer that he has been fortunate enough to reach that stage without his potential or actual crop having failed. To remind us of this aspect of farming, the Torah describes the address to which the gratitude is to be addressed as אל פני האדון ה', “in the presence of the Master i.e. <i>Hashem</i>.” It is in this capacity as the “boss” of nature that He has supervised your activities and blessed them with success.
   
   23,20. הנה אנכי שולח מלאך, “Behold I send an angel, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the Torah hints at this point already that the Israelites will become guilty of a sin which will cause the present proximity of G’d the essence, to be replaced by an intermediary, an angel (compare Exodus 33,2). <i>Rashi</i> mentions this, although at the insistence of Moses, (Exodus 33,17) the presence of G’d eventually did accompany the people, until under Joshua, it was replaced by the angel mentioned here. (compare Joshua, 5,14)
   
   23,24. לא תשתחוה לאלוהיהם, “do not prostrate yourselves before their deities.” The warning not to become guilty of any form of idolatry is repeated in the Torah again and again, in spite of the Torah’s refraining from any unnecessary verbiage. This only proves how seriously any form of idolatry is considered by G’d, so much so that He repeats such warnings again and again to impress us with His great concern that we not become victims of such philosophies. The Torah, representing our Master, does what any human master does when he warns a servant repeatedly not to forget some basic task that he has to perform. The human master also does not like to have to repeat himself constantly, but he does so in light of the importance of the message he conveys. 
   Perhaps, in the Ten Commandments G’d issued a general command, but now that the Israelites are liable to come face to face with the idolaters in the land of Canaan, they need especial reminders not only not to copy any of their practices but to completely uproot any residue of such idolatry.
   
   ולא תעשו כמעשיהם, “and do not act in accordance with any of their practices.” This is the basic law not to adopt symbols of any gentiles that identify the practitioners as idolaters, even if the practice does not appear to have a religious significance. Generally, these prohibitions are known as not to copy דרכי האמורי, “the customs of the Emorite.” Perhaps the Torah warns here not to copy these religious practices even if in our eyes the practice appears as the very opposite of an act of deference and worship, such as the custom of defecating in front of the “<i>Baal Peor,”</i> a revolting practice, in our eyes. 
   
   23,25. ועבדתם את ה' אלוקיכם, “You shall worship the Lord your G’d.” Nachmanides writes that seeing most of the idolaters are fully aware that the Creator in heaven is the supreme G’d, and they do not pay respects to such forces of nature as for instance the sun, except because they believe that some benefit will accrue to them on account of that, as they think that the sun influences the ripening of the respective crops in their fields, and that G’d has delegated some of His power to the sun for that purpose, the Torah is at pains to remind us that only exclusive dependence of the Creator directly is permissible. We are to realize that by wiping out traces of idolatry in the country this will not only not harm our interest, but, on the contrary will ensure that G’d’s blessing will be even more bountiful. This is why the Torah adds that our bread and our water will receive its blessing directly from <i>Hashem,</i> without recourse to any intermediary.
   
   והסירותי מחלה מקרבך, “I will remove disease from your midst.” This is a promise that the food and drink grown or taken from existing sources will not be contaminated and will be healthy.
   
   23,26. לא תהיה משכלה, ”there will not be a woman who prematurely loses her fetus.” Seeing that the water and other drinks will be healthy thanks to G’d’s blessing, the bodies of the people will be healthy, and the organs responsible for reproduction will be able to carry out their function without hindrance. The reason why the Torah singles out the female population for this promise is that premature abortions occur with women, while a dysfunction of impregnating a woman with healthy sperm occurs generally with men, hence if a woman is barren this may not be her dysfunction but her husband’s, although the visible effect is the fact that she does not bear children.
   It is also possible that premature death of a fetus is a disease, one that originated with the male sperm, so that the promise of לא תהיה משכלה may actually be addressed to the man who will not suffer disease, מחלה, whereas the promise that there will not be an עקרה is addressed to the mothers to be.
   בארצך, “in your land.” This includes the livestock.
   
   את מספר ימיך אמלא, “I will fill the number of your days.” You will not die in war, through disease, through adverse climactic effects, but you will live out your years as envisaged at the time of your birth. These promises require supernatural intervention by G’d in your lives, i.e. miracles. G’d will perform these miracles on behalf of people who have made a point of living according to G’d’s revealed wishes. G’d adds that just as He will make plain that we are the beneficiaries of His goodwill, so will He make it plain that the sinners, i.e. His and our enemies, will become the victims of His wrath. They will be afflicted with a number of natural disasters, such as invasions of crop destroying insects, etc. These poisonous insects will even drive out the population of part of the land of Canaan in advance of your arrival there. The tribes mentioned are only representative of all the Canaanite tribes.
   Quite possibly, under ideal circumstances, there might not even be many Canaanite tribes left to make war against, after these plagues had afflicted them.
   According to Ibn Ezra the צרעה mentioned here is a disease afflicting the body, not an insect infesting the grain. The word would be related to the dreaded skin disease צרעת. 
   
   23,32. לא תכרות להם ולאלוהיהם ברית, “You must not enter into any covenant with them or their deities.” The plain meaning is that the inhabitants will not be promised that their lives will be spared if they surrender, and there will be no understanding that the Israelites will accept any part of their religious practices.
   Nachmanides writes that one could also interpret the Torah as meaning that no agreement of any kind with the local inhabitants must include retaining any of their religious practices. In other words, as long as the local inhabitants have not completely abandoned their idolatrous practices. In the event that the inhabitants convert to Judaism they may be allowed to survive.
   
   24,1. ואל משה אמר עלה אל ה' אתה ואהרן נדב ואביהו ושבעים מזקני ישראל, “and He had said to Moses: “ascend, you and Aaron, Nadav and Avihu as well as 70 of the elders of Israel.” I find it puzzling that Eleazar and ittamar, Aaron’s other sons, were not included in this invitation. Surely they were more distinguished than the seventy elders mentioned in our verse. We have a list of the respective rank of Israelite dignitaries at the time in Maimonides <i>בי</i>את המקדש ה,י<i>ג</i> in which he enumerates the following ranks in this order: Aaron, Eleazar, Ittamar, and Pinchas. The above-mentioned all rose to the position of High Priest, and were superior in a variety of ways to the seventy elders.
   We have a tradition that Nadav and Avihu had already become guilty of death by burning during the episode introduced here (<i>Vayikra Rabbah,</i> 22,10) when they “saw G’d,” i.e. they treated their spiritual high as if it were something ordinary, not even interrupting their eating and drinking during the time they enjoyed this vision. (compare verse 11) Had they not been so highly placed, they might not have been punished in such a salutary manner. At any rate, G’d Who foresees events without necessarily interfering in them, knew that Nadav and Avihu would commit an even greater indiscretion in their enthusiasm to participate in the consecration of the Tabernacle. They were not punished on the occasion described here, as G’d did not want to mar the joy experienced by the people on that day. At the same time, G’d did not want that Aaron would die without a son or grandson who could inherit the office of High Priest. In order not to have all of Aaron’s sons become guilty of the same offence, He did not invite them at the time to accompany Moses part of the way on his ascent to the Mountain.
   According to <i>Rashi</i> this portion describes events which occurred on the 4th of Sivan, (2 days before the revelation). On the other hand, the instruction to Moses to ascend Mount Sinai (verse 12) occurred after the Ten Commandments had been given.
   Nachmanides does not agree with this scenario described by <i>Rashi.</i> He supports this by quoting 21,1 claiming that what Moses told the people then were not the 7 Noachide laws, taught to the people at <i>Marah</i>, but laws revealed to him on Mount Sinai. The words ואת כל המשפטים in our verse here  (verse 3) as well as the expression ויספר, an expression used only when something new is being revealed, make it plain that this occurred after the giving of the Torah. These were laws mentioned to Moses immediately after the Ten Commandments had been given, laws introduced with the words כה תאמר לבית יעקב, in 19,3. G’d added there a reference to the people’s visual experience, i.e. אתם ראיתם “you have witnessed, etc.” (at Mount Sinai, i.e. the revelation) Subsequently, G’d commanded the משפטים to the people as described in chapter 21, and the people accepted all of these joyfully, culminating in their declaration כל הדברים אשר דבר ה' נעשה, “we will perform all the instructions G’d has issued.” (24,3) This was a declaration of faith in Moses who had conveyed all these laws to them in the name of <i>Hashem.</i> It was at this point that G’d said to Moses to tell the people to go back to their respective tents. (Deut. 5,27)  It is reported there that the people went back to their tents and made a great celebration on that day. They prepared the slaughtering of the animals for the following day as there was not enough time left on the day of the revelation to build a major altar and 12 minor altars known as מצבה. (compare verse 4) Moses had meanwhile written down all that had been revealed on that day orally. It was better to give the people time to prepare properly for the conclusion of the covenant on the following day. On that day the people rose early in readiness for what was to develop. The people stood at the foot of Mount Sinai, the very place where they had stood to receive the Ten Commandments. It was here that Moses built the altar and the 12 pillars representing the 12 tribes of Israel. After the offerings had been presented on the altar, Moses read for the people what he had written down on the previous day. (verse 6) and the people responded with the famous נעשה ונשמע, “we are prepared to carry it out, let’s hear the details.” The words ויעל משה ואהרן  concluded the making of the covenant.
   G’d invited Moses to ascend the Mountain once more and there to receive the Tablets on which were inscribed the Ten Commandments in G’d’s own writing, and to remain on the Mountain for some time, (verse 12) speaks of the day following the giving of the Torah, the 7th day of Sivan, G’d announced to him that at the end of that stay he would receive the Tablets.
   As to the grammatically strange wording ואל משה אמר עלה, which we would normally translate as “and He had said (previously to all this) to Moses: ‘ascend,’ etc.,” we have to understand this in context. Up until now the commandments Moses had related to the people were applicable to the people, including Moses, of course. Now the Torah refers to a commandment that had been given exclusively to Moses, to be performed only by him. G’d commanded him the details of this commandment after Moses had instructed the people in what they were expected to do, and had concluded the covenant with them. G’d then said to him “ascend to Me,” accompanied by the people enumerated, for a part of the way.
   
   24,2. ונגש משה לבדו, “only Moses, alone, is to approach close to <i>Hashem.</i>” Ibn Ezra comments that actually the Torah should have addressed Moses in direct speech, i.e. ונגשת אתה לבדך, “you are to approach alone.” However, the pattern of the Holy Scriptures is to frequently use indirect speech when we nowadays would use direct speech. G’d even refers to Himself in the third person, as in Genesis 19,24 וה' המטיר על סדום ועמורה גפרית ואש, מאת ה' מן השמים, “The Lord made it rain on Sodom and Gomorrah sulphur and fire, from the Lord from heaven.” The Torah does not quote G’d saying: “מאתי,” emanating from Me.
   Nachmanides writes that G’d’s comments in this case were also addressed to Aaron, who was to hear that G’d wanted only Moses to ascend the Mountain. On a previous occasion Aaron had also heard G’d say that both Moses and he were “to ascend to Me on the Mountain, but that he and the elders were to prostrate themselves from afar. (verse 1).” Seeing that on one occasion Moses was accompanied by his dignitaries, the Torah had to spell out that at some point only Moses could proceed beyond that threshold. Having eliminated the elders by the words ונגש משה, the word לבדו was needed to make plain that also Aaron was prohibited from advancing toward the Mountain any more closely.
   
   24,5. את נערי בני ישראל, “the youths of the Children of Israel.” What are meant are the firstborn sons of the respective families.
   Nachmanides writes: “I do not know why the Torah calls these firstborns נערים, “youths?” Perhaps the reason is that in the previous verses the Torah had specifically mentioned the זקנים, the elders, the ones who had also been characterized as the אצילי בני ישראל, “the great men of Israel,” the ones blessed with a measure of holy spirit. The Torah may have hinted that attainment of spiritual maturity was not something reserved for people who were born as firstborns, even though those were the ones to whom the functions of the priesthood were entrusted. Seeing that they were the ones, he distinguished them as separate from the multitude.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the reference is to the young men who were still free from sin, had not slept with any woman, so that they were considered the elite of the people.
   
   24,6. וישם באגנות, “he put it in the basins.” These vessels were made in a manner that did not resemble the ones that were part of the regular Temple service, or the regular appurtenances of the altar. The reason for this was that Moses intended to sprinkle half of the animal’s blood on to the people who would become active participants of the covenant through this. The other half of the blood Moses sprinkled on to the altar 
   According to Ibn Ezra the basins, אגנות, were used by Moses both to sprinkle blood on the people and on the altar.
   
   24,8. ויזרוק על העם, “he sprinkled on the people.” Some commentators understand the word על here to mean  בעד, “on behalf of.” We have a parallel to this in Numbers 17,12 ויכפר על העם “Aaron atoned on behalf of the people.”
   
   24,10 ויראו את א-לוהי ישראל, “they experienced a vision of the G’d of Israel.” Ibn Ezra explains that the word ויראו here describes a prophetic vision, not perception with their physical eyes. This vision would be similar to that seen by the prophet Ezekiel when he described the appearance of G’d’s throne. (Ezekiel 1,26) He described it as made of אבן ספיר, whereas here the Israelites due to their familiarity with bricks, described it as לבנת ספיר, as a brick made of sapphire. In verse 28 in that chapter in Ezekiel, the prophet spells out that what he saw was not the actual throne but a דמות, an image of such a throne.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the words א-לוהי ישראל mean that the merit of the patriarch Israel was the catalyst that enabled them to be granted such a vision.
   
   24,11. ואל אצילי בני ישראל, “and against the nobility of the people of Israel, etc.” This is a reference to Nadav, Avihu, and the elders of Israel. The reason why they are described as אצילים is that they had been granted a prophetic vision, the holy spirit had descended upon them. Compare ומאציליה קראתיך, “and from its spiritual elite I have called you forth.” (Isaiah 41,9)
   Ibn Ezra says the Torah uses the appellation אצילי so as to make a qualitative distinction between Moses on the one hand, and the elders. The reason this was called for was that Moses, at the age of 80, could also have been perceived as one of the ”elders.” The new term אצילי was thus coined here to describe the stature of Nadav and Avihu.
   
   לא שלח ידו, “He did not stretch out His hand (punitively).” Nachmanides writes that seeing that the Torah had warned both the priests and people not to ascend the Mountain as this would constitute a breach of the protective fence around the Mountain, (19,24) the Torah refers to the fact that these people had not committed any breach of the rules and therefore did not deserve punishment. Had they done so, they would not have been found worthy to experience a prophetic vision. The whole line of ויחזו וגו' must be understood as what these people did do or experience, meaning that they did not disregard the prohibition of approaching too closely to the Mountain. Some commentators contrast what did not happen here with what happened when G’d did stretch out His hand to Moses to give him the Tablets. This would mean that the people experiencing these visions at this time did not receive encouragement from G’d .
   
   ויאכלו, “they ate, etc.” they consumed the part of the peace-offerings that all Israelites may consume, at the foot of the Mountain, They did not take the meat back to their tents.
   
   וישתו, “they drank;” they used the occasion of receiving the Torah for organizing a great feast on that day to express their happiness at having received the Torah. We find that a similar festivity took place when the Torah, at the end of 40 years, was engraved on the stones taken from the river Jordan. (Deut. 27,7)
   Some commentators understand the Torah’s mentioning that the elders ate and drank as the Torah’s way of drawing attention to the contrast with Moses who, forthwith, ascended the Mountain and remained there for 40 days neither eating nor drinking. Moses most certainly did not have lesser visions than the elders, and yet he did not feel the need to eat for supplying his body with food on such an occasion.
   
   24,12. ויאמר ה' אל משה עלה אלי ההרה, “The Lord said to Moses: “ascend to Me on the Mountain.”
   According to Nachmanides this is the same commandment he had been given on the previous day when G’d had said to him (verse 2) ונגש משה לבדו, “Moses alone is to come close.” Now, on the seventh day of Sivan, G’d added that Moses was to remain o the Mountain for forty days.
   
   ואתנה לך את לוחות האבן והתורה והמצוה אשר כתבתי להורותם, “I shall give you there the stone tablets as well as the Torah and the <i>mitzvah</i> which I have written down in order to teach it to them.” 
   According to Nachmanides the words: “which I have written,” refer to what is inscribed on the Tablets, whereas the word להורותם, “to teach them,” refers to the Torah and the <i>Mitzvah.</i> Moses is to teach the words on the Tablets to the people.
   <i>Rashi</i> understands the words אשר כתבתי to mean that when closely examined, we would find that the entire Torah is included in the Text of the Ten Commandments.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word התורה as referring to the written Torah, whereas the word המצוה is supposed to refer to the oral Torah.
   The correct interpretation is that both words refer only to the Tablets. The proof is in the words אשר כתבתי להורותם, “which I (G’d) have written to teach them.” G’d never wrote the Torah, only Moses did.
   Some commentators claim that the word התורה refers to the first of the Ten Commandments, whereas the word המצוה refers to the remaining nine Commandments. 
   Still other commentators understand the word התורה as referring to the negative commandments, whereas the word המצוה refers to the positive commandments, as in זכור ושמור that refer to the two aspects of the Sabbath. I believe the message in our verse is that both negative and positive commandments form an integral part of Torah legislation, and it is the purpose of each group of commandments to teach us the right way to conduct our lives. This is why G’d added the words אשר כתבתי להורותם, “which I wrote down in order to teach them.”
   
   24,14. ואל הזקנים אמר שבו לנו בזה, “and he said to the elders: ‘wait for us here.’” According to <i>Rashi</i> Moses said this when he was about to leave the camp, [not at the foot of the Mountain. Ed.] They were to spend the time he was absent judging the people and filling in the void whenever the need would arise.
   Nachmanides questions how this was possible, seeing that the previous verse had both the elders and Moses at the bottom of the Mountain, not in the camp. He therefore explains what happened as follows. When Moses and Joshua took their leave of them, they both said to the elders to go back to their respective tents. However, they added that under no circumstances were they to come back to this location or beyond, not even to the place where Joshua remained during all the forty days Moses would be on the Mountain.
   It is possible to understand the words שבו לנו as meaning “remain in lieu of us and be our deputies.” During our absence, you will be ably assisted by Aaron and Chur.
   
   מי בעל דברים, “if someone has a grievance, etc.” Moses meant that if there would arise a problem beyond the ability of the elders to solve they should turn to Aaron or Chur for a definitive ruling. By saying this to the elders, Moses added stature to both Aaron and Chur, seeing that he publicly appointed them as final arbiters during his absence. The turn of phrase שבו לנו, is also to be understood as a compliment to the elders to whom Moses delegated most of his authority during that period. Moses had used the word לנו once before in a complimentary manner when he authorized Joshua to select fighting man to resist the attack by Amalek, at the end of <i>Parshat Beshalach.</i>
   
   Parshat  Terumah
   
   25,2. ויקחו לי תרומה, “let them take for Me a contribution.” After G’d had spoken to Moses face to face when He gave him the Ten Commandments, and He had already communicated some of the other 613 commandments which form the bedrock of the entire legislation known as Torah, a method comparable to our sages when they admitted proselytes to the Jewish faith and nation, the people in the meantime had accepted even all the laws they had not yet had time to become familiar with. G’d had concluded a covenant with them which confirmed them as His exclusive people for all time to come. He, in turn, would be their exclusive G’d. The time had come then to erect a Sanctuary for this G’d on earth, a structure which symbolized G’d’s presence not only on earth generally, but in the midst of His people. This represented the realization of G’d’s promise in Exodus 19,5 which spelled out the special relationship between G’d and the Jewish people. The principal reason for building this structure was to provide a home for the <i>Shechinah,</i> G’d’s benevolent presence among the people. The Holy Ark within that structure represented the holiest part of it. In connection with it, and after giving detailed instructions as to its size, the materials it was to be made of, and the lid and the cherubs adorning it, G’d had announced ונועדתי לך שם ודברתי אתך מעל הכפורת מבין שני הכרובים אשר על ארון העדות, “there I will set My meetings with you, and I shall speak with you from atop the Cover, from between the two cherubs that are on the Ark of Testimony, etc.”
   
   This is why Moses began immediately with the construction of the Holy Ark, followed by the making of the Cover, followed by the Table and the <i>Menorah,</i> all of which are the furnishings of that Tabernacle The fact that G’d did indeed speak to Moses from that location, on the Cover of the Holy Ark, has been confirmed in Numbers 7,89.
   
   25,6. בשמים לשמן המשחה ולקטורת הסמים, “spices for the oil of anointment, and for the aromatic incense.”
   Nachmanides says that there are some commentators who consider this verse as having been abbreviated, and that its meaning is as if the Torah had written:וסמים לקטורת הסמים, “and fragrances to be used in the aromatic incense.”
   
   Other commentators interpret this verse as if the text had read: ולקטורת הסמים יביאו סמים, “and for the purpose of making the aromatic incenses they shall bring different fragrances.”  The Torah mentions these fragrances collectively at this point, as the letter ה in front of the word סמים indicates that the various fragrances alluded to were well known, and did not require being listed. They were not even listed individually in the paragraph dealing with the making of the incense in Exodus 30,34-38, where only 5 out of a total of 11 are enumerated. [the other six are derived by the sages through interpretation of the text. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra explains that there was no need to mention the other 6 ingredients as they were used both for the oil of anointment and for the making of the incense. There was no need to repeat the words בשמים and סמים as these words were mentioned already in connection with the “headings” for both the oil of anointing and the incense for burning up. The Torah also did not consider it necessary to write שמן לשמן המשחה, “oil for the oil of anointing,” as the “heading” שמן was implied by the term שמן למשחה as applicable to each of these ingredients.
   The reason why we need all these different explanations with which the commentators preoccupied themselves, is to counter the argument of the linguists that the word סמים refers to medications, or drugs, in other words, something used internally, in the body, not externally. According to these linguists the word פיטום as in פיטום הקטורת, denotes that these drugs exude a strong fragrance.
   However, <i>Rashi</i> thinks that the word סמים describes certain categories of spices, and this is also the opinion of Onkelos who translates both the word בשמים and the word סמים as בוסמיא, spices.
   
   25,7. אבני שוהם ואבני מילואים, “<i>shoham</i> stones, and stones for the settings.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason why these stones were called מילואים, settings, is that they were set in gold which had been recessed to accommodate each stone so that it would be firmly set in its frame. The exact spot of this recessed hole is called משבצות in the Torah. (28,25)
   
   לאפוד ולחושן, “for the <i>ephod</i> and the breastplate.” The <i>shoham</i> stones were on the shoulder pieces of the <i>ephod,</i> and the jewels referred to as מילואים were inserted in the breastplate. They were משובצים, surrounded by the golden rim that protruded around the grooves within which these jewels were inserted. 
   Nachmanides is troubled by this interpretation as it does not seem right to him that the stones should already have been named according to their ultimate function, although this was still many months in the future. At this time each jewel had a name by which it was known universally, regardless of which piece of jewelry it was used in. He also finds it strange that the Torah should refer to settings for these stones, seeing that even the breastplate and the ephod for which they were intended did not exist yet, and we have not been told what either of these two garments was. Furthermore, Nachmanides makes the point that the אבני שוהם also required to be placed in settings on the shoulder pads of the ephod, so that the expression אבני מילואים applies in equal measure to these two jewels. They are, however, nowhere described as other than משבצות זהב, “held in place by gold settings.” (28,11) Nachmanides also does not accept <i>Rashi’s</i> comment that the meaning of משבצות זהב is that the jewels set in a groove, depression in the gold, were held in place by a golden rim around the jewel. He prefers the translation by Onkelos מרמצן בדהב, enclosed in gold. This means that underneath each jewel there would be a golden receptacle with small fork-like pincers at the top, which would grip the jewel once it had been inserted in the golden setting. This concept is borrowed from the sages ברמצא דפרזלא, boring a hole with an iron pick. (Shabbat 103, <i>Niddah</i> 62) What is described is a kind of fork, the extreme ends of which can be bent so as to hold a precious object firmly in place. The jewels would be placed at the curved bottom of such a “fork,” before the prongs at the top would be bent over to hold the jewel inside firmly in its position. This is still the way it is done in our days (author speaking)
   The meaning of the word מילואים is that the stone be whole, stones that have not been worked over by diamond cutters and such. Just as hewn stones, אבני גזית, were not to be used in constructing the altar, so the jewels for the breastplate and the <i>ephod</i> of the High Priest had to be in their original state. It is an accepted assumption by people who believe in the therapeutic and other value of certain jewels, that if these jewels are not in their original state they will have no such therapeutic value. 
   The reader interested in the subject, is encouraged to read up in my translation of the commentary of Rabbeinu Bachya, pages 1286-1294 where he explains the therapeutic values of each of the stones in the breastplate of the High Priest. Some gemstones’ therapeutic value cured diseases of the body, others had beneficial effect for people mentally underprivileged. [The author claims that scientific texts in his time claimed that there are actually no more than12 kinds of genuine gemstones. Ed.] Apparently, when such gemstones are found in a river bed, they are flawed as far as their use both in the breastplate or as therapeutic aids is concerned, as the constant contact with the water of the river makes it impossible for them to be retrieved in their natural state. This is why here Onkelos translates the word מילואם as אשלמותא, emphasising the wholeness, whereas in connection with filling of vessels or filling in a hole, he translates it as מילוי, as this is an expression used when it concerns such an activity.
   When the Torah discusses the אבני אפוד, (28,11) it speaks of מעשה חרש אבן פתוחי חותם תפתח על שני אבנים, usually translated as “with a jeweler’s handiwork, engraved like a signet ring, shall you engrave the two stones.” In those instances, each gemstone had to have holes in them to accommodate engraving the names of the various tribes. This was the kind of work done by stonemasons. Concerning the gemstones on the breast plate however, the Torah does not use the expression חרש אבן, but ומלאת בו מלואת אבן, an expression which is repeated in 28,20 יהיו במלואותם, perhaps best translated as “in their mountings.” In view of all these considerations, Moses had no choice but to use the secretion of the <i>shamir</i> worm to accomplish this objective. He showed this worm to helpers of Betzalel, demonstrating that the gemstones would split by themselves in the desired places without the use of stonemasons’ tools, jewelers’ engraving tools.
   Seeing that the word במלואותם occurs only in connection with the jewels inserted in the breastplate, even though the sages say that Moses brought the <i>shamir</i> also to go to work on the jewels of the<i> ephod</i>, by moving that worm above the surface of these two jewels in a manner parallel to writing the respective names of the tribes on them. This is probably an incorrect reference to the jewels on the breastplate, seeing that the breastplate, after all, is known also as the חשן האפד “the breastplate of the <i>ephod”</i> seeing it was fastened by chains to the <i>ephod.</i> The meaning of the wordsאבני שוהם, accordingly, is: the three places where jewels were affixed, i.e. 2 on the shoulder pads of the <i>ephod</i> itself, plus the four rows of jewels on the breastplate. The expression אבני מלואים however refers merely to the jewels worn on the High Priest’s breastplate.
   If it was indeed the opinion of the sages that the jewels on the shoulder pads of the <i>ephod</i> were mounted in the same way as those on the breastplate, it is conceivable that they derived this from the wording in our verse, and they understood the words אבני מלואים as applying equally to the jewels of the <i>ephod</i> and the <i>choshen,</i> respectively.
   
   25,9. וכן תעשו, “and so you shall do.” According to<i> Rashi</i> these words are an instruction that the materials and dimensions mentioned here are applicable not only to the Tabernacle, its furnishings and the priestly garments about to be constructed, but that the same rules apply throughout later generations.
   Nachmanides is not sure at all that this is in fact so, as it would have obligated Solomon to make exact replicas of the vessels used in the Tabernacle, and we have clear evidence that Solomon built an altar of 20 by 20 cubits instead of 5 by 5 cubits as described in 27,1. (compare Chronicles II 4,1) 
   Ibn Ezra explains the need for the words וכן תעשו, as due to the fact that up until this point the Torah had spoken of the structure, not the furnishings.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, there is no need for all these explanations, as whenever the Torah repeats something, the objective is to urge the party addressed to proceed with the task at hand without any delay. G’d had first said: ועשו לי מקדש, “they shall make a Sanctuary for Me,” and now He repeats: “now that I explained what it is to consist of, I tell you to proceed with the job.” All the Israelites are addressed by the word תעשו, and they all responded, as we know from 39,32. Seeing that in this verse we are dealing with a command, and instruction, the people are addressed in direct speech: “you are to do.”
   
   25,10 ועשו ארון, “they shall construct an ark.” This refers to the Israelites referred to in verse 2. When the Torah switches to direct speech in the following verses, making it sound as if these commandments were all addressed to Moses personally, this must be understood in terms of Moses representing the entire Jewish people. The reason that the Torah first employed a plural mode was to encourage all the Israelites to take an active part in the making of the Tabernacle by contributing of their wealth, so that their participation in a sacred undertaking would guarantee each one of them a share in the Torah. However, only skilled people could take part in fashioning the parts and the furnishings.
   Actually 3 separate arks were made. The outer and inner one were made of gold, whereas the middle ark was of acacia wood. The reason that the Torah does not use the expression וצפית אותו זהב, “you are to overlay it with gold,” is that the ark was enclosed only from 5 out of 6 sides, the top remaining open, until the lid was placed on it, as a separate part.
   
   25,12. על ארבע פעמותיו, “on its four corners.” <i>Rashi,</i> following Onkelos<i>,</i> understands the word פעמות as referring to the four corners of the ark, and suggests that these rings were fastened at the upper third of the ark close to the כפורת, the lid. There were altogether only four such rings. When the Torah writes later ושתי טבעות וגו', these are not additional rings, but the reference is to two out of the four rings being fastened on one of the sides of the ark.
   Nachmanides writes that there certainly were not more than four rings, but that he cannot agree with <i>Rashi</i> that these rings were fastened in the upper third of the ark, something he considers physically impossible, as it is a well known fact that the higher the rings for the staves were positioned the more difficult would it be for the carriers of the ark to carry their load. 
   [this editor has seen a calculation by the late Rabbi Eliyahu Ki Tov, of sainted memory, that the ark with its combined content weighed approx 39000kg. If so, it could only be lifted with the help of a miracle, and Nachmanides’ concern is of no practical significance. Ed.] A second argument by Nachmanides against the view of <i>Rashi,</i> is that it is far more dignified that more of the ark would be exposed to view when it was being transported, seeing it was borne on the shoulders of the sons of Kehat. [I find this argument also irrelevant as the ark, in common with all the other furnishings was covered by blue woolen cloth, and thus not visible to the people at large while it was being transported. Ed.]
   The following is the commentary on the location of the rings. by my late father of sainted memory the רא'ש.  “Personally, I prefer <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary to that of Nachmanides, seeing that the Talmud in tractate <i>Shabbat</i> chapter 8 states that if someone carries a load on the Sabbath more than 10 <i>tefachim</i> (100 cm) above ground he is guilty of carrying in the public domain on the Sabbath, the reason being that the sons of Kehat carried the ark at a level higher than that. [This in itself is an unusual <i>halachah</i> as the domain known as רשות הרבים, the public domain, is not considered as such at a level above 10 <i>tefachim.</i> However, since all the details of forbidden activities on the Sabbath are directly derived from what was forbidden on the Sabbath for the Israelites in the desert, this anomaly resulted. Ed.] The Talmud derives this from the fact that according to the measurements given in the Torah, the height of the ark at one and a half cubits was 9 <i>tefachim</i> without the lid, which was an additional <i>tefach</i> thick. It is derived from there that any load that is transported by means of staves, (such as the ark<i>)</i> has the staves affixed at the juncture of the first and the second third from the top. The rationale given in the Talmud is that the major part of the height of the ark would be above the level of the shoulder height of the carriers, would be in constant state of swinging to and fro, a most uncomfortable if not impossible manner of transporting such a heavy load. On the other and, when two thirds of the height of the ark was below the shoulder height of the Kehatites carrying it, the task of carrying it would be much easier.
   I believe (<i>Rosh speaking)</i> that there were not 4 but 8 rings, 4 small rings attached to the 4 corners, in order to enable the ark to be properly positioned. There were another 4 rings along the respective sides each about one quarter of the distance from the respective corners. They were attached to the sides forming the width of the ark. The staves of which the Torah writes, were inserted through these latter 4 rings along the sides. This explains why in connection with the first 4 rings the Torah added the words על ארבע פעמותיו, whereas no mention of these corners is made in connection with the second set of 4 rings that were attached along the walls of the ark.
   Ibn Ezra writes that wherever else the wordפעמות  appears, it refers to legs. He quotes verses from Isaiah, Psalms, and Song of Songs, to prove his point. He therefore concludes that the ark had legs attached to its four corners, and that it would have been disgraceful for such a holy vessel as the ark to be simply resting on the floor of the Tabernacle, [especially as the “floor” apparently was not even a carpet over the desert sand. Ed.] The four rings by which the ark was carried, were attached near the bottom, immediately above the legs. The other 4 rings were decorative, much higher than the ones by means of which the ark was carried.
   Nachmanides, while agreeing that the word פעמות appears elsewhere in our Scriptures always as meaning ”feet,” comes to the conclusion that it means the steps taken by the feet here, but that the feet referred to were those of the priests carrying the ark [through the Jordan river, for instance compare Joshua 4,15 Ed.] The Torah thereby hints that the rings were attached at the corners at the bottom of the ark, the length of the ark faced the eastern wall of the Tabernacle, whereas the rings faced north, one at the north east corner and the other at the northwestern corner. The two southern rings were exactly opposite them at the southeast and southwest corners respectively. The feet of the priests would move between the positions of the rings.
   
   25,21. ואל הארון תתן, “and you are to place within the ark, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason why this verse appears to repeat what has been written already in verse 16, is to tell us that the Tablets were to be placed inside the ark even before the lid was placed on it. I might have thought otherwise that only after the lid had been constructed was the ark considered complete enough to house the Tablets. After that the lid would be placed on the ark.
   I do not understand what <i>Rashi</i> is saying. It is the most obvious thing that the Tablets could not have been placed inside the ark unless the lid was off at the time. Perhaps <i>Rashi</i> meant to say that the lid was not to be put on the ark at all, not even in order to move it from one site to another, unless the Tablets had already been placed inside it.
   Nachmanides, referring to <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary, writes that if indeed our verse is an instruction, this sounds most illogical; it would be far more likely that the Torah would instruct not to put the Tablets into an as yet incomplete piece of furniture, and only after the ark had been fitted with the lid were the Tablets to be placed inside. After all, the Torah writes that the Tablets are to placed inside the ark, and the ark is not called “ark,” unless it has been fitted with the lid first. Nachmanides also questions the words מעל הכפורת אשר על ארון העדות, “from above the lid, which is on top of the ark of the testimony.” Why would this information have to be repeated? We know that the cherubs were part of the lid, the כפורת! He therefore explains that seeing the Torah had neither explained the need for the cherubs, nor why they had to have their wingspans extended <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> each other, it is explained now that the voice of G’d when He spoke to Moses would appear to emanate from precisely this spot between the extended wings of the cherubs on top of the lid of the ark.
   Keeping all this in mind, the Torah repeats that seeing that the <i>Shechinah</i> will speak to Moses from between the outstretched wings of the cherubs, it is fitting that they are placed on the equivalent of a “throne,” כסא הכבוד. This “throne” for the <i>Shechinah</i> on earth, is the Holy Ark, when it is the repository of the Tablets that had been written by G’d Himself.
   Some commentators think that the reason the line was repeated is simply to teach that the first set of Tablets, the ones Moses had broken, were also to be placed inside the same Ark.
   
   25,23. ועשית שלחן, “you are to construct a table;” the reason is that the table is the symbol of wealth, honour, distinction, grandeur. 
   Nachmanides writes that the significance of placing the table in the Tabernacle lies in it being a reminder that all material blessings are channeled to us from its original source, from G’d, ever since He created the world. However, in order for that blessing to continue and to grow, it must have some root that it can draw on. The table represents this root. The matter became evident when the prophet Elisha asked the woman whose creditors were threatening to take her children as slaves in settlement of her deceased husband’s debts, (Kings II 4,1) “what can I do for you?” Seeing that all she had was the remnants of a small jar of oil, he told her: “get yourself some containers from your neighbours first.” After she had done so, Elisha used the existing oil to fill all the containers. The lesson we learn from that story is that even a blessing must have something it can focus on, something of substance in this world. Something similar was demonstrated by the prophet Elijah, Elisha’s mentor in Kings I 17,16. The table on which the show-breads were stacked, fulfilled the same function on behalf of the entire Jewish people. Our sages illustrated the effectiveness of this heavenly blessing channeled through the show-breads by stating that any priest who ate as little as the size of a bean from these show-breads found that he was completely sated.
   
   25,29. ועשית קערותיו, “you will make its dishes, etc.” Onkelos translates that which <i>Rashi</i> describes as קערות, the forms in which the show-breads were baked (iron forms, and subsequently displayed), golden forms, as being the מנקיות. In a dispute on the subject, in the משנה, (compare <i>Tossaphot</i> 96,b commencing with the words לא היה) Onkelos decides in favour of the view of the sage who considers the מנקיות as being sort of branch-like semi-open tubes, מכילתא, in Aramaic. The reason advanced by the author for his view is that these מנקיות supported the weight of the forms in which the show-breads were displayed on the table, especially the highest layer of the show-breads. The source, linguistically speaking, is the phraseהכיל ,נלאתי  in Jeremiah 6,11, which means: “I am exhausted and cannot contain it anymore.”
   Nachmanides, not assuming that the word may have an Aramaic origin, quotes numerous verses in Scripture where the word means: “supporting something.” He explains that what Onkelos means is that these are the forms in which the show-breads had been baked, and, due to their thinness, they could not be allowed to lie there without being enclosed as during the seven days that each bread stayed on the table from one Sabbath to the next, they would have broken up into small pieces without such support. The Talmud speaks of three kinds of forms, one of which was exactly matching the dimensions of the bread, i.e. the dough that was baked in them; these were the ones called here מנקיות. In Aramaic they are called מכילתא, as they had to be true to the measurements of the dough. Incidentally, Onkelos translates the words איפת צדק, “a true measure,” as מכילין דקשוט. (Leviticus 19,36) This was a form, presumably made of wood or clay, in which the dough was placed prior to being transferred for baking into a similar form made of iron. Finally, there was a form made of gold, to which the breads were transferred after having cooled off, and they were placed on display on the two parallel racks above the table. The measurements of these latter forms did not have to be so meticulously tight fitting. The main purpose of the latter forms was to act as containers. 
   The קשוות is a term which includes the various other small utensils including the shelving tubes. Perhaps they were named thus as they were meant to prevent the breaking up of these breads, and the letter ש in this word is used in lieu of the letter צ. We find a similar substitution of the letter ש for the letter צ in Psalms 65,9 וייראו יושבי מאותותיך, “the dwellers at the far corners of the earth were awed by Your signs (miracles).” 
   The word מנקיות describes a certain measuring cup, or something similar; they are called thus to symbolize that they are accurate, not deceptive, i.e. איפה צדק “true measure.” (Lev. 19,36) The owners will be perceived as free from sin, נקי, as they do not use these devices to enrich themselves by deceiving their customers. I find it difficult to understand, if that were the meaning, why the מנקיות should not have been mentioned first.
   
   25,30. לחם פנים, “show-bread.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the name פנים, faces, to mean that these breads had two ”faces,” i.e. that the manner in which they were displayed enabled people from opposite sides of the Tabernacle to see them clearly. He accepts the view of the sage who describes the manner in which they were displayed as resembling a box that has split open. According to the view that these breads, when in their forms, resembled the shape of a ship, this cannot be the meaning of the word פנים.
   Ibn Ezra explains simply that the breads were called thus as the Torah itself describes G’d as viewing them as constantly in His presence, i.e. enjoying His attention,לפני תמיד.
   
   25,33. כן לששת הקנים היוצאים מן המנורה, “likewise for the six branches that protrude forth from the <i>Menorah.”</i> Seeing that thus far only two of these “arms” have been mentioned, the Torah had to add the word “כן,” “likewise, similarly, i.e. that the same pattern applied to all the six arms. In the verse following, (35) where all six “arms” have been mentioned specifically, there was no need for the extra word כן. This was necessary only where I could have thought that a different six “arms” were referred to. We did need to be told that the knobs, almond shaped decorations, and blossom shaped decorations, were all to be integral on each of these “arms.”
   
   25,38. ומחתותיה, “and its pans.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that these “pans,” were meant to accommodate the wicks after they had burnt out.
   Other commentators claim that these “pans” were small receptacles in which the oil for each of the lamps was placed. This seems unlikely, as it would pose the question what does the word נרותיה in verse 37 mean?
   
   25,39. ככר זהב טהור, “one talent of pure gold.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the Torah means that the <i>menorah</i> including all its auxiliary vessels, should weigh neither more nor less than one talent of gold. 
   Nachmanides comments that when looked at from the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, <i>Rashi</i> is certainly correct. However, if it is so, this poses the question how much the chunk of gold known as the <i>menorah</i> was to weigh by itself?  Why would the Torah not have given us this detail concerning the by far largest part of this major piece of furniture in the Sanctuary? The Torah might at least have revealed how much the total of all the auxiliaries weighed, and we would have been able to calculate how much the <i>menorah</i> itself weighed? By not revealing this detail we might even assume that the various auxiliaries together weighed more than the <i>menorah</i> itself<i>!</i>
   When perusing the discussion about all this in the Talmud, <i>Menachot</i> 85, it appears that <i>Rashi</i> departed from the views expressed there. Apparently, the words ואת כל כליה, “and all its auxiliary vessels,” in our verse, do not refer to vessels constructed separately, not part of the chunk of gold, but refer to the basic auxiliaries such as the lamps which were also part of the single cast chunk of gold which constituted the <i>menorah</i>. If, in spite of the fact that they were an integral part of the <i>menorah,</i> the Torah describes these lamps as נרותיה ואת כל, clearly implying that they were subordinate to the <i>menorah</i> itself, the reason is that all other candelabras that we are familiar with, always have these lamps attached as a detachable auxiliary to the candlestick itself. They deserve a name in their own right precisely because as a rule they are separate attachments.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of the line ככר זהב טהור יעשה אותה ואת כל כליה, is that even all the auxiliary vessels of the <i>menorah</i> were made of pure gold. Seeing that it was quite unusual for vessels constantly in touch with fire to have been made of gold, the Torah, in describing the weight of the gold used for the single cast <i>menorah</i> describes the weight as pertaining to אותה, “it,” before including the auxiliary vessels, that, while made of gold, were not part of that talent of pure gold described previously.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the Torah mentions the weight of the <i>menorah</i>, whereas no such weights were given for the Holy Ark, for instance, or for the Table, for that matter, is that it was the only one of the furnishings in the Sanctuary which consisted of pure gold only, both the Ark and the Table were only overlaid with gold. Moreover, the Torah was interested in informing us in an oblique manner that the maximum size of such a <i>menorah</i> that could be fashioned out of a single talent of pure gold was well known, so that the Torah did not need to spell out the height of the <i>menorah,</i> though the sages did tell us the measurements i.e. eighteen <i>tefachim.</i> There was also no need to describe the size of the crown-like borders around the Table and the Holy Ark, as they were thin and were directly attached to the Table and Ark, respectively.
   Although, according to our sages the thickness of the lid for the Ark, the כפורת, was one <i>tefach</i>, there was still no need to mention the size or weight, as it too corresponded precisely to the measurements of the Ark which the Torah has provided. Seeing, that the basic size of the <i>menorah</i> was not spelled out, the Torah, giving us the weight of it, enabled the sages to calculate its size on that basis. The height of the menorah was such that it had to provide illumination for the surface of the Table when the show-breads would be placed there and would be exchanged on the following week.
   As to the reason why <i>Rashi</i> quoted the <i>Midrash</i> according to which the word תיעשה in the passive mode means that the <i>menorah</i> emerged from the crucible on its own, i.e. without having been cast by Betzalel in a specific mould, you may interpret this as not conflicting with the view expressed in the <i>Midrash</i> that G’d showed Moses a precise image of what the <i>menorah</i> would look like, but that Moses still had difficulty envisioning the construction of the <i>menorah</i> even after G’d had shown him the vision referred to.
   
   26,17.שתי ידות לקרש האחד, “two tenons per beam.” 
   Nachmanides, in commenting on the <i>baraitha</i> (<i>Shabbat</i> 98) quoted by <i>Rashi,</i> according to which each of these tenons had been left exposed after a quarter of its width had been removed on either side, so that the combined width of the two parallel tenons would be zero, and there would not have remained any part of the tenon to insert into the silver sockets. one cannot understand the <i>baraitha</i> at face value. There was no specific measurement prescribed for the lowest cubit of the beams to be made to fit into the silver sockets. The meaning of the word רביע in the <i>baraitha,</i> is that enough of the sides of both tenons had to be shaved off to enable them to fit inside the silver sockets, but at the same time forming a continuous line, flush with the outside of these sockets. The same amount of wood had to be shaved off in between the two tenons, seeing that each beam was fitted into two sockets.
   Personally, I think that apart from the <i>baraitha,</i> there is no problem, seeing that the words רביע מכאן ורביע מכאן, “a quarter from one side and a quarter from the other side,” do not refer to the thickness of the beams, but to the thickness of the hollow walls of the silver sockets. Seeing that the thickness of these was minimal, the <i>baraitha</i> describes this as רביע to describe an insignificant amount. 
   
   משלבות אשה אל אחותה, “parallel to one another.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the two tenons at the bottom of each beam were parallel and matching one another, the Torah mentioning that they were not one protruding further than the other from their respective outer parameters, i.e 6x9. <i>tefachim.</i>
   Nachmanides explains the word שליבה, as “projection,” as the tenons of the rungs of the ladder which fit into the mortise of the sides of the ladder’s frame. The adjoining beam would have a similarly shaped projection so that they could dovetail into one another and make a solid joint. Each beam at the top would have two such projections.
   
   26,24. ויחדיו יהיו תמים אל ראשו, “and together shall they match at the top.” To the ring which linked two beams each together after an incision the thickness of the ring was grooved near the outer rim of each beam.
   Nachmanides adds that he does not understand why the Torah did not mention that there were a total number of 20 such golden rings just as there were 20 beams, and why the making of these grooves to accommodate the rings was not mentioned either.
   Perhaps, the expression אל הטבעת האחת, “into the one ring, with the definitive article ה in front of the word טבעת, ring, is a reference to the accepted method of builders to fit adjoining beams with such rings. The Torah uses a similar definite article when describing the bolts, בריחים, when it speaks about הבריח התיכון, “the central bolt.” Normally, seeing that we had not heard about such a bolt before, it would not qualify for the description: “the central bold.” The fact that people were familiar with how such structures were joined together, especially, portable ones such as the Tabernacle, enabled the Torah to condense its description of the details.
   The <i>baraitha</i> in <i>Shabbat</i> quoted above appears to understand the rings mentioned here as the ones affixed to the sides of the beams, the ones through which the בדים, staves were inserted to insure that the beams did not move in any direction. The same applies to the manner in which the hooks of the curtains in the courtyard of the Tabernacle are described, where we also would not be able to account for the use of the definitive article ה otherwise. [compare 27,10] According to this interpretation the Torah would not have mentioned the bolts affixed to the exterior sides of the beams at all.
   
   26,33. והבאת שמה מבית לפרוכת את ארון העדות, “and you shall bring there, beyond the dividing curtain, the ark housing the Tablets of Testimony.” Moses was not commanded at this time to do this, i.e. to place the dividing curtain underneath the golden clasps, קרסים, and only subsequently to bring the Ark into the Holy of Holies, beyond where the dividing curtain had been hung. This is not the time and place when the Torah would issue directives for matters other than the ones that concerned the construction of the Tabernacle and its furnishings.
   In light of this, also the words ונתת את הכפורת על ארון העדות בקודש הקדשים, (verse 34) “you are to place the lid on the ark of Testimony in the Holy of Holies,” are not to be understood as to the order in which the Tabernacle would be assembled. On the contrary, when the directives for assembling the Tabernacle were issued, the Torah specifically directs that the lid be placed on the Ark only after it had already been placed in the Holy of Holies. (Exodus 40,3) This is also repeated when the assembly of the dividing curtain is described in 39,34-35. 39,33-38 clearly shows that the furnishings were installed in the Tabernacle before the respective curtains were hung. Therefore, the meaning of the words in our verse is that it is mandatory to arrange for the dividing curtain to be beneath the clasps holding it in place so that at all times the Holy Ark would be within the Holy of Holies. The sole function of the dividing curtain was to separate two domains of differing degrees of holiness, i.e. the Sanctuary, היכל, and the קדשי קדשים, the Holy of Holies. It was important for us to know that the lid of the Ark, כפורת, with its cherubs mounted on it, the source from which G’d’s voice would address Moses, be completely within this Holy of Holies all times.
   
   27,10. ועמודיו עשרים, “and its pillars twenty.” The Torah fails to mention the raw material these pillars were made of. Presumably, we are to deduce this by comparing them to other pillars, such as the ones at the entrance to the Sanctuary, and the pillars that supported the dividing curtain. These were all made from acacia wood, expressly stated. (26,32) Also the fact that these pillars were overlaid with silver is not mentioned here, although it is mentioned in <i>Parshat Vayakhel</i>, (36,36)
   
   Parshat  Tetzaveh
   
   27,20. ואתה תצוה, “and you are to issue instructions, etc.”
   Moses has not been mentioned by name in this portion, seeing that he had said to G’d that He should erase his name from His Book. (Exodus 32,32) Although Moses had said this conditionally, i.e. if G’d were to kill the Jewish people as punishment for the sin of the golden calf, we have a rule that a curse of a sage, even if uttered only as something conditionally, is taken by G’d at face value. (<i>Zohar Chadash</i>, 60)
   Other commentators explain the absence of the mention of Moses’ name here as due to the subject matter following being the priestly garments of Aaron, the High Priest. Originally, Moses himself had been slated to be the High Priest. The fact that this honour was now being given to Aaron, might have produced a certain amount of regret on Moses’ part if he had heard his name mentioned as being part of transferring this rank to his brother. To forestall as much as possible any feelings of sorrow on Moses’ part, the Torah referred to him anonymously. 
   After the Torah had completed its instructions about the building of the Tabernacle, it gave directives concerning the illumination that was to be part of the daily service in the Sanctuary. The reason that the Torah mentions the priesthood of Aaron at this juncture, is because he was the one who would attend to lighting the <i>menorah</i> on a regular basis. Seeing that the Torah had already revealed the status of Aaron as the High Priest, it continued by describing the special garments to be worn by the High Priest when he was not inside the Sanctuary. This is also the logical place when the details of the golden altar, the altar on which the incense was offered are described another task performed by Aaron both in the morning and in the afternoon of every day. It was important to inform us that the golden altar did not serve the purpose of sprinkling the blood of sacrificial animals upon it.
   
   ואתה תצוה, according to Ibn Ezra, Moses was to issue a directive to the community of the Jewish people at large, to provide top quality olive oil for the lamps on the <i>menorah</i>.  The community at large was similarly instructed to donate the funds for the mandatory daily communal offerings, described in the Torah by G’d as קרבני לחמי, ”My offering, My food.” (Numbers 28,2)
   Nachmanides writes that seeing that in connection with the donations of the materials for the Tabernacle the Torah had constantly added the word: ועשית, “you are to make out of it, etc.,” so here too the idea of determining which oil qualified for lighting the <i>menorah</i> was not left to the good judgment of the community at large, but the Torah writes ויקחו אליך, “they will present it to you,” i.e. you will then examine it if it measures up to the required degree of refinement. One of the reasons the Torah did not leave the refining of this oil up to each individual Israelite, was that they did not possess the tools to refine the oil to that degree. They could only donate what they had taken with them out of Egypt, if it had remained in good condition. In fact, the princes brought the kind of refined olive oil fit for kindling the <i>menorah.</i> The meaning of the words את בני ישראל, [if they did not have such oil, was Moses to command people who did not have it to bring it as a contribution? Ed.] is that Moses himself was to accept from the Israelites whatever grade of olive oil they were willing to donate for the cause. The words are to be understood in the same way as the opening line in <i>Parshat Terumah</i>, מאת כל איש אשר ידבנו לבו<i>,</i> “from every person whose generous heart moves him to donate, etc.”
   
   ויקחו אליך, “they shall take it to you,” i.e. for your benefit, seeing you are charged with the task of having the Tabernacle constructed, G’d is at pains to make clear that if the Israelites were not going to provide oil for the <i>menorah,</i> He, being G’d, certainly did not need them to illuminate any space for Him, seeing that He is the source of all illumination. In fact, after the Tabernacle was erected, it was found that the light of the <i>menorah</i> inside the windowless Sanctuary provided illumination also for the surrounding area.
   
   להעלות נר תמיד, “to kindle on a permanent basis.” According to <i>Rashi</i> when a light burns all night long, it is considered as burning תמיד, i.e. all the time that there is a need for it. <i>Rashi’s</i> proof is derived from the expression עולת תמיד in Numbers 28,7 which cannot mean that such a burnt offering was being burned up on the altar on an ongoing basis, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, but meant that it was a regular sacrifice, offered on a daily basis, one in the morning and one in the evening.
   Other commentators understand the word תמיד as meaning that the other lamps on the six arms of the <i>menorah</i> were to be kindled by drawing on the already kindled נר מערבי, the lamp on the central shaft of the <i>menorah.</i> That particular lamp was kept alight around the clock.
   
   27,21. מערב עד בוקר, “from evening until morning.” This is an instruction to supply sufficient oil to each of the lamps to enable it to keep burning all night long without need for a refill of oil. The amount of oil provided was a constant, i.e. half a log, however allowance was made for the nights being longer in the winter by providing thinner or thicker wicks in accordance with the seasonal factors involved.
   
   28,1. נדב ואביהו אלעזר ואתמר, although the Torah had already indicated that this task was to be performed by “Aaron and his sons,” and we know the names of these sons of Aaron, the Torah names each one of them individually once more, in order to show that although both Aaron and his sons had been anointed with the oil of anointing, such had not been the case with Pinchos, Eleazar’s son, and that therefore at this time Pinchos was not included in the priests qualified to service the <i>menorah.</i> Once a priest had been ordained, his offspring born subsequently did not require  anointing in order to be fully qualified as a priest.
   
   28,2. ועשית בגדי קודש, “you are to make vestments to be worn during holy service.” Moses was not expected to fashion these garments himself, of course; this is a directive that he instruct the artisans charged with that task to insure that the vestments they would make would correspond to the details given in the Torah, Just as the skilled labourers constructing the Tabernacle itself were instructed by him personally, although Betzalel was the supervisor of the whole project to carry out their duties in consonance with the details recorded in <i>Parshat Terumah</i>. 
   
     לכבוד ולתפארת, “for glory and splendour.” Nachmanides writes that this means that by wearing the garments described forthwith the wearer would enjoy glory and splendour in the eyes of those who saw him wearing these garments. The reason was that the garments that will be described now were all of the type worn by Royalty only. Already when Yaakov had a tunic, כתנת, made for Joseph, this was meant to distinguish the wearer, to set him apart from less distinguished peers. The מעיל, robe, was similarly a garment worn only by Royalty or other highly distinguished individuals. This is why the sages decreed that after the collapse of the independent Jewish state, grooms under the wedding canopy were no longer allowed to adorn themselves with turbans, and the brides were not wearing crowns on their heads. (compare <i>Maimonides Taanit</i>, 5,15. based on Ezekiel 21,32). The headgear of the priests is also referred to as פארי מגבעות, as the kind of hat conferring distinction on the wearer. The breastplate too is a garment worn by Royalty. They were usually made from blue wool, gold threads, as we know from Daniel 5,7 (et al) והמונכא די דהבא על צואריה, “will wear purple and a golden chain around his neck.” The ציץ, the golden headband, corresponds to the crown worn by kings. Their crowns are made of a combination of blue and red, purple wool and gold. In Psalms 45,15 we are told כל כבודה בת מלך פנימה ממשבצות זהב לבושה, “the royal princess, her dress embroidered with golden mountings,” etc. Finally, תכלת, the wool dyed a royal blue, was also the colour worn only by Royalty.
     It is also possible that the meaning of the words לכבוד ולתפארת is a way of saying that seeing that the High Priest is to perform service of the Lord, he is to do so while clad in suitably decorative attire, all in honour of <i>Hashem.</i> [the problem with this interpretation is that the High Priest was not allowed to wear these vestments inside the Temple, only outside of it. Ed.] The Biblical verse supporting such an interpretation would be Psalms 69,19 כי תפארת עוזמו אתה, “for You are the glory of its strength.” 
     
     28,4. חושן ואפוד ומעיל וכתונת תשבץ ואבנט, “a breastplate, an <i>ephod</i>, a robe, a tunic of chequer work, a turban, and a sash.” All the vestments have been mentioned here with the exception of the ציץ, the golden headband, and the trousers. It is possible that seeing that the Torah wrote that Moses was to address כל חכמי לב, “all the wise-hearted people,” there was no need to mention the two last mentioned garments, as making them did not involve any special skill.
     
     28,5. והם יקחו את הזהב, “and they shall take the gold, etc.” Up until this point all the directives had been addressed to Moses personally, whereas now G’d commanded that Moses address all the wise-hearted people to fashion the vestments, therefore the Torah had to continue with והם יקחו וגו', that these wise-hearted people had to get hold of the raw materials they were to employ when making these vestments. They would receive them directly from the donors and there would be no need for an accounting of the quantity of such materials handed over to the artisans entrusted with the work. They were all trustworthy. The same principle also applied to all the other people engaged in the construction of the Tabernacle. We know this from the fact that the only time mention is made of these donations being handed over by the people was on the first day they had been given such an opportunity, and Moses already had to stop them from binging additional contributions as the Tabernacle’s needs had already been oversubscribed. (compare 35,21 and 36,7) It is clear from there that the people brought their contributions directly to the artisans appointed to convert the materials into the respective furnishings of garments.
     
     28,30. ונתת אל חשן המשפט את האורים ואת התומים, “you are to place within the folds of the breastplate the <i>Urim</i> and the <i>Tumim</i>.” 
     Nachmanides writes that Ibn Ezra,in an effort to be very astute, wrote that the <i>Urim</i> and<i> Tumim</i> were something constructed by human hands, by artisans. (compare Leviticus 8,8 where Moses is described as placing the <i>Urim</i> and the <i>Tumim</i> inside the breastplate after Aaron already wore the breast plate). He clearly thought that these <i>Urim</i> and <i>Tumim</i> were something man made of silver and/or gold. He appears to have thought that these mysterious inserts were similar to what the astrologers use in order to understand communications from their zodiac signs.
     [Before translating the scathing criticism by Nachmanides here on the personality of Ibn Ezra, the reader must be cautioned that the commentary by Ibn Ezra found on this verse in most editions of the <i>Chumash</i> is a one liner, not as in the version of the Ibn Ezra’s commentary published by Mossad Harav Kook by Asher Weisman in three volumes in 1976. Anyone reading that version (at the end of volume 2, in the so-called short version) will come away with a totally different impression than if he had read only the standard version available in most editions of the <i>Chumash.</i> Ed.]
  (continuing Nachmanides’ commentary) Ibn Ezra said absolutely nothing, but the <i>Urim</i> and <i>Tumim</i> were in accordance with<i> Rashi’s</i> commentary a piece of parchment on which the Holy name of <i>Hashem</i> had been written and which Moses inserted between the folds of the cloth supporting the <i>Choshen.</i> The proof of all this is that we do not find a single mention in the Torah of the <i>Urim vetumim</i> as being one or two of the components of either the Tabernacle or the vestments of the priest being constructed by any of the artisans who fashioned all the other items. When the making of the <i>ephod</i> [to which the breastplate was attached. Ed.] was mentioned as well as that of the breast plate, (39,2-6), there is not a single word about the <i>Urim</i> and <i>Tumim</i> having been constructed. Neither is there a mention anywhere of the people having contributed from their materials for the construction of the <i>Urim vetumim.</i> 
  We are dealing here with a mystical element, the apparent function of the Holy Name of <i>Hashem,</i> or a variety of them, being concealed within the folds of the breastplate enabling the letters engraved on the 12 gemstones which decorated the breastplate, to flash in response to queries directed by the wearer, the High Priest, to G’d, queries to which he required a direct answer from heaven as the <i>Sanhedrin,</i> Supreme tribunal<i>,</i> was not competent enough to answer them. One such example is found in Judges 1,1 when Joshua wanted to know which tribe should lead in the attack against the Canaanites. It is quite possible that these names of G’d which Moses wrote on the parchment which he inserted in the folds of the breast plate, were known as such to the elite of the Jewish people at the time, and that this would explain the use of the definitive article used here, i.e. האורים, התומים, something which is never used unless the subject is a known quantity, a phenomenon that at least some people are familiar with. This may also explain why David possessed an <i>ephod</i> comparable to that which Moses had in his time, and why we read that in <i>Nov</i> the city of priests (whom King Shaul murdered) there were 85 priests wearing such a type of <i>ephod.</i> (compare Samuel I 22,18)  These priests were all trained by prophets, and possibly they used their <i>ephods</i> to address inquiries to G’d on certain occasions.
   
  28,31. ועשית את מעיל האפוד, “and you are to make the robe of the <i>ephod,</i> etc<i>.” Rashi</i> explains that the robe was a kind of shirt. Nachmanides queries the expressionעוטה , wrapping, used in connection with the robe, as this expression certainly seems out of place in connection with a shirt. The word means to drape (oneself) as in a <i>tallit,</i> a garment which envelopes the body completely. It has neither sleeves, nor a collar, a cutout for the neck as described in verse 32, and called פי תחרא. This particular robe, according to the Torah’s directives, had to be of weaver’s work, ארוג, embroidered, and the wearer would slip it on overhead and would place his arms through the armpits provided. At the front it had two flaps that could be opened or closed according to the wishes of the wearer. We know this from Samuel I 15,27 where King Sha-ul is described as grabbing hold of the flap of the prophet’s Samuel’s robe
   
  28,34. פעמון זהב ורמון, “a golden bell and a pomegranate.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the Torah speaks of two distinctly separate kinds of ornaments, one looked like a bell, the other like pomegranate.
   Nachmanides writes that if that were correct the “pomegranates” would not have served any purpose that we can understand. If we were to understand that the “pomegranates” were decorative only, why would he not have made them like apples, but made of gold? We must assume that the bells were surrounded on the outside by these “pomegranates,” the “pomegranates” being hollow, they were made to look like unripe small “pomegranates” that had not “opened” yet, and the bells were hidden within their cavities, but could be seen partially from the outside.
     
   28,37. ושמת אותו על פתיל תכלת, “you shall fasten it to a cord made of blue wool.” <i>Rashi</i> points out that instead of the verb שים, i.e. ושמת, used by the Torah here, the Torah uses the verb נתן, i.e. ויתנו, in Exodus 39,31. Not only that, but here the ציץ. is to be fastened to Aaron’s מצנפת, turban, though worn on his forehead, מצח, whereas in <i>Parshat Pekudey</i> it is described as being worn over the Turban.
   [<i>Rashi, in</i> discussing the implications at length, something that Nachmanides assumes the reader has already familiarised himself with, therefore comes to the conclusion that there were three locations on the ציץ to each of which a blue cord was attached in order to securely place the ציץ in such a way that there was room for Aaron to put on his phylacteries on the skin of his forehead. Ed.]
   Nachmanides expresses his amazement at <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, claiming that clearly the Torah mentions only a single blue wool cord in connection with the headband. According to <i>Rashi</i>, in Nachmanides’ view, there would have been six such cords. Furthermore, he accuses <i>Rashi</i> as unjustifiably lumping together verses that describe the instruction to make the headband, with verses (<i>Parshat Pekudey</i>) that describe the manner in which the directive was actually carried out. If indeed there were as many blue wool cords as described by <i>Rashi,</i> what would have been the purpose of the blue cord mentioned here which was in the center of the ציץ? According to <i>Rashi,</i> the headband had already been firmly secured in place behind Aaron’s head, at the nape of his neck!
   We must conclude that there was only a single such cord made of blue wool, this cord was stretched on Aaron’s forehead from one ear to the other and the headband itself had two holes in it at either of its two extremities, the cord being threaded through these holes so that the headband was securely tied together by means of this cord at the nape of Aaron’s neck. Simultaneously, the turban Aaron wore on his head covered this blue cord at the level of Aaron’s brain; whereas at the back of his head the turban covered this cord down to the level of the nape of the neck. In the front, the ציץ was worn so that it covered a major part of Aaron’s forehead, from ear to ear. The result of all this was that the rear of Aaron’s head was enclosed by the turban from ear to ear, whereas the front was covered by the golden headband from ear to ear. This is the meaning of the line: ושמת המצנפת על ראשו, i.e. “on the upper part of his head,” not like the מגבעות, the caps worn by the ordinary priests that enclosed the entire head, as we know from 29,9 וחבשת להם מגבעות, “you shall wrap the headdresses on them.” The meaning is that the entire head be covered by these מגבעות, headdresses, caps. As to what the Torah writes ונתת את נזר הקודש על המצנפת, “you are to place the crown of sanctity on the turban,” (29,6) the meaning is that that the ציץ is to be connected, tied, to the turban. There is no need to belabour the switch from the word ושמת to ונתת, and <i>vice versa</i>, as the Torah did not choose these two expressions for such interpretations, just as once the Torah writes that ויתנו עליו פתיל תכלת, whereas another time it writes ושמת אותו על פתיל תכלת. The variations of the wording teach that as long as the principal purpose of fastening the headband both to the forehead and to the turban was accomplished, minor changes in the procedure did not matter. We find similar variations in language of the Torah in connection with the consecration offerings in chapter 29, where the Torah writes in verse 3: ונתת אותם על סל אחד והקרבת, “you are to place them on one basket (the loaves of bread) and present them as an offering, etc.,” where the word על does not mean “on,” but “inside.” Similarly, there are numerous occasions when the preposition על actually is used instead of the preposition אל. Here too it is quite in order to understand the words ושמת אותו על פתיל תכלת, as if the Torah had written ונתת אותו אל פתיל תכלת, “you are to fasten it to a cord of blue wool.” The fact is that the cord was fastened to the headband, ציץ. Inversely, the headband was also fastened to the cord made of blue wool. The result was that the cord was on the headband.
   
   28,41. והלבשת אותם את אהרן אחיך ואת בניו אתו, “ you will dress your brother Aaron and his sons with him with them.” Moses was to dress up Aaron and his sons in the garments described previously. The word אתו, normally translated as “with him,” means here that this procedure should be performed with all of them on the same day, just as their anointing took place on the same day.
   
   ומלאת את ידם, “you will inaugurate them.” According to <i>Rashi</i> whenever the expression מלוי ידים occurs, it refers to a kind of consecration, inauguration. The party so described begins a new assignment, one that is a long term assignment, not a short term one.
   Nachmanides explains the words ומלאת את ידם as being similar to מלאת ימים, completing a certain length of preparatory days, such as the nine months of pregnancy, or completing a tour of service, as when Yaakov demanded to be given Rachel as his wife, his reason being described with the words כי מלאו ימי, “the seven years I contracted to work for her are complete..” (Genesis 29,21). We encounter the phrase ובמלאת הימים האלה, “at the completion of these years, etc.” (Esther 1,5) It describes what the occasion was for the party Ahasverus gave to both his ministers, and subsequently to the citizens of Shushan.
   The connection with our consecration is that any non-priest who nonetheless performs service in the Tabernacle, even if he copies the exact procedure performed by the priests, lacks something. This something is added through the anointment to the priesthood of Aaron and his sons, and the garments they wore that were testimony to their qualifications as priests. The ”uniform” completes the act of consecration, officially makes the wearer the appointee to the King’s service, his “guard.” Another element completing this appointment to the priesthood was the איל המלואים, the ram as well as the other offerings listed in chapter 29 which were one-time offerings to mark this occasion. The occasion could not recur, as from that time on the priesthood became a hereditary status. Having offered these sacrifices once, initiated Aaron and his sons into the priesthood, so that their performing similar tasks on behalf of others had become legitimate.
   
   28,43. והיו על אהרן ועל בניו..... ולא ישאו עון ומתו, “they shall be on Aaron and his sons…..so that they shall not bear a sin and die.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this verse is the source of the law that a priest who performs his duties in the Sanctuary without all the appropriate garments is guilty of the death penalty at the hands of heaven. This law applies equally to the High Priest and to the ordinary priest.
   Nachmanides (on 28,35) queries <i>Rashi’s</i> comment by writing that if this were indeed so, the Torah should have written this verse much earlier immediately after all the priestly garments have been listed. Why would such a statement be made when only three of the eight garments have been listed as yet? Furthermore, our verse continues: ובצאתו ולא ימות, “when he leaves the Sanctuary he will not die,” something that has no longer anything to do with any shortcoming in the procedure of doing the sacrificial service, and still the Torah mentions the word “death. He concludes therefore that the death penalty applies only to priests not wearing trousers when performing their service in the Temple. This raises the question whence does the Talmud derive the death penalty for priests who perform their service while not wearing their other special garments? (compare <i>Zevachim 18</i>) The Talmud derives it from a different verse. What is clear from the discussion in the Talmud there is that there is no difference which of the priestly garments the priest omitted to wear when it comes to his being guilty of death. 
   The death penalty mentioned in connection with the robe, מעיל, referred only to the ornamental pendants at the lower rim of that robe, the bells and the pomegranates. The reason that the Torah repeated mention of the death penalty in that instance is that seeing that these ornamental pendants did not serve any visible purpose, one might consider them as not essential if unaware that the failure to append them put the life of the High Priest at risk. Moreover, seeing that ordinary Royalty are not known to wear garments with these kinds of ornaments, one might not comprehend how these ornaments symbolized the כבוד ותפארת, the glory and splendour which are the purported effect these garments have on the people seeing the wearer dressed in them.
   The pealing of the bells at the rim of the robe announce that the High Priest is approaching the Sanctuary. It is as if to announce that he has been granted an audience with the <i>Shechinah</i>, similar to the commoner who is granted an audience by a king of flesh and blood, who would not dare to enter the King’s chambers without first being announced. Were he to do so, he too would put his life at risk, as he would be perceived by the king’s guards as planning to assassinate their ruler or otherwise harm him or insult him.
   In the Talmud <i>Yerushalmi</i>, the sages see an allusion in the line  (Leviticus 16,17) וכל אדם לא יהיה באהל מועד, “no other human being is to be in the Sanctuary when the High Priest enters there in order to obtain atonement, etc.,” as including the angels. This is why the approach of the High Priest must be audible. [I assume that the <i>Yerushalmi</i> that author has in mind is in <i>Yuma</i> 5,2 where it is recounted that for the 40 years that the High Priest Shimon Hatzadik officiated on the Day of Atonement, he would see an angel with a face like a human being accompanying him to the Holy of Holies, except for the last time when he entered there. He told his friends that he would die during that year, something he gathered from the fact that on that occasion this angel did not materialize. Ed.] Joseph ordered that every person other than his brothers be removed from his chambers before he revealed himself to them. Similarly, during intimate audiences granted by kings, only the immediately concerned party is permitted to be closeted with the King. [Incidentally, this enabled the judge Ehud to kill King Eglon of Moav. Ed. (compare Genesis 45,2, and Judges 3,20)
   
   29,3. והקרבת אותם בסל, “you are to present them in the basket.” The loaves are dragged in front of the priest; the verse refers to what takes place in front of the entrance to the Sanctuary, something mentioned in the verse following.
   The whole procedure may be understood as follows: “you will present the breads in the basket assigned for this, followed by the bull, and the rams, all of which are brought to the entrance of the Sanctuary by Aaron and his sons.”
   An alternative explanation: the words והקרבת אותם בסל, are not defined more closely at this point, as it is understood that the location which had been designated for this is where the basket containing these breads is to be presented in accordance with instructions issued to the priests. The following verse speaks only about Aaron and his sons, hence Moses is instructed to ensure that they undergo ritual immersion in a ritual bath prior to donning their garments.
   
   29,7. ולקחת את שמן המשחה ויצקת על ראשו, “you will take hold of the oil for anointing and pour it over his head.” 
   Ibn Ezra wrote that this anointing took place before Aaron wore his turban, מצנפת, seeing the oil was poured directly on his head.
   Nachmanides disagrees, seeing that even when the Torah reports the carrying out of these instruction in Leviticus 8,9 the Torah writes (concerning Moses) וישם את המצנפת על ראשו, “he placed the turban on his (Aaron’s) head.” Immediately following this, the Torah writes וישם על המצנפת אל מול פניו את ציץ הזהב, נזר הקודש, “he placed on the turban  toward his face, the golden headband, a crown as symbol of sanctity, etc.” Only after this description of the actual procedure, does he Torah go on in verse 12, to describe the pouring of the oil of anointing on the head of Aaron. We must assume that the turban did not cover the entire surface of Aaron’s head, but that this turban was constructed in such a manner that it left a substantial area of Aaron’s head uncovered, so that the oil of anointing could be poured on even while he was wearing the turban. This corresponds to <i>Rashi’s</i> understanding of the procedure. According to <i>Rashi,</i> the oil was poured on the area where the phylacteries are placed on the head. Naturally, that area of the head was left uncovered.
   
   29, 9. וחגרת אותם אבנט אהרן ובניו, “you shall girdle them with a sash, Aaron as well as his sons.” At first glance, the word אותם appears to refer to Aaron and his sons, and the verse would make a “u–turn” explaining whom Aaron and his sons were to girdle with a sash each.
   Nachmanides writes that if that were the meaning of the verse then the words וחבשת להם מגבעות could not refer to Aaron and his sons, seeing that Aaron did not wear a garment called מגבעת. Moreover, seeing that he was already wearing his turban, how could Moses wrap a מגבעת on top of his head? It is possible to understand the word אותם at the beginning of our verse as referring only to Aaron’s sons, which, in turn would explain why the Torah would have to write once more “Aaron and his sons,” meaning that Moses was to girdle Aaron with a sash just as he had done to his sons. Seeing that both Aaron and his sons wore sashes made of the same material, Aaron’s name was not mentioned at the beginning of the verse. The simple meaning then is that Moses would girdle the sons of Aaron with their respective sashes just as he had done for their father Aaron. Moses was the one who dressed both his brother and his nephews in all the priestly garments on this initial occasion. However, the priests themselves put on their undergarments, the ones which covered their private parts.
   
   29,10. והקרבת את הפר לפני אהל מועד, “you shall bring the bull close to Tent of Meeting.” 
   Nachmanides, in referring to the commentary by Ibn Ezra, writes that according to Ibn Ezra both Aaron and his sons placed their hands firmly (סמיכה) on the bull at the time when he brought it in front of the entrance of the Sanctuary. Seeing that the actual presentation of the bull in front of the entrance of the Sanctuary in verse three (by implication) had already been mentioned, it would not be repeated without adding a new dimension to it, he writes that in his personal opinion all that happened at the entrance to the Sanctuary after the bull, etc., were presented there, was that they received the directive to offer these animals as sacrifices on the altar in the courtyard. The only reason the location is mentioned here again, is to ensure that the slaughtering, etc., would be performed in the areas designated for the priests to perform these procedures. There would have been no need to spell out the placing of their hands on the sacrificial animals, as this is always done immediately before the animal is slaughtered.
   
   29,13. ולקחת את כל החלב המכסה את הקרב, “you will take all the fat membranes which are attached to the innards of the animal, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this refers only to a membrane above the animal’s abdomen. Nachmanides agrees that there certainly is such a membrane there that is part of the חלב mentioned in our verse. However, seeing that the Torah speaks of כל החלב, “all the fat,” this must mean at least two distinct kinds of חלב, i.e. also the fat described in Leviticus 3,3 ואת כל החלב אשר על הקרב. When the Torah reports about these directives having been carried out, no mention is made of the fat usually known as על יותרת הכבד, “the diaphragm with the liver.” (compare verse 22). This also belonged to “all the fat, etc.” It is clear from the mention of יותרת הכבד in verse 22, that the fat membranes mentioned earlier without more precise locations, are those that cover the abdomen.
   This poses the problem for Nachmanides that in the respective chapter in Leviticus 8,15 both כל החלב אשר על הקרב as well as יותרת הכבד are mentioned separately. 
   
   29,14. תשרף באש, “you are to burn by fire.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that nowhere else do we find that a sin offering offered on the altar in the Temple’s courtyard, was completely burned up without a portion of the meat being consumed by the priests. This was so only because of the exceptional circumstances surrounding this event.
   Nachmanides suggests a specific reason for the departure from the normal procedure when a sin offering is presented on the altar. He claims that this bull was meant to atone for the sin of the golden calf; the offering in question, i.e. a bull as a sin offering, is that assigned to the High Priest if he has committed an inadvertent sin, which if it had been deliberate would result in the <i>karet</i> penalty. Aaron atoned for his share in the sin of the golden calf by means of this offering. This particular sin offering (its blood) is brought to the Sanctuary, seeing that in the legislation dealing with this kind of sin offering the Torah stipulates that its blood is to be presented to the front of the curtain dividing the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies. The element known as הוראת שעהemergency legislation, involved on this occasion, was that Aaron had not yet completed his consecration as High Priest, so that he really had no business to be in the Sanctuary as yet. On the other hand, the Presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> had not yet manifested itself until the eighth day of the מלואים, so that he did not commit a capital crime by doing so in his present state. The dividing curtain therefore had not yet qualified for its very name, i.e. a fence before the Holy of Holies. Nonetheless, the legal status of the Sanctuary was similar to that of the Holy of Holies, so that both he and his sons required a degree of atonement for what they did, but this was not connected to the sin of the golden calf that had occurred many months earlier.
   
   29,26. מאיל המלואים אשר לאהרן, “from the bull of the consecration rites concerning the appointment of Aaron to the priesthood.” Even though this same ram served as a consecration rite ram also for his sons, they are not mentioned here, seeing that Aaron was considered the owner offering these sacrifices. Moses acts as Aaron’s and his sons’ priest at this stage, performing the rites the priest generally performs for the owner of the sacrificial animal as his appointed emissary. Once this point had been made, we need not wonder that in the next verse Aaron’s sons are mentioned as also partaking of the meat of these animals. Father and sons will partake in the portions normally assigned to the priests of such offerings which are not burned up on the altar.
   
   20,36. ופר חטאת תעשה ליום על הכפורים, “and one bull shall you make as a sin offering on each of these days of the consecration rites.” The atonement was required in respect of non-consecrated people having performed service on the altar. (or according to the <i>Midrash</i> anyone whose donation to the materials of the Tabernacle having donated materials not legally his.)
   Nachmanides considers these words as referring back to the words אשר כופר בהם, in verse 33, in case during eating any of the parts of these sacrifices an inadvertent <i>halachic</i> error had been committed by either Aaron or one of his sons. Although a sin offering is always the catalyst of atonement, in this instance, there was an innovation in that even the rams also conferred atonement of their owners.
   
   29,46. לשכני בתוכם, “for Me to dwell in their midst.”
   According to <i>Rashi</i> the meaning of the word לשכני is “in order for Me to reside.”
   Nachmanides understands the prefix ל in the word לשכני as similar to the prefix ב, i.e. “for I have taken up residence” (among them). The reason I did so is that they shall forever be aware that it was I Who has taken them out of Egypt.
   
   30,1. ועשית מזבח מקטר קטורת, You are to construct an altar for the burning up of incense.”
   Nachmanides writes that seeing that the golden altar was considered one of the pieces of furniture of the Sanctuary, it should have been mentioned in the same chapter as the Table, the <i>Menorah,</i> and the ark. In fact, in <i>Parshat Vayakhel</i> the golden altar has indeed been listed together with the other furnishings of the Tabernacle, (compare chapter 37).
   The reason why here the golden altar, primarily used for the burning of the incense, has been mentioned only after the details of the construction of the Tabernacle have all been recorded, as well as details of the sacrifices, is to inform the reader that after all said and done, the crucial element in securing the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> in the Tabernacle, i.e. within the encampment of the Jewish people was that the presentation of the incense on that altar was of such importance to <i>Hashem,</i> as we know already from Moses’ own reference to this importance of the presentation of incense in order to defuse G’d’s anger at His people. *Deuteronomy 33,10.” Presentation of the incense repre-sented not a prelude to something that the Israelites expected from G’d in return, but was meant solely as an expression of honour and reverence for G’d. It was an expression of appreciation for being allowed to house the <i>Shechinah</i> on earth. [I added a few words of my own in order to make the concept clear. Ed]
   
   30,7. והקטיר עליו אהרן קטורת סמים, “Aaron is to burn up on it the incense comprised of a variety of spices.” Nachmanides writes that contrary to first impressions, the command to offer the incense was not addressed to Aaron in his capacity as the High Priest, exclusively, but in his capacity as representative of the priesthood. The same holds true for the lighting of the<i> menorah,</i> which is mentioned immediately after this verse, and where the Torah also mentions Aaron by name, although he was not the only one authorized to perform this service. In that instance, the Torah adds that Aaron’s sons were charged with performing this task. (compare 27,21)
   I do not know why the High Priest Aaron has been mentioned twice, both with the incense and the lighting of the lamps on the <i>menorah,</i> nor does the Torah refer to him with the definitive article, i.e. הכהן. Perhaps, seeing that in verse 10, where the Torah describes Aaron as bringing atonement by way of the animals’ horns, once a year, only Aaron (i.e. the High Priest) is meant, we might have concluded that the same applies to the burning of incense on the golden altar, seeing the Torah also at the legislation about the kindling of the lamps refers to Aaron without mentioning his sons  (Leviticus 24,2). We might have been misled, therefore at the end of that legislation, when the Torah speaks of חוקת עולם, an enduring statute, these words refer to the legislation itself, not to who is to kindle the lamps. Aaron was singled out because he was the first one to ever kindle that <i>menorah,</i> but other priests were allowed to do it subsequently.
   
   30,9. קטורת זרה,”alien incense.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this to mean that even similar incense offered as a free-willed donation, is considered “alien,” and as such carries a severe penalty. Onkelos translates the verse as referring to spices not listed in <i>Parshat Ki Tissa</i> that begins forthwith. The prohibition of changes in the composition of the spices includes even adding an additional spice to the ones the Torah authorized and whose proportions the Torah specified. (30,22-38)
   
   Parshat  Ki Tissa
   
   30,12. כי תשא, “when you take a census, etc.” 
   Nachmanides writes that the words כי תשא את ראש mean: ”when you take a census of the people, etc.,” they shall each give a half shekel as atonement for having legally forfeited their claim to life. Moses is to take the sum total of these half shekels and make use of them in connection with the sacrificial service in the Sanctuary. From these words in the Torah, Moses concluded that he was meant to conduct such a census at that time. Moses acted upon this, and this is why we read in 38,25 that the money from the census was used to provide the silver sockets of the beams in the Tabernacle. The fact that the Torah does not record Moses as being told to collect these monies from the people concerned shows that they had brought them along at the same time they brought the diverse donations for the construction of the Tabernacle. This is why there was no need for Aaron and the tribal princes to accompany Moses when he would go to the individual tents in order to collect the half shekel needed for each person’s contribution to the daily communal offerings as Moses was required to do during the census related in the Book of Numbers. (compare Numbers 1,4)
   <i>Rashi</i> raised the problem<i> of</i> how it was possible that two censuses seven months apart could produce the identical number of males between the ages of 20 and sixty, and his answer is that actually these censuses were taken in the same calendar year, one being the Jewish year which commences on the first of <i>Nissan,</i> the other the calendar used by the gentiles, which is based on the years since the creation begins on the first day of <i>Tishrey</i>, and that the first census took place immediately after Moses had returned from his last ascent to Mount Sinai, the day after the Day of Atonement, whereas the second census, as pointed out in Numbers  1,1-2, took place on the first day of <i>Iyar</i> of the year following. The reason why the numbers appear to match is that as far as the ages of the people counted were concerned, they celebrated their respective birthdays according to the day and month in which they had been born, whereas for the purpose of army service a single day during the year (presumably the first of <i>Nissan</i>) was the day on which all those who had attained the age of 20 during the preceding 12 months were now considered as 20 years of age.
   Personally, (Nachmanides speaking) I do not believe that there was a problem to begin with. The first count was made during the first year of the Israelites’ wanderings, when the tribe of Levi had not yet been counted separately. In other words, the remarkable thing is not that the counts show the same total both times, but the remarkable thing is that in a period of 7 months the number of Israelites of the ages of 20 and up had increased to such an extent that the absence of any Levites during the second count was not even noticed in the final tally. The very fact that before the second census the Levites were specifically excluded from the total for the 12 tribes, is clear proof that during the first census the tribe of Levi was counted on exactly the same basis [not from 30 days and up, instead of from 20 years and up Ed.] as per the directives in the Book of Numbers. Seeing that we are entitled to assume that numerous people died between the Exodus and that time, at which time the Israelites were described as approx. 600000 strong, the natural increase was quite remarkable.
   I believe further, that the donations (money) mentioned in our paragraph here and the one mentioned in Numbers chapter 1, the purpose of which was to raise equally sized donations for financing the mandatory daily communal offerings, could not have been raised as part of that census either, as suggested by <i>Rashi.</i> If <i>Rashi</i> were correct, why should the members of the tribe of Levi not also have been required to contribute their half shekels for the communal offerings that were offered on their behalf?
   Furthermore, the people who were required to contribute half shekels for the communal mandatory offerings were all those who had demonstrated signs of puberty, by having at least 2 pubic hairs. It is clear therefore that the purpose of the census in our chapter, i.e. the three donations hinted at, were 1) for atonement, i.e. ½ shekel by each male above the age of 20, 2), contributions for the building of the Tabernacle, and 3) the emphasis on everyone passing the turnstile not contributing either more or less than ½ a shekel were people above the age of 13 (with two pubic hairs) whose contribution to the purchase of mandatory communal offerings, would enable them to benefit from the atonement provided by the offering of these communal sacrifice if and when due.
   
   ונתנו איש כופר נפשו    , “they are each to hand over a ransom for their souls.” This had to be done at this point in time, seeing that they had participated in some manner in the sin of the golden calf. This was the reason why, in this instance, the shekel was used as the symbol of their atonement. Normally, whenever a census is taken, coins are not required, the only restriction is that it must not be a head count. This is why we find that King Sha-ul, prior to the campaign against the Amalekites, counted the soldiers by means of sheep and broken shards of clay.
   
   30,13. מחצית השקל, “half of the coin known as ‘shekel.’” Nachmanides writes that in common with other important Kings, Moses designed a coin called “shekel”  [from the word משקל, weight] to symbolize that it was of pure silver, without any dross. Seeing that this coin became the standard for the redeeming of the firstborn, all of whom were redeemed in terms of whole <i>shekalim</i>, the coin itself was called שקל הקודש, i.e. a silver coin used to redeem something holy. In Leviticus 27 we have a whole chapter dealing with the use of this coin in redeeming various kinds of vows made by man. Whenever the Torah speaks of definitive amounts of silver, the quantity referred to is expressed in terms of multiples of that coin. This also explains why the language in which the Torah has been written is called לשון הקודש, “the Holy Tongue,” seeing that so many subjects dealing with holiness and sanctity have been recorded in the Torah. This is also the language in which G’d communicated with the Jewish nation through His prophets. It is also the language in which His holy nation, when praying to Him utter His Holy name, the tetragram, the language He used when He created the universe and issued directives to His creatures. All the phenomena He created both in heaven and on earth were named in that language. 
   
   30,15. העשיר לא ירבה והדל לא ימעיט, “the wealthy must not contribute more, nor the poor less, etc.” According to Nachmanides this is one of the 365 negative commandments in the Torah, i.e. anyone violating this directive has become guilty of a transgression of a Biblical prohibition. He feels that a wealthy man who contributed more than one shekel,-contrary to the Torah’s instructions,- could compensate by contributing less the next time, and the poor man who contributed less than a half shekel could make up for it at a future occasion, is reminded by the wording of the Torah precludes such a תיקון, adjustment, but having failed to do it as directed, the person is guilty of a transgression which cannot be made good. It is not as if someone who had sent the correct amount by means of a messenger, and for some reason this shekel never reached the proper destination, he can compensate by replacing the lost shekel with a replacement. According to the Talmud <i>Ketuvot</i> 108, in the latter case the person whose <i>shekel</i> did not arrive in time (before the end of that year) did not violate the commandment but merely did not get credit for fulfilling it, whereas according to Nachmanides the incorrect contribution constitutes a transgression. None of the other authorities lists this directive as a negative commandment in their count of the 613 commandments. [in Ramban’s commentary on Maimonides’ ספר המצות, we do not find it mentioned either. Ed.]
   
   30,19. ורחצו אהרן ובניו ממנו את ידיהם ואת רגליהם, “Aaron and his sons are to wash their hands and their feet with the water from this basin.” This was a standard procedure, observed by people who ventured into the presence of their king’s table in order to perform valet services there. They would wash their hands and feet immediately before commencing their duties. The procedure was not a ritual, but was purely hygienic in nature. Hands and feet are by definition more likely than any other part of the body to touch matters which contaminate them. This is why the Rabbis insisted on our washing our hands before prayer. [nowadays, when the feet are encased in shoes, the feet are less likely to become contaminated so that this part of the regulation has been relaxed. Ed.]
   
   30,23. מור דרור, “pure myrrh, etc.” according to Nachmanides all the scholars are agreed that the myrrh described here originates with a certain musk ox found in India, the animal is a variety of the family of deers. Near the neck of that animal a concentration of this musk is found, the reason it is accumulated there is the extremely hot climate in the regions where these animals abound. It oozes out of the pores of that animal.
   The meaning of the word דרור in our verse is that it is pure, not contaminated by other materials which would render it unfit for use as part of the spices prescribed by the Torah for the oil of anointing.
   Ibn Ezra disagrees with this explanation claiming that מור  is not a spice even though it does exude a pleasant fragrance. Perhaps this is the reason why מור was mentioned separately from other spices listed.
   
   וקנמון בושם, “and fragrant cinnamon;” according to <i>Rashi</i> this was the bark of the cinnamon tree.
   Nachmanides, commenting on Maimonides, cites him as writing that the Torah refers to a tree that grows in India. [The fact is that there are conflicting statements as to what Maimonides thought, and his writings do not bear out what Nachmanides attributed to him. Ed.]
   Nachmanides himself holds that all the scholars up to then were wrong but that what is meant is what is described in <i>Midrash Rabbah</i> as a kind of grass which grows in the land of Israel, and which is known as something that sheep and deer feed on. I believe that it is the dried out version of that grass, known in Arabic as <i>ad’brand</i>, and in Latin as <i>Ashkent</i>, a potent fragrance. 
   
   [in view of the obvious confusion and inability of our sages to agree on which of the fragrances can be matched to fragrances we are familiar with nowadays, I will not bother to translate the author’s comments on this subject any further. Ed.]
   30,33. אשר יתן ממנו על זר. “and he anoints an alien with this, etc.” according  to<i> Rashi</i> the word זר here means anyone neither a priest nor Royalty (from the house of David) who would be in line for this oil of anointing.
   
   Ibn Ezra explains that seeing the Torah first mentioned Aaron and his sons as the ones to be anointed with this oil, and now the Torah writes that a זר must not be anointed with this oil on pain of the most severe penalty <i>karet,</i> it is clear that the word זר includes only non priests. 
   
   Nachmanides writes that it certainly appears at first glance as if the word זר only applies to non-priests, i.e. anyone not descended from Aaron, so that even a King may not be anointed with this oil. However, we must examine the text more closely and try to understand the meaning of the words שמן משחת קודש יהיה זה לי, “oil of sacred anointment this shall be for Me.” If the word זר were to be used as narrowly as suggested by Ibn Ezra, the Torah, instead of writing יהיה זה לי “shall this be for Me,” should have written יהיה זה לאהרן ובניו לדורותם, “shall this be for Aaron and his offspring throughout their generations.” This would then be parallel to what the Torah wrote about the priestly garments and who were not allowed to wear them, (compare 29,29) 
   We must therefore conclude that the correct interpretation about who may be anointed with this oil is that at this time Aaron and his sons are to be anointed with it. The reason that the Torah used the somewhat vague expressionשמן משחת קודש is that the Torah, i.e. G’d, reserves the right at some time in the future when a titular political head will be appointed for the people as per the instructions of a prophet, authorized to sanction this in the name of G’d, the appointee will also be anointed with this oil as proof that the appointment had been sanctioned by G’d. The reason that the Torah does not prohibit with the words על בשר זר, “on the flesh of an alien,” is that even a priest who is not in need of this oil for ritual purposes must not be anointed with it.
   30,34. קח לך סמים, ”Take yourself spices, etc.” Nachmanides writes that there are scholars who hold that the plain meaning of the line קח לך סמים  וגו' is: “take yourself spices, namely נטף, שחלת, חלבנה,” whereas what follows are not spices but are varieties of frankincense, לבונה, such as pure frankincense mixed into the whole mixture. These scholars are not correct, as it is not the custom of the Torah to write the word סמים a second time just for reasons of style and syntax. The Torah does not use unnecessary repetition.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that the very word סמים, seeing it is used in the plural mode, refers to a number of (2 seeing no number is specified) different spices, i.e. take a variety of spices, namely the ones named forthwith, i.e. a total of 5 varieties and an equal number, the ones used for the oil of anointing, plus the last named, i.e. לבונה, making a total of eleven spices which make up the offering of incense. If so we have reason to wonder why the Torah did not name all the varieties?
   Perhaps we have to conclude that the verse which commences with the words קח לך סמים נטף ושחלת וחלבנה, did not consider the unnamed additional varieties as so important, as long as they were pure, זכה. However, only the varieties named are so important that they each need to be part of the mix prescribed. The reason may have to do with the cloud of smoke generated when burning these varieties of spices. The unnamed varieties would contribute the sweet smelling fragrances, whereas the ones named would contribute what was visible to the eye as opposed to what could be inhaled. This may also be the reason why no quantities are mentioned in the Torah in connection with the incense. What interested the Torah was only that the proportions of the named spices be equal to one another. The addition of other spices was left vague, just as in the case of the olive oil in the oil of anointing no quantity was specified. The Torah relied on what had been written before, i.e. that the composition should follow certain ratios already outlined. The מעשה רוקח, “handiwork of the perfumers,” was a commonly known mix and the Torah merely writes that in the making of the incense the same basic procedures should be followed which are followed when preparing perfume. In due course, the completed incense was to be deposited in front of the Holy Ark in order that the fragrance would rise as they do when presented to kings of flesh and blood. Alternatively, we may infer that what was not spelled out here in writing had been communicated to Moses orally in which all the details about fragrances and incense were explained.
   
   It is also possible to explain that סמים and בשמים are different names for the ingredients and that the three ingredients that have been named in connection with the oil of anointing are not סמים, for נטף and חלבנה are actually a form of שרפים, resin from either the tree trunks or other plants. (Maimonides in <i>hilchot kley hamikdash</i> calls these עצי הקטף, derived from the wood of the balsam tree). The ingredient described as שחלת, may be a clove, possibly grown in the sea. The Torah would then have instructed Moses to take סמים which people were familiar with, i.e. the ones named, which would be added to the oil of anointing, seeing that the ingredients described asמור, דרור, קנמן   were all part of the mixture which made up the incense, קטורת.  The reason that the word סמים is repeated was to inform Moses that additional ingredients, all under the generic name of סמים would be part of the mixture. These additional סמים  are then named, viz. שבולת, נרד, כרכום, קושט in accordance with what our sages have taught us in tractate <i>Keritot</i> 6. To this mixture frankincense, לבונה, was added. The whole would resemble the type of concoctions produced by the handiwork of the perfumers, מעשה מרקחת. 
   
   נטף, “balsam, also known as צרי.” <i>Rashi</i> adds that צרי in French is equivalent to resin from trees.
   Nachmanides claims that this is wrong, and that someone misspelled what <i>Rashi</i> wrote, and that the French word attributed to <i>Rashi</i> erroneously, is actually a mixture of leaven and honey and a variety of dead insects, and the like, something that the Torah most certainly would not have instructed Moses to prepare as oil of anointing or incense, the offering G’d supposedly receives with maximum goodwill. He therefore concludes that צרי is another word for שרף the resin oozing out of trees when the trunk has been sawed off or branches have been broken off. This may be the reason our sages coined the phrase עצי הקטף, to describe the origin as being trees or wood which had been injured, cut off.
   
   30,35. ממולח, “thoroughly mixed;” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word ממולח, as thoroughly mixed, whereas Nachmanides  sees in the word its original meaning, i.e. “salted,” and the Torah would instruct that just as meat offerings have to be salted so even the incense has to be salted. This is why the Talmud referred to the quarter <i>kav</i> of salt from the Dead Sea, which was part of the mixture.
   
   30,36. ונתתה ממנה לפני העדות באהל מועד אשר אועד לך שמה, “you are to place some of it in front of the Testimonial Tablets in the Tent of Meeting, where I shall designate a time to meet you.” The Torah emphasises that this offering is to be presented twice daily, on the golden altar, inside the Sanctuary, quite close to the Holy Ark. 
   
   Nachmanides writes that it is quite possible that the reason why the Holy Ark is mentioned here is that the Torah wanted to include every aspect of the offering called קטורת, and that it is so holy that on the Day of Atonement it was even taken into the Holy of Holies, the room reserved for the Holy Ark from whose lid the voice of the <i>Shechinah</i> would emanate whenever it addressed Moses. The words אשר אועד לך שמה, are referring to the presentation of the incense in the Holy of Holies, as distinct from the rest of the year when it is presented in the Sanctuary, the היכל.
   
   31,2. ראה קראתי בשם בצלאל, “See, I have called by name, Betzalel.” Moses repeats this description of Betzalel’s qualifications when he says to them in 35,30. This was necessary, as it was a miracle that a people who had been forced to perform basic slave labour for hundreds of years  should have produced among themselves artisans capable of performing highly skilled work such as was envisioned for the making of the priestly garments, and for the furnishings of the Tabernacle. Betzalel, personally, had been endowed by G’d not only with the wisdom to carry out the physical work required, but he had been endowed with the spiritual insights necessary to comprehend the mystical aspects of the Tabernacle and everything connected with it. He was fully aware of the significance of both the materials used, the measurements G’d had commanded, and the manner in which the entire project represented a re-enactment of מעשה בראשית, the way in which G’d had created the universe. Our sages, in attempting to give us an inkling of all this, stated that G’d had shown Betzalel the book of Adam, the first human being. They meant that just as Adam, initially, had been on intimate terms with his Creator, so Betzalel had been endowed with something parallel, as much as this is possible in the present imperfect world.
   Some commentators interpret the word: “ראה” as meaning  “I want you to know that in My eyes this man appears to be good.” Seeing that this is so, I want you, Moses, to relate to him in a similar manner.
   
   31,10. ואת בגדי השרד, “and the knit vestments, etc.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the vestments mentioned here were the covers in which the furnishings of the Tabernacle were wrapped while the Israelites were en route from one encampment to the next. The literal meaning of the word שרד appears to be that the fabric of these vestments was very porous, like knitwear.
   
   According to Nachmanides this is not the issue, but the word שרד indicates that only one single kind of yarn was used in the construction of these covers, as opposed to the ceremonial garments of the High Priest which consisted of a variety of yarns all used in the making of a single garment. 
   At any rate, I have an additional and basic difficulty with <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary. It appears unlikely that G’d would instruct Moses to have vestments made without telling him how many, what size, and what materials these were to be made of. Furthermore, what is astounding, if <i>Rashi</i> were correct, is that such auxiliary vestments would be mentioned ahead of the ceremonial garments of Aaron, or even before the garments of the ordinary priests. Moreover, the expression לשרת בקודש used in 35,19 is totally incomprehensible; what “service” would these vestments possibly perform if their purpose were just to serve as covers for the Tabernacle’s furnishings? Also what is the meaning of the words in verse 6 ועשו את כל אשר צויתיך, “they are to do in accordance with all that I commanded you,” and what follows are a list of things including the בגדי השרד?” Seeing the making of the בגדי השרד had not been commanded to Moses as yet how could they have been included in what is described in verses 7-11?
   From the words of our sages it would appear that the vestments referred to as בגדי השרד are none other than the priestly garments, and the reason that they are here referred to by the description בגדי השרד, is that the wearer be uniquely distinguished among his people. The word שריד appears in a similar context as referring to the unique phenomenon of someone escaping the general slaughter of Israel’s enemies in Joshua 8,22, and again in the sense of someone unique in Jeremiah 42,17. The message here is that only one single individual in his generation may be clothed in these garments, i.e. the High Priest Aaron, and after his death the High Priest who replaces him. This may also be the reason why these garments are referred to for all times as בגדי אהרן, Aaron’s garments, not plain “the High Priest’s garments.” The term בגדי אהרן reflects the unique honour bestowed upon Aaron for whom these garments were designed and fashioned. It is not for nothing that the Torah refers to these garments as being לכבוד ולתפארת, “as marks of honour and glory.” This is also why in our literature the term בגדי השרד is equated with בגדי מלכות, “Royal garments,” garments reflecting the glory and authority of the king. As such they become automatically בגדי הקודש, the garments reflecting the sacred duties performed by their wearer. No one else is allowed to wear them. [we know of the unique image of the wearer of these garments when Haman desired to be dressed in the king’s clothes as a mark of the king’s regard for him. Esther, 6, 7-10. Ed.]
   When we are told in <i>Parshat Pekudey</i> that these garments were woven from blue wool, purple coloured wool, and red wool; it is noticeable that on that occasion no mention is made of the material שש, i.e. fine linen; the reason is that linen, even the finest linen, was considered as inferior to the three kinds of dyed wool mentioned. (compare Exodus 39,1.) Possibly, there had been no excess donations of these three kinds of woolen threads. Seeing that in our verse the mention of the purpose of these garments to perform holy service in them has been omitted, the Torah may instead have referred to them as בגדי השרד as an alternate way of informing us of the distinction of these garments.
   
   31,31. אך את שבתותי תשמורו, “However, you must observe My Sabbaths;” a reference to the numerous Sabbath days during the year.
   <i>
   Rashi</i>, pointing out that the word אך always precedes a restrictive clause, claims that the verse in front of us specifically addresses the subject of interrupting the construction of even such a sacred project as the building of the Tabernacle in order not to desecrate the Sabbath.
   Nachmanides questions <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, saying that on the contrary, the restrictive nature of the words אך and רק, should be interpreted as lifting the normal restrictions on building activity on the Sabbath out of deference to the sacred nature of the task of building a residence for G’d on earth. In all other examples of the words אך and רק where these appear in conjunction with a Torah commandment, the commandment’s applicability is limited as a result. If we were to interpret the appearance of this word here as a limitation on the work of the Tabernacle, the result would be that it may proceed even on the Sabbath. Other examples of such a restrictive clause being applied on account of these words result in circumcision on the eight’s day overriding the laws of the Sabbath; similarly, the commandment to save a life which is in danger overrides any forbidden activity of the Sabbath, if the life to be saved is in danger on the Sabbath. The Talmud <i>Yerushalmi 8,5</i> in <i>Yuma</i> actually quotes our verse here as the source that saving someone’s life on the Sabbath when it involves violation of Biblical prohibitions on the Sabbath is not only permitted but mandatory. However, Rabbi Yochanan there adds that where the life in danger is so only marginally, violation of the Sabbath is not permitted on account of this. Mention of the Sabbath here must be viewed as the exception to the general rule in which the words אך and רק are applied, and that is why work on the Tabernacle was interrupted for the sake of observing the Sabbath.
   The plain meaning of our verse is: “keep working on the sacred project of building the Tabernacle but do not allow this project to interfere with observance of the Sabbath in any shape or form in order to complete this work sooner.”
   
   31,18. ויתן אל משה, “He gave to Moses, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the subject of the word ויתן in our verse is the word אלוקים, although it appears only at the end of our verse. The construction is similar, in a sense, to Exodus 20,1 where the lineוידבר אלוקים את כל הדברים האלה , “G’d said all these words, etc.,” refer to what is yet to come, instead of to something that preceded it. The same is true in connection with the Tablets, where the Torah describes these Tablets as having been made by the Lord and inscribed by the Lord only in 32,16. The handing over of the Tablets to Moses certainly preceded the end of G’d’s dialogue with Moses as is evident from 32,7-14.
   
   32,1. קום עשה לנו אלוהים, ”rise up and make for us gods, etc.” Nachmanides writes that there is no question that the Israelites did not demand or expect Aaron to make idolatrous images for them, as the people most certainly believed in a living G’d Who had taken them out of Egypt, and Who had performed all the miracles for them which the Torah has recorded. It is clear that the Israelites did not for a moment believe that Moses had performed all these miracles on his own. This is why, when referring to Moses, they described him as someone who had led them, “walked in front of us, etc.” Seeing that apparently Moses would not return from the Mountain, they asked for a substitute who, with the guidance of G’d, would henceforth be their guide through the desert still to be traversed before they would come to the land of Canaan. They did not refer to a power which would enable man to live in the here and now as well as in the world of the future. They were fully aware that all the journeys thus far had been על פי ה' ביד משה, ”at the command of <i>Hashem</i> transmitted by Moses.” All they expected of the substitute was that ילכו לפנינו “walk in front of us.” When they referred to Moses having העלנו מארץ מצרים, “raised us up from the land of Egypt,” this is not to be confused with אשר הוצאתנו מארץ מצרים, “who has taken us out of Egypt,” i.e. “who redeemed us from bondage.” It is quite clear from what Aaron answered Moses who had accused him of making a golden image for them, that he had never for a moment understood the people as reverting to idolatry. Otherwise, instead of repeating what the people had said to him as proof of his innocence he would have had to either misquote them or to confess his guilt. Aaron’s reply to Moses’ accusation is most certainly not an apology! On the contrary, if he had been guilty, he would have added more guilt upon himself by his very words. (verses 22-24) 
   
   If Moses were to return unexpectedly, the people were most certainly prepared to accept his continued leadership, as they proved when no one opposed either Moses’ burning of the golden calf, or the measures he introduced to punish the few people who actually did dance around the calf and revered it as a deity. If the people, i.e. the multitude, had really believed that this calf possessed any divine powers, they most certainly would have protested Moses destroying their deity. It is true that it was Aaron who had produced this calf, not because the people had demanded this particular image, or any other image for that matter. This is what the sages had in mind when they interpreted the people’s wishes as their wanting multiple images, as they had no idea of what to choose. Aaron’s intention was that seeing the people were at Mount Chorev, in a desolate desert, and waste and destruction have traditionally been perceived as originating in the north, (compare Jeremiah 1,14) and Jeremiah did not only refer to the King of Babylonia who threatened the kingdom of Yehudah from the north, something that is clear to all those who read that chapter, Aaron assumed that the spiritually negative forces are strongest in the north, and that is why they are perceived as attacking from the north. He meant to counter this by specifically addressing the G’d of Israel in a festivity aimed in a northerly direction to counter such forces and to harness the spiritually positive forces, as a counterweight, especially seeing that the people would celebrate a festivity in honour of <i>Hashem</i>. He had hoped, by means of the offerings, to transfer the power associated in people’s minds with the astrological symbol ox to the Master of all oxen, i.e. <i>Hashem,</i> and to set in motion celestial forces against this type of idolatry.
   
   32,2. פרקו נזמי הזהב, “remove the rings of gold, etc.” Aaron selected gold and no other material,l seeing that the appearance of gold is reminiscent of the Attribute of Justice, something symbolized by fire. This is also the reason why all the furnishings in the Sanctuary were constructed of gold, as well as the altar for incense in the inner Sanctum. The likeness of the calf being made of gold, therefore resembled fire more than silver would have done.
   
   32,4. אלה אלוהיך ישראל אשר העלוך, “these are your leaders o Israel that have led you out of Egypt.” These words of the onlookers are further proof that the golden calf was not intended to serve as a deity, as there could not have been any person foolish enough to credit the gold from their earrings with having orchestrated the Exodus from Egypt. What the people meant was that the mystical power represented by gold in the present shape was the major factor which had enabled Moses to lead the people out of Egypt. Never, in connection with the golden calf, did any part of the people ever say the words אשר הוציאוך ממצרים, “who have initiated your departure from Egypt,” a formulation which would have credited the golden calf with divine powers. They only credited the power inherent in this gold as facilitating the auxiliary aspects of the Exodus, such as drying out the bed of the sea through which the Israelites walked when crossing the Sea of Reeds.
   
   32,5. וירא אהרן, “now Aaron realized, etc.” The Torah did not complete the sentence about what it was that Aaron “saw,” i.e. that the people were bent on crediting the golden calf with much more than he had thought at first. In order to head off a major spiritual and subsequently physical disaster, Aaron now proclaimed the following day as a festival in honour of <i>Hashem,</i> and he proceeded to build an altar to accommodate the offerings to <i>Hashem</i> which he intended to sacrifice at that feast. By doing this he felt he would forestall people building altars on which they would offer sacrifices to this golden image of a calf. By temporizing he felt and hoped that Moses would return from the Mountain before a calamity would occur. However, seeing the people on whose behalf he was going to offer these sacrifices intended them for the golden calf, they would have turned them into פיגול unacceptable sacrifices. At any rate, the people preempted Aaron early on the following morning. 
   
   32,6. ויעלו עולות ויגישו שלמים, “they burned up burnt offerings, and they presented peace-offerings. It is noteworthy that the Torah does not mention in whose honour these offerings were presented, i.e. we would have expected the Torah to write ויעלו לו עולות, “they burned up burnt offerings in its honour.” The absence of the word לו, shows that some people did indeed offer their sacrifices to <i>Hashem,</i> whereas others meant to honour the golden calf when presenting their offerings. The offering of any sacrifice, which even though technically corresponding to <i>halachah</i> in all its visible details, would become פיגול, totally rejected, and the owner guilty of death at the hands of heaven, merely because it had not been addressed to <i>Hashem</i>.
   וישב העם לאכול  ושתו, ”the people sat down in order to eat and drink, etc..” They all sat down to eat in order to still their hunger, and to drink in order to become inebriated as they were in the habit of doing on festivals. The reason that the Torah bothered to record these details is to show that although Moses, upon his return from the Mountain, found the people in such a state of mind that they danced around the image of the golden calf, he summoned the spiritual fortitude that enabled him even in such circumstances to act as a true servant of <i>Hashem</i> to seize this very calf in front of their eyes and to utterly destroy it by burning it.
   The Torah now completes recording the entire episode involving the golden calf, before resuming with recording what had transpired between G’d and Moses after G’d had informed him of what was going on down below, and Moses had descended hurriedly to rejoin his people. Chronologically speaking, we must presume that the conversation between G’d and Moses on the Mountain took place early in the morning, when he was told by G’d that the people had become corrupt and had even made for themselves a cast image in the shape of a golden calf, an image before which they had prostrated themselves. By the time Moses reached the camp the people had already sat down to eat and drink. G’d had waited with telling him to descend until after some people had already actively worshipped the calf as a deity.
   
   32,7. כי שחת עמך אשר העלית, “for your people, the ones you brought up from Egypt, etc.” Seeing that after the crossing of the Sea of Reeds, the Torah described Moses as making the people take a turn toward the desert, [apparently without consulting G’d, Ed.] G’d now describes the calamity as having befallen “Moses’” people, as distinct from their being “G’d’s people,” seeing he had led them into the desert on his own authority. as distinct from their having remained “G’d’s” people. (compare Exodus 15,22)
   Alternatively, G’d took a leaf out of the people’s book, seeing they had described Moses as the man who had brought them out of Egypt. (verse 1) In Deuteronomy 9,12 Moses quotes G’d as having said to him: שחת עמך אשר הוצאת ממצרים, סרו מהר ,” your people, the ones you took out of Egypt have become corrupt and departed quickly from the path I commanded them.” Moses rejected this accusation, replying that G’d had taken the people out of Egypt. Compare Deut. 9,26. He did not even agree that he had played any substantive part in the Exodus. [The Israelites had been expelled by Pharaoh, did not leave at Moses’ bidding. Ed.]
   
   32,10. ועתה הניחה לי, “and now, desist from Me, etc.” Nachmanides writes that it makes no sense to understand the words ועתה הניחה לי, as meaning that Moses should not try to interfere with G’d’s anger, seeing that He had not yet displayed any sign of such anger, as G’d Himself is about to say. Moreover, how could G’d become angry after Moses had already appeased Him? The plain meaning of the words in question must be understood as a prelude to what G’d adds immediately after referring to His anger when He announces that He will wipe out the Jewish people instantly and would replace them with a new Jewish nation based on Moses as their founding father.
   Alternately, G’d told Moses not to appeal to His attribute of Mercy in order that He could give free rein to His attribute of Justice, as a result of which the people would be annihilated.
   
   32,11. למה ה' יחרה אפך בעמך, “to what purpose, o <i>Hashem,</i> should Your anger flare against Your people?” Nachmanides writes that in light of this great sin by the Israelites, it would seem to have been appropriate for Moses to plead Israel’s case by commencing with a confession, as in the formula “אנא חטא העם הזה וגו', “indeed this people have committed a grievous sin, etc.” [as he did when he ascended the Mountain again in verse 31. Ed.] Our sages have distinguished themselves in citing reasons why what appeared at first glance as a terrible sin, was in fact much less serious than it appears at first glance.
   The proper way to understand Moses’ words at this juncture is: ”why would You give permission to the Attribute of Justice to assume control of the fate of Your people when You had led the people out under the banner of the Attribute of Mercy, while at the same time reserving Your Attribute of Justice for dealing with their enemies?”
   Some commentators explain Moses’ question as being simply: “why not direct Your anger at the instigators of this sin, the mixed multitude, who had joined the Jewish people at the time of the Exodus?”
   This prayer, in which Moses describes that by doing away with the Jewish people <i>Hashem</i> would ultimately diminish His own image, which He had built up while performing the miracles in Egypt, is repeated in Deuteronomy. The only difference is that here Moses is described as offering this plea before descending from the Mountain, whereas in Deuteronomy it is described by Moses as having taken place after he had descended from the Mountain. (Deut. 9,26)
   Ibn Ezra feels that Moses refrained from pleading on behalf of the people as long as the symbol of their sin was still among them. He could not hope to have his prayer answered until after every vestige of the golden calf had been destroyed. Seeing that G’d had said to him that he should desist from pleading, and he realized that the matter depended upon him, he hastened to come up with some cogent reason why G’d’s anger, if it were to result in the people’s destruction, would be counterproductive from G’d’s own vantage point. [Ibn Ezra does not view our verse as a prayer on behalf of Israel, but on behalf of G’d’s image among mankind. Ed.]
   Personally, I do not agree. (Nachmanides speaking). Nachmanides argues that if indeed Moses had not prayed while on the Mountain for the first time, and all his entreaties (according to some scholars 40 days’ worth of them) were a single prayer, why would the Torah have divided them into what is reported here and what Moses added in Deuteronomy? I believe therefore, that we are dealing with two distinct prayers. When G’d told Moses to desist so that He could proceed with what He had in mind, Moses prayed immediately, instead of desisting. He formulated the prayer quoted in our verse. He was far too worried that if he were to wait it would prove too late, as G’d’s anger would have been translated into disaster for the Jewish people. His prayer proved effective, at least sufficiently to suspend execution of G’d’s plan at this stage. It did not mean that G’d had been mollified, how could He have been, when no remedial action both in word and deed had yet been taken? Seeing that G’d had granted Moses a stay of execution, he descended and immediately proceeded to destroy the golden calf, to sprinkle the penitent people with water containing the ashes of that cast image, and authorized the execution of the active participants who had danced around the calf proclaiming it to be a deity. Having done all this, he felt that he could ascend the Mountain again and plead for forgiveness, not only a delay of the punishment for what the people had become guilty of. On that occasion, the confession of the people’s guilt did not ring hollow, as he was able to point to the remedial action he had taken and the people having demonstrated sincere penitence.
   As to the reason why Moses related the sequence differently, 40 years after the event, when he said that as soon as G’d told him to desist so that He could destroy the people he descended the Mountain, (Deut. 9,14-15) this was because Moses was in the process of reminding the people [who were still alive, i.e. below the age of 60, Ed.] of a whole litany of sins committed by their fathers. In order not to interrupt the continuity of his recital, Moses did not mention what he had said to G’d in our verse at that time. He preferred to tell of what precisely had happened at hat time as well as Aaron’s role in all this. [remember that the great majority of the people whom Moses addressed at that time had not even been alive when all this happened. Ed.] After he had concluded by reminding the people that they had a long history of being rebellious against G’d, (Deut. 9,24) he came back to his prayer on behalf of the people and reminded them that he had spent an entire 40 days on the Mountain pleading the cause of his people. He wanted his audience to know that their existence at this time was not a natural event, but that G’d had initially meant to kill all their fathers, so that most of them would never have been born even, if not for his insistent prayers over a period of so many days when he did not even enjoy food and drink. He did not have to list all the details of his prayers as a list of 40 days of continuous prayer would have resulted in the Torah being an interminably long book, and the people reading it would have gone to sleep from boredom. When Moses mentioned that he had also prayed on behalf of Aaron at that time, he made clear that Aaron had been in need of his prayer at that time. He did not mention this in our verse, as it would have been embarrassing to have done so while Aaron was still alive. In Deuteronomy, a speech by Moses several months after Aaron had already died, he could mention this without fear of embarrassing him.
   
   32,16. והלוחות מעשה אלוקים המה, “the Tablets had been made by G’d.” Nachmanides writes that it would have been more appropriate to describe the details of these Tablets in 31,18 where we first hear about them, and where we have been told that they had been written with a “finger” of G’d. The reason that this was written at this juncture was to impress upon us that in spite of the Tablets being G’d’s personal handiwork, Moses did not let this stop him from smashing them as he was so upset when he saw what was going on in the camp.
   An alternate reason for why Moses smashed the Tablets, a thought expressed by our sages, is that when Moses realized that the letters on the Tablets had already flown away, so that the sanctity of the Tablets had departed, he took this as a signal to also smash the body which had hosted the letters while the people were a holy people. He would not demean the work of G’d to be brought within the boundaries of a camp which had become totally defiled.
   
   32,18. קול ענות אנכי שומע, “I can only hear a sound of distress.”  Nachmanides writes that what Moses said was not based on factual evidence, -after all he had not yet seen what was going on with his eyes, and we do not judge on the basis of what our ears hear.- In fact, technically speaking, Moses was out of order in telling Joshua his conclusions which incriminated his people on the basis of not even having seen the evidence. We must therefore interpret what Moses is quoted as saying to mean that he voiced the opinion that what he heard sounded like revelry.
   In the <i>Midrash</i> Moses’ words are understood as a rebuke to Joshua, his mentor saying to him that someone who will one day become the ruler of this people cannot afford to make judgments based only on what he thought he had heard. (<i>Midrash Rabbah Kohelet</i> 9)
   
   32,19. וישלך מידו את הלוחות, “he threw down the Tablets from his hand.” The Torah does not use the verb ויפל, which would have meant that the Tablets fell directly in front of his feet, but it uses a verb indicating that Moses flung the Tablets as far away from him as he was able to.
   וישבר אותם, “he shattered them. According to the plain meaning of the text, the reason why Moses made a point of smashing the Tablets was that these Tablets which had inscribed on them that Israelites must not make a cast image of anything in heaven or on earth, would, if allowed to remain intact- serve as testimony against the people who had so grossly violated what was written upon these Tablets.
   
   וישרוף באש, “he burned it by fire.” Gold is normally worked only when it has been made red hot, when it is cast in a mould. Therefore, just as the calf came into existence by means of fire, it had to be destroyed by means of fire.
   Ibn Ezra writes that there are elements (or additives) which when mixed with gold, not only have the same effect as melting it, but make it incapable of being reconstituted. Moses used such a solution.
   
   32,21. מה עשה לך העם הזה? ”what have these people done to you?” <i>Rashi</i> understands this question as meaning: “how many tortures have these people inflicted upon you that you became instrumental in making this calf?”
   Nachmanides has difficulty in accepting this interpre-tation, as Moses implied that Aaron’s action was excusable, whereas when it comes to idolatry we have an ironclad rule that one must be prepared to sacrifice one’s life rather than lend a hand in such a nefarious scheme. He therefore prefers to understand Moses’ question to Aaron as: “how much did you hate this people that you were willing to become the instrument which would lead to their destruction?” He said this as it had been Aaron’s task to be their remonstrator, castigator, not their assistant and abettor when they were bent on committing a sin. Nachmanides adds that actually, Moses should first have accused Aaron of his sin, before mentioning the people’s sin. Only then should he have mentioned that Aaron had been guilty in causing them to commit this sin. He refrained from accusing Aaron to his face of causing the people to sin, out of respect for him.
   Alternatively, the reason why Moses did not reprimand Aaron was simply that he was one hundred per cent convinced that Aaron could not have harboured any thought that deserved criticizing from an <i>halachic</i> point of view, but that Moses’ words referred exclusively to the sin committed by the people, and that Aaron should have remonstrated with them. Aaron replied simply that the people had deliberately misled him.
   
   32,22. אתה ידעת את העם כי ברע הוא, “you know what the people are like once they are bent on an evil path.” Aaron did not want to dwell at length on how the situation had deteriorated, and the people’s having planned this, but he shouldered part of the blame saying that he had misled them by throwing the gold they had brought into the crucible, as an unexpected result of which this calf emerged. The people had made him believe that they wanted a temporary substitute for Moses until Moses would return. It had neither occurred to him that this calf would emerge from the crucible, nor that they would worship this calf by prostrating themselves in front of it
   32,25. וירא משה, “Moses saw, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that even though Aaron had made excuses for the people, Moses, in his heart, did not accept this.” [I have not been able to find this remark by <i>Rashi</i> in our editions of <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary. I believe this is an error, and should be attributed to Nachmanides. Ed.]
   כי פרוע הוא, “that the inner motivations of the people had become revealed,” i.e. that they were innately wicked, they were a nation that had completely lost its spiritual directions, pursuing a totally destructive path. (similar to Deut. 32,28 גוי אובד עצות ואין בהם תבונה)
   כי פרעה אהרן, “for Aaron had exposed them.” Aaron was responsible for depriving the people of their normal intelligence and moral scruples. Moses said this as he realised that the people had become so confused that they imagined that this golden calf could serve them as a guide on their journeys through the desert. Anyone confused to such an extent must be considered as having completely lost his senses. As a result, some of the people, though misguided, entertained worthy thoughts, whereas others, entertained completely idolatrous thoughts.
   לשמצה בקמיהם, “as a disgrace among those who would rise up against them.” Even the portion of the people whose intentions were perfectly innocent will become the pretext for others to point at the disgraceful conduct of the Jewish people for all future generations. [as their intentions were not clear, seeing they had not voiced opposition to those who were bent on idolatry. Ed.] The historians would conclude that all the Jews had been of one mind at that time. The accusations labeled against all the people on that account would give Satan a valuable tool to use against the Jews.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, the word שמצה, derived from שמץ, something minute, means that as a result of this episode, the Jewish people had forfeited their image of being a unique and spiritually superior people, and they would henceforth be considered in the eyes of the nations as of very small stature. (compare for the meaning of שמץ Job 4,12 ותקח אזני שמץ, “my ear caught a whisper” something barely audible) of it. Or, in the sense of Israel losing its accumulated merits in the Book of G’d, [ספר זכויות as in the אבינו מלכנו prayer. Ed.] our positive balance in that book would shrink to zero. This would be most harmful whenever we would face enemies in battle.
   
   2,26. ויעמוד משה בשער המחנה, “Moses stood at the entrance gate to the camp.” Seeing that Moses had seen that the people’s conduct had resulted in their disgracing themselves, and being guilty of a public desecration of the name of the Lord, Moses took up position at the gateway to the camp and called out in a loud voice that all those loyal to <i>Hashem</i> should come forward and publicly execute all those guilty of acts of idolatry, in order that this would become common knowledge and no one would be able to use the fact that idolatry had been tolerated among the Israelites as a weapon against their reputation of being G’d’s nation. The public execution was an act of sanctification of the Lord’s name that would even the score. 
   
   32,27. כה אמר ה' שימו איש חרבו על ירכו, “thus has the Lord G’d of Israel said: “every man put his sword on his thigh, etc.” Nachmanides writes that what occurred here is not related to Exodus 22,19 זובח לאלוהים יחרם בלתי לה' לבדו, “anyone who offers sacrifices to <i>elohim,</i> (other gods) other than to <i>Hashem</i> will be destroyed.” Here only the people whom G’d had told Moses about, were to be executed, the others were not guilty of a capital offence. The Levites were aware of who had offered sacrifices to the golden calf, and, seeing that it was physically impossible to bring all these people to trial and they had not been warned, the procedure is not recorded here in writing in detail. Time was of the essence, if a greater calamity was to be avoided. By doing what they did, the Levites helped Moses to turn the temporary stay of execution G’d had promised Moses before he descended into a permanent stay of execution. (compare 32,14) We find that almost 40 years later, when the people at <i>Shittim</i> became sexually and ritually involved with the Moabite women (Numbers 25,4-9) similar emergency measures were employed.
   
   שימו איש חרבו על ירכו, (see above) Nachmanides writes  that there were so many people who worshipped the calf that it was impossible to bring all of them to a tribunal, and moreover, there had not been anyone who had warned these people in accordance with normal judicial requirements. This is why G’d had told Moses to use emergency measures. Our sages, go further and state that the method of execution was also changed, as normally stoning would be the order of the day for convicted idolaters, and all who had witnessed such a deed had to participate in the execution. [This comment does not agree with the Talmud in <i>Yuma</i>, although according to Maimonides <i>hilchot avodah zarah 3,1</i> it seems clear that stoning is the penalty when proper warning has been administered. Ed.]
   According to the scholars who hold that warnings had been issued to the people whom the Levites executed on this occasion by qualified witnesses, we must interpret Moses’ instructions to the Levites as having included this proviso. Those who could not be convicted on that basis, instead of being stoned, were executed by the sword.
   The correct interpretation is according to the scholar who holds that slaughtering animals to idols or burning incense is punishable by death through the sword, whereas other forms of worship such as kissing the idols is punishable by the kind of death preferred by the victim. This is so because the latter type of practicing idolatry has not been punished by death by the Jewish courts throughout the ages. [it was left to the heavenly tribunal to  take care of the sinner. Ed.]
   
   32,32. אם תשא את חטאתם ואם אין מחני נא מספרך, “if You will forgive their sin…., and if not please blot me out from Your Book.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> Moses wanted to have his name removed from the whole Torah.
   Nachmanides finds this difficult, as in his opinion G’d’s reply that He would remove the sinners’ names from His Book and not those of the ones free from sin, would not be comprehensible. Who else was there whose name could be erased, seeing that we have not heard about the names of any of the sinners? He therefore concludes that Moses’ request must be understood thus: “If You will forgive them in Your Mercy, o.k, if not, I prefer that you wipe me out from among the living i.e. the Book of Life, and let the people continue living in my place. G’d’s reply that He will punish the guilty and not the innocent instead of the guilty, makes perfect sense then. He had no reason to erase Moses from the Book of the Living.
   
   32,34. ועתה לך נחה את העם, “and now, go and lead the people!” G’d meant that now that He had reconsidered His initial plan and had desisted from destroying the people, it was up to Moses to continue to lead them.
   
   אל אשר דברתי לך, ”to where I have told you.” G’d did not want to be more specific, as He was still angry and He wanted Moses to know that the people’s continued existence was not due to His having forgiven them, but to the high regard in which He held their leader, i.e. Moses. Whenever He would have an occasion to visit some punishment on the people for a different sin, He would add some extra punishment in partial discharge of what they had become guilty of during this unhappy episode. This would continue even after they would come to the Holy Land. This is a veiled hint that they would at some time be exiled from that land. This is why our sages have taught us that there is no historical disaster which befalls the Jewish people that does not include part of the punishment for the unexpurgated guilt of the sin of the golden calf. (<i>Shemot Rabbah</i> 43,3)
   
   32,35.ויגוף ה' את העם , “<i>Hashem</i> smote the people.” In this instance the Torah did not reveal how many of the people were smitten with this fatal plague, as distinct from the people who had been executed by the Levites or the plague that killed the people participating in Korach’s uprising, or the people who died as a result of the encounter with the Moabite women at <i>Shittim</i>. Perhaps the reason why here we have not been told numbers is that these people did not die all simultaneously, so that the cause of their deaths would be obvious, but the “plague” that struck them meant that they died prematurely.
   Alternatively, the Torah did not bother to inform us of their number, just as it has not informed us of the number of people who died at <i>Taveyrah</i> (Numbers 11,1) or at <i>Kivrot Hataavah</i> (Numbers 11,35) The principal reason why the number of people executed by the Levites are mentioned, is to give credit to the Levites who carried out G’d’s instructions in spite of the large number of people involved. They trusted in G’d’s protection and were not afraid of their victims resisting and possibly killing them.
   
   אשר עשו את העגל, “who had made the golden calf.” This is mentioned to tell us that the people who were struck by the plague were not the ones who had actively prostrated themselves and worshipped the golden calf. Their sin consisted of ganging up on Aaron and demanding that he make for them a substitute for Moses. Seeing that the Torah first said that they were punished for making the golden calf, something not quite accurate, as Aaron had taken the gold and thrown it into the crucible, the Torah now had to add: אשר עשה אהרן, that actually it had been Aaron who had “made” the calf.
   אשר עשה אהרן, “which Aaron had made.” The reason the Torah had attributed the making of the calf to the people whom G’d subsequently struck with the plague, was that Aaron had acted only as their שליח, as their proxy. Had they not demanded it of him by adopting a threatening posture, he would never have dreamt of undertaking such a project. This plague only commenced after the Levites, at the command of Moses, had executed the people who had actively worshipped the calf. After that Moses had prayed to G’d on behalf of the people, and had received instructions to lead the people toward their goal, the Holy land. At that point G’d had said that He would send along one of His angels. In order to justify His doing so, He had to reduce the level of unexpurgated sin still amongst the people. Striking the instigators of the whole episode with the plague accomplished that purpose. Now G’d was able to say to Moses to proceed. [verse 34 was only preparatory, and did not contain the command to proceed forthwith. Ed.]
   33,1. עלה מזה אתה והעם, “move forward from this place, you and the people!” G’d now indicated that although He had forgiven partially, the people were not on a spiritual level which enabled Him to make His presence manifest among them again, and therefore He would content himself by assigning an angel as their escort representing His <i>Shechinah,</i> instead. G’d made mention at this point of 
   
   הארץ אשר נשבעתי, “the land which I had promised on oath” (to the patriarchs’ descendants) G’d hinted that on account of the people who had died by the plague, and their having thus been partially rehabilitated, it was possible for Him to once more mention the merit of their ancestors. He added:
   
   33,3 אל ארץ זבת חלב ודבש, ”to a land flowing with milk and honey.” G’d meant that the land itself would not become ruined by their inhabitants nor as a result of the sins of their inhabitants, but neither would the land condone the sins of its inhabitants and G’d would expel the six tribes as mentioned previously. G’d added, as an expression of His goodwill,
   כי לא אעלה בקרבך, “for I, in My capacity of My essence, will not go up amongst you.” This was not a description of the Israelites’ unworthiness at that time, but was meant as a protective device. In the event that the Israelites would sin again, in spite of being in the presence of G’d’s manifest <i>Shechinah,</i> He would be forced to react in a manner that would spell their destruction. As a result of the golden calf episode Israel suffered two major setbacks. 1) the absence of the <i>Shechinah</i> from the camp; 2) leadership by means of an angel until the destruction or expulsion of the Canaanites from their land. Once this promise to the patriarchs had been fulfilled, they were not even promised the presence of an angel as visible evidence of G’d’s continued personal interest in their fate. To make this point clear, G’d described the terms of reference for His angel as being limited to בדרך, “while on the way,” Concerning all this the Torah continues with:
   33,4. וישמע העם הדבר הזה ויתאבלו, “when the people heard this they went into mourning for themselves.” When <i>Hashem</i> observed that the people now mourned their fate, He switched to the Attribute of Mercy, [note that the Torah refers now to ויאמר ה' instead of וידבר ה' and instead of speaking אל העם He addresses the בני ישראל, a complimentary term. Ed.]
   
   33,5. אמור לבני ישראל, “say to the Children of Israel, etc.;” G’d now explains that the absence of His essence in their midst would be to their advantage, not as they had thought that it would be a sign of estrangement. Nonetheless, they had done well in considering themselves as in mourning and not wearing any decorative jewelry. They should always react to their own sins by observing a state of mourning, i.e. demonstrating that they were ashamed of their conduct. G’d would then take note of their penitence and react in accordance with the sincerity of their remorse.
   הורד עדיך מעליך, “remove your jewelry from yourselves!” 
   33,6. ויתנצלו בני ישראל את עדים, “The Children of Israel divested themselves of their jewelry.” Even though we had already read in verse 4 that the people did not put on their jewelry, some commentators understand the words ולא שתו to mean ולא הסירו, “they did not remove,” i.e. until ordered to do so they did not remove the jewelry they had been in the habit of wearing.
   Other commentators claim that every Israelite would normally be adorned with two crown-shaped pieces of jewelry. Removing, or better, not adorning themselves with jewelry as mentioned in verse 4, referred to only one of these two crowns. Now they were commanded to strip both crowns from themselves.
   
   33,7. ומשה יקח את האהל, “and Moses would take the tent, etc.;” <i>Rashi</i> writes that what is described in our verse did not happen until after the Day of Atonement, when Moses had returned from the Mountain for the third and last time. Moses continued pitching his camp outside the people’s camp until after the Tabernacle had been assembled and inaugurated. [based on <i>Tanchuma.</i> Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that he cannot agree with the above. He feels that there would have been no point in mentioning this at this juncture, seeing that Moses had not even ascended the Mountain for the second time as yet. Moreover, according to our sages, the only reason why Moses removed his tent from the camp was that the people were in disgrace, and just as G’d had seen fit to remove His presence from the people, G’d’s pupil, disciple, merely emulated his Master. After the Day of Atonement, when the people’s sin had been forgiven, what would be the point in positioning his tent outside the boundaries of the camp at that time? 
   
   Following his reasoning, Nachmanides therefore feels that Moses on the 17th of <i>Tammus</i>, the day he had returned from the Mountain for the first time and had smashed the Tablets, he also burned the golden calf, instructed the Levites to execute active idol worshippers. On the following day he told the people that he would ascend the Mountain again and pray there for forgiveness. He did so and offered a short prayer. This was the occasion when G’d told him that He would not accept his offer to save the people and to die in their stead and to have his name blotted out from the Book of Life. He told the people that he had been told that G’d would punish the guilty and not be content with their leader assuming their guilt and punishment. He then instructed them to remove their jewelry, telling them that the process of mourning would be drawn out, and that forgiveness, if at all, would not be instant, and he told the people to observe mourning.
   Moses moved his own tent to an area that was not spiritually contaminated by the people’s sin, and in this manner he hoped to maintain his ability to communicate with the <i>Shechinah</i> on a reciprocal basis. This could not be expected within the camp, as the spiritual contamination caused by the golden calf episode had not yet been cleansed. In fact, the Torah itself testifies that until after the inauguration of the Tabernacle Moses could not communicate with the <i>Shechinah</i> while within the camp. [(compare Exodus 40,34-38 and Leviticus 1,1) (compare also Moses’ comments in Leviticus 9,7-24) In all these verses the return of the <i>Shechinah</i> to the camp is illustrated. All of this took place only at the beginning of <i>Nissan</i> of the second year, [some eight and half months after Moses smashed the Tablets. Ed.]
   Concerning <i>Rashi’s</i> statement that Moses burned the calf on the 18th of <i>Tammuz</i> and that on that same day he executed the people who had been actively engaged in worshipping the calf, and that on the 19th he ascended the Mountain again, this is difficult, for if we do not consider the day of his ascent as a day belonging to the forty days, seeing that this day did not have the preceding night with it, as Moses had still been in camp then, (compare Talmud <i>Shabbat</i> quoted by<i> Rashi</i>) we will be left with two days missing, if according to tradition Moses was supposed to have returned on the 10th day of <i>Tishrey</i> from his last ascent and stay on the mountain. Even if we were to assume that Moses ascended again already on the 18th day of <i>Tammuz</i>, we are still short a day if he spent 40 days on the Mountain and returned on the 10th of <i>Tishrey.</i> Unless the actual daylight hours of Moses’ ascending or descending the Mountain are counted as whole days, the calculations do no jive.
   33,11. ויהושוע בן נון נער, “Joshua son of Nun, a lad,” Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that we know that Joshua lived to the age of one hundred and ten, and we have a tradition that he spent seven years conquering the land of Canaan, and seven more years settling the people on their respective portions of that land, he was 96 years of age at the time the Israelites crossed the Jordan. This means that at this time he was already 56 years of age. We must therefore wonder at why the Torah describes him as נער, “a (mere) lad.” He therefore understands the verse to mean that Joshua, who was the personal valet of Moses, was charged with the kind of errands one charges a lad to do for one.
   Nachmanides writes that there is no need to resort to this explanation of the word נער in our verse, as there are many instances when a person who performs valet service for others is referred to as נער, and this in no way poses a problem. The person for whom the service is performed is known as איש, which automatically makes the one performing the service a junior to the איש, i.e. a נער. 
   
   As to the unusual vowel <i>chirik</i> instead of the usual <i>segol</i> under the letter ב in the word בן נון, Nachmanides explains this as a mark of distinction for the bearer, meaning that there was no one who could match Joshua in wisdom and understanding. [an allusion to בינה understanding. Insight. Ed.] An alternative explanation is that the subject here is that בינה מוליד נון reminiscent of Psalms 72,17. In that verse ינון is a reference to the Messiah, and future Jews are credited to the Messiah as if they were his biological offspring (including the people being resurrected in due course) all on account of the meritorious deeds performed by the Messiah (Alshich)
   
   33,12.ויאמר משה ראה אתה אומר אלי , “Moses said: “See, You say to me: “take up this people, etc.” The instructions which Moses claimed to have received at Mount Sinai occurred on the 19th of <i>Tammuz</i>. The Torah did not have to write at that time that Moses ascended the Mountain, seeing that as long as the glory of G’d hovered over the Mountain, it was clear that G’d spoke to Moses from that location.
   
    ואתה לא הודעתני את אשר תשלח עמי, “yet You have not told me whom You will send to be with me.” <i>Rashi</i> understands Moses as referring to G’d’s having said that He would send an angel along (compare 32,20) as something which he was not even willing to consider as a הודעה, an “official information.”
   Nachmanides claims that this is not the correct meaning of what we read here at all. It does not jive with the syntax employed by the Torah. Furthermore, if correct, why would Moses say this to G’d at this juncture instead of in 32,20 when he had been told to get moving with the people? Did he then intend at this point to gain some advantage of what had happened on account of the golden calf?
   I believe (Nachmanides speaking) that what happened was as follows: G’d had told Moses that He would send an angel ahead of the people, to which Moses replied that he had not been told the “name” of that angel, i.e. the category of that angel and his terms of reference. He wanted to know if that was the same angel that had traveled with the Jewish people before the unhappy events with the golden calf, an angel who was high up in the celestial hierarchy, so that our sages describe him as an angel אשר שם ה' בקרבו, who clearly represented <i>Hashem,</i> the essence. as G’d Himself had said at the time כי שמי בקרבו, for My name (essence) is within him.” (Exodus 23,21) This is what Moses meant when he continued in a plaintive voice ואתה אמרת ידעתיך בשם, “and You Yourself have said to me that You had become as intimate with me as is possible, i.e. You expressed Your approval of me.” Moses indicated that he would not settle for anything less at this time.
   
   33,14. פני ילכו והנחותי לך, “My Presence will go and put your mind at rest.” Nachmanides writes that the commentators agree that G’d agreed that His essence would go with the people. We find similar words with the same meaning in Samuel II 17,11 פניך הולכים בקרב, when Chushai advises Avshalom to personally lead his troops against his father David. [the word פניך, meaning that Avshalom would prove that he was serious in his rebellion, that his innermost self was involved, and knowing this his supporters would not need to fear that he might change his mind at the last moment, leaving them to appear as the rebels and having no longer a cause to fight for. Ed.]
   
   33,15. אם אין פניך הולכים, “If Your essence will not be going…” according to <i>Rashi</i> these were the terms under which Moses was willing to settle for the presence of an angel. He did not mean that his previous words should have been understood as a kind of ultimatum to G’d, seeing that G’d had already assured him with the words פני ילכו, that He, personally, would accompany the people [or Moses, as became clearer in Joshua 6,14 when the angel that had first been appointed here, replaces the one whose stature had been approved by Moses who had remained with the people  as long as he lived. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra explains that the initial promise by G’d to personally come with him was addressed only to Moses, but not the people as a whole. Moses, in remonstrating, had in mind the people whom he also wanted to benefit from G’d’s personal Presence, rather than that of only an angel of relatively low standing in the celestial hierarchy. This is why he said to G’d: אל תעלנו מזה וגו', “do not lead us up from here” (in the plural mode). Nachmanides rejects this interpretation also, seeing that in his opening remarks Moses had spoken in the singular mode: לא הודעתני את אשר תשלח עמי, “You have not informed me whom You would send with me.” Besides, the whole argument of distinguishing between the angel being for the sake of Moses or the people respectively, is not valid, as in better times before the sin of the golden calf, in 32,20 G’d had said to Moses:הנה אנכי שולח מלאך לפניך לשמרך בדרך, “here I will send an angel ahead of you (sing.) to watch over you (sing.) on the way, etc.” If Ibn Ezra were correct in his distinction between angels for the benefit of Moses and the people, respectively, why did Moses not protest G’d’s promise already in 23,20? This whole paragraph in the Torah is so fraught with mystical aspects which only selected few are privy to, that it is not appropriate to comment on them here in such a public forum. Thus far Nachmanides.
   Seeing that I have not attained such insights as are required, I have only touched on the subject ever so slightly, limiting myself to the plain meaning of the text.
   
   3,18. ויאמר, הראני נא את כבודך. “I said: please reveal to me Your glory.” Moses requested that G’d show him His true face in a vision, something our sages are in the habit of referring to as אספקרלריא המאירא, “a clear, unambiguous visual image.” G’d answered him that what He would do was to parade before him a number of phenomena, each of which represented some of the ways in which He demonstrated His earnest desire to be of benefit to His creatures; as a result of viewing these phenomena one after another, he, more than any other human being, would develop an appreciation of what G’d’s essence was all about; however, it was impossible to do more without terminating Moses’ life, as it was not given to mortals to get a still deeper insight into what an Eternal G’d, the Creator of the universe, was truly like. 
   
   33,19. וקראתי בשם ה' לפניך, “I will proclaim the name <i>Hashem</i> before you.” I will let you hear My ineffable Name, seeing that it is not given mortal man to view a visual imagine of My essence.
   
   וחנותי את אשר אחון ורחמתי את אשר ארחם, “I will show grace to those to whom I choose to show grace, and I will treat with mercy those whom I deem fit to be treated with mercy.” By means of My proclaiming My Name, you will realize something about the facet of Me known as חנינה and the result of the exercise of this facet of My various characteristics you will know who has been the recipient of חנינה and who has been the recipient of mercy.
   The meaning of the line ולא יראני האדם וחי, is not- as many misunderstand- that as a result of man being granted a visual image of the essence of <i>Hashem</i> that he would die; rather, the meaning is that before a living human being would attain the spiritual capacity to view such an image his soul would depart from his body, for we know that even angels cannot experience the kind of visual image Moses requested, to wit: (Daniel 10,16) במראה נהפכו צירי עלי, “in the vision my joints shudder.” [Daniel who was shown the vision of an angel who experienced the overwhelming awe with which that angel related to his own vision. Ed.]
   
   24,3. ואיש לא יעלה עמך, “and no man may ascend with you.” Unlike the first time around, this time the elders were no to accompany Moses even part of the way.
   
   וגם איש אל ירא בכל ההר, and also no man is to be seen in the entire area around the Mountain.” Even at the base of the Mountain, unlike the first time when the Israelites had stood at the base of the Mountain.
   
   גם הצאן והבקר אל ירעו אל מול ההר ההוא, “neither sheep no cattle are to graze opposite that Mountain.” On the occasion of Moses’ first ascent the warning had only been not to touch this area by hand on pain of death. The reason why so many new restrictions had been added was to make plain to the people that there had been a change in their status. On the first occasion Moses, as their representative, went up to the Mountain to receive the first Tablets after the people had been considered fit to witness the revelation. They were all on a spiritual “high.” This time only Moses remained on such a level, and G’d wanted them to realize that it was only because Moses was highly regarded by Him, and this is why his prayer would be welcome. Seeing that the glory of G’d had remained hovering above the Mountain all this time, unworthy people would be highly at risk if they ventured too near.
   
   34,9. ילך נא א-דוני בקרבנו כי עם קשה עורף הוא, “may my Lord walk in our midst because they are a stiff-necked people.”
   Nachmanides in interpreting the word כי as “because,” i.e. according to the unadorned text, explains the psychology underlying Moses’ argument. G’d had warned Moses that if the people were to rebel against the angel’s instructions, he would make short shrift of them and destroy them. An angel would interpret any display of stubborn behaviour as completely negative. When, after the people had regained their grace in the eyes of <i>Hashem,</i> and they would meticulously, i.e. ”stubbornly,” observe all the laws of the Torah, G’d would realize that their stubborn streak had been turned to constructive use. If a relapse would occur, as was possible, G’d knowing that their stubborn streak had also been employed constructively, would look at this as making them deserve another chance, something an angel could not be expected to do. Hence, Moses argued, the very stubborn streak of the people is what made him ask to have G’d in their midst, instead of merely a proxy, an angel. G’d’s relationship to the Jewish people was that they were “His people.” No angel could relate to them as such.
   Other commentators view our verse as meaning almost precisely the opposite. Moses, admitting that the people‘s Achilles heel was their stubborn streak, their rebelliousness, argues that because of this inherent weakness they needed the Presence of the attributes of <i>Hashem,</i> Who is kind, patient, makes allowances, etc. Such a combination of attributes within one camp would mitigate the negative impact of the negative aspect of Israel’s stubbornness.
   
   Still other commentators interpret Moses’ reference to the people’s stubbornness as such that it results in their defying even death rather than violating G’d’s Torah. This is why they bend over backwards to keep His commandments, even risking their lives to do so. They treat the laws of the Torah as a burden which they are willing to carry under any circumstances, as they feel that they must do so in order to show that they appreciate G’d’s glory sufficiently. Seeing that this is their general attitude, it behooves G’d to forgive them for their grievous error in the episode of the golden calf.
   וסלחת לעונינו ולחטאתינו, “and You will forgive our deliberate as well as our inadvertent sins.” Moses did not ask G’d to forgive also פשענו, “our sins committed out of the desire to show defiance of G’d’s legislation.”
   34,10. ויאמר הנה אנכי כורת ברית, He said: “here I am about to conclude a covenant.“ G’d announced to Moses that He would make a covenant with him, and perform special distinctions with him and His people as Moses had requested. He added:
   
   נגד כל עמך אעשה נפלאות ...וראה כל העם אשר אתה בקרבו, “the distinctive acts which I will perform in sight of the whole people that you are amongst, etc.” G’d says that whatever wonderful acts He would perform henceforth would be on account of His special relationship with Moses, and the people would be beneficiaries seeing that they are included in this covenant. It is not possible to explain this verse as meaning that G’d would perform even greater miracles for the people than He had performed in the past, as we can search the whole Torah and not find any evidence of this having been the case.
   
   34,11. שמר לך את אשר אנכי מצוך, “Beware of what I command you today.” Nachmanides writes that it is clear that concerning commandments the Israelites had already violated, G’d would not say “the ones I command you this day.” Therefore, G’d must be referring to commandments that He is about to announce, and He warns the people not to disregard them as they had done with other commandments that had been issued in the past. At that time, by violating the commandment concerning idolatry they had in effect violated the whole of the Torah legislation that set them apart from other nations. When G’d had promised to expel the nations inhabiting the land of Canaan and to replace them with the Israelites, this had been due largely to the idolatrous ways of the members of those tribes. The Israelites are therefore warned at this time not to have any track with those nations, as they would lure them into worshipping their traditional deities, especially if there would be intermarriage between the two peoples. The absolute prohibition of making a cast image is therefore repeated here once more. As a corollary, and as if to underline how the pilgrimages three times a year to Jerusalem i.e. to the Temple would help cement the close relations between the average Israelite and his G’d, this legislation is repeated here once more also.
   34,15. ואכלת מזבחו, “and you would eat from what he had offered as a sacrificial offering to his deity.” Cultural relations with the nations now in the land of Canaan would inevitably lead to intermarriage and to idolatrous practices. [Jewish history, alas, is full of examples of the truth of the fears expressed here by the Torah. Ed.] The first step in such a chain is concluding of a non aggression pact with any remnants of the Canaanites allowed to continue to live there.
   
   34,21. בחריש ובקציר תשבות, “you are to abstain from work on the Sabbath both at seeding/ploughing time and at harvesting time. According to Nachmanides, the simple reason why periods of the year during which ploughing and harvesting proceeds have been singled out for a reminder to observe the laws of the Sabbath, is that the farmer is under greater pressure at that time to complete his work on schedule. If, due to atmospheric conditions, he feels under special pressure, he is warned not to let such considerations deter him from resting on the Sabbath. The reason why-surprisingly- the Torah interrupts aspects of the laws to make the pilgrimage to the Temple on the three holydays named, is that ever since the Exodus the Sabbath is no longer only a reminder of G’d’s creative activity, but it is a reminder of how He relieved the pressure on the Jewish people who slaved in Egypt. The G’d Who gave us relief from pressure in Egypt will not let us succumb to what we perceive to be pressure by atmospheric conditions when the weather seems to make agricultural pursuits more difficult.
   
   34,26. ראשית בכורי אדמתך, “The first of your land’s produce, etc.” The reason why mention of not boiling milk and meat appears here next to the legislation of bringing the first of one’s produce to the Temple, i.e. the priests, is that at the same time the farmer will presumably also bring the first of the young born by his animals, seeing that on the way the young lambs and kids are still suckling at their mother’s teats, and once in Jerusalem these animals will be slaughtered to help the owners enjoy the festival. Using the milk of the mother animal with which to cook the young, is therefore not something far-fetched. On the other hand, in Deuteronomy 14,21 when the same legislation is repeated in connection with forbidden foods, the emphasis is placed on the eating of the product of such boiling of milk and meat together.
   
   34,27. כתב לך את הדברים האלה, “make a written record of these words for yourself;” G’d commands Moses to write the ספר הברית, “the Book of the Covenant,” so that the people would accept it with same enthusiastic נעשה ונשמע, “we will perform, now let’s learn the details,” as they had accepted what was written on the Tablets at the first covenant. Seeing that the people had violated what was part of the first covenant, a new covenant had become necessary. In order to prevent another violation of a covenant, this covenant had to be recorded in writing, the “Book” being mute testimony to its validity. Moses, of course, carried out G’d’s instructions, although the Torah, as on many occasions, did not bother to spell this out for us.
   
   אתך ברית ואת ישראל, “the covenant includes both you and Israel.” The reason why the Torah singles out Moses, i.e. עמך here, is because the entire new covenant G’d renewed only on account of His feelings for Moses, as we mentioned previously. As to G’d’s relations with Israel, G’d’s pardon for the people had to precede His concluding a new covenant with them. [This is why the cumbersome wording כרתי אתך ברית ואת ישראל is used instead of the straightforward כרתי עמכם ברית, “I concluded a covenant with you.” (as for instance in Deut.5,2) Ed.]
   
   34,28. ויהי שם עם ה' ארבעים יום....ויכתב  על הלוחות את דברי הברית, עשרת הדברים. “He remained there with <i>Hashem</i> for forty days<i>….</i>and He (G’d) wrote on the Tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.” 
   The subject of the word ויכתב is <i>Hashem,</i> for G’d Himself testified  (Exodus 34,1 וכתבתי על הלוחות, “I Myself will inscribe on the Tablets, etc.”) The forty days mentioned by Moses here were the last forty days he spent on Mount Sinai. Prior to this he had spent another forty days on the Mountain, devoted entirely to prayer on behalf of the Jewish people, beseeching G’d to forgive the people. He referred to those forty days in Deuteronomy 9,18. Moses did not spell out how many days he had been on the Mountain on that occasion now as everybody knew, as opposed to the people whom he addressed in Deuteronomy, most of whom had not been alive yet at this time. The reason the Torah, i.e. Moses, emphasized that he spent 40 days on the Mountain even on the last occasion was to remind the people how difficult it had been to obtain atonement for them. He certainly had not needed all that time to learn the Torah, as he had learned that on his previous stay on the Mountain.
   
   34,31. וידבר משה אליהם, “and Moses would speak to them.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that this is phrased in the present tense, as was the entire episode.
   
   34,32. ואחרי כן נגשו, “after that they approached.” This was after Moses had taught the Torah to the elders.
   
   Nachmanides writes that this is not correct, but that the words ואחר כן refer to what happened after the people had scattered, being afraid to approach Moses until he had placed the scarf around his forehead which prevented the rays of light emanating from his face. He then called upon them to approach, whereupon Aaron and all the princes did approach and speak to Moses. Moses welcomed them with the good news that the people’s sin had been forgiven, and he showed them the second set of Tablets to prove it.
   
   At that point the ordinary Israelites realized that when Moses spoke to the princes everything appeared normal, and they too approached Moses unafraid. Moses then told them  that G’d had commanded him the second version of the Ten Commandments, the ones which He had inscribed on the second set of Tablets which he had brought down with him. Moses told the people everything from שמר לך in verse 11 onwards until the end of the whole <i>Parshah</i> for He told the people that G’d had commanded a new covenant. The Torah only summarises here, giving us a synopsis of all that G’d had told Moses to tell the people at that time. Having realized from the people’s retreat that it was caused because of the rays his forehead emitted, he proceeded to cover his forehead with the מסוה, his mask-like scarf. It is also possible that the people had told him that they could not face him on account of the rays his forehead emitted, so that Moss made it a practice to be without that mask only when he went to communicate with G’d or be communicated with by G’d.
   Parshat  Vayakhel
   
   35,1. ויקהל משה את כל עדת בני ישראל, “Moses assembled the entire community of the Children of Israel. The comprehensive term עדה includes both men and women. Seeing that both the men and the women had contributed of their belongings for the work on the Tabernacle they were all entitled to be addressed here directly. The assembly mentioned here, occurred on the day after Moses had returned from his last trip to the Mountain on <i>Yom Kippur</i> and had informed the people that the instructions to build a Sanctuary for G’d were living proof that they were back in G’ds favour. While it is true that Moses himself had already received such instructions on his first ascent to the Mountain, to wit chapter 25,8 ועשו לי מקדש, seeing that the sin of the golden calf had intervened, and G’d’s manifest Presence had withdrawn in the interval, these instructions now had to be renewed.
   
   אלה הדברים וגו', “these are the things, etc.” Some commentators feel that the words אלה הדברים focus on the Sabbath legislation which follows immediately. The reason the Torah used the plural mode אלה instead of זה הדבר, is to make the point that the Sabbath and all it entails is a commandment that is considered as weighty as the remainder of the laws of the Torah. [Deliberate violation of the Sabbath makes one a heretic, even if one conscientiously observes all the other commandments. Ed.]
   Alternatively, the fact that the Sabbath legislation includes the prohibition of 39 categories of activities known collectively as אבות מלאכות, makes the plural mode אלה perfectly appropriate.
   Nachmanides writes that the words אלה הדברים refer to the instructions relating to the building of the Tabernacle, and its various components. The reason why the Torah mentioned the sanctity of the Sabbath before proceeding with the details of the Tabernacle, was to stress that the work for the Tabernacle was not to override the laws of resting on the Sabbath.
   
   35,2. כל העושה בו מלאכה יומת, “anyone performing forbidden categories of work on that day deserves to be executed.” Even if the person concerned was busy doing work sanctioned by heaven, it does not take precedence over the legislation governing the rules of the Sabbath. One of these rules, for instance, is what follows:
   
   35,3. לא תבערו אש בכל מושבותיכם, “do not kindle any fire in any of your dwellings;” we find a disagreement between the scholars of the Talmud (<i>Shabbat</i> 70) concerning this particular verse. Some hold that the reason why this particular work prohibition is the only one specifically mentioned in the Torah, is to place it in a different category from the other prohibited categories of activities, i.e. all the others are subject to the death penalty, whereas this one is punishable only by thirty nine lashes, (according to <i>Rashi,</i> not even that<i>)</i> as are most other negative commandments when violated deliberately. [the technical term for this view by Rabbi Yossi is ללאו יצאה, “it was singled out as a lesser transgression.” The other opinion views this prohibition as an example, לחלק יצאה, “singled out, [as representative of the rules applying to all thirty nine categories. Ed.] The thirty-nine categories themselves are based on activities without which the work on the Tabernacle could not have been carried out successfully; hence they are appropriate as guidelines as to what is and what is not prohibited on the Sabbath. Some scholars feel that the reason why kindling a fire had to be mentioned especially, is that the general public does not view this activity as “work,” seeing that it is permitted on the festivals when used to prepare food. Still other commentators feel that a basic activity, such as kindling a fire, is so necessary that people could not have imagined that it was forbidden on pain of death if the Torah had not spelled it out for them specifically.
   Nachmanides writes that seeing the Torah does not add here that anyone performing forbidden work will be put to death, we might have thought that when this kindling of fire is performed in order to enable us to have hot meals on the Sabbath, that this is not forbidden, just as it is not forbidden on Passover or the other festivals, although the Torah writes that no work may be performed on those festivals. By specifically stating that lighting a fire on the Sabbath, for whatever reason, is forbidden, we are reminded that the Sabbath is different from the festivals in this respect.
   
   35,5. יביאה את תרומת ה', “he shall bring it as his contribution to <i>Hashem.”</i> The meaning is the same as if the Torah had written יביא, without the letter ה at the end. It happens quite frequently in Scripture that the pronoun is used, as in this case, prematurely, and only afterwards does the Torah explain to what this pronoun [in this instance the letter ה for “it” referred. Another such example is found in Exodus 2,6 ותפתח ותראהו, “She opened it and saw him, את הילד, “the boy.”
   Moses now proceeds to tell the entire congregation all the details of the work to be performed, not because all the people would participate in it, but to make them aware of the gigantic nature of this project, undertaken in the desert in the absence of workshops, etc. It was also to bring home to them that substantial contributions were required to ensure the successful conclusion of the project. 
   Interestingly, when referring to the Tabernacle as well as to its furnishings, Moses uses the definitive article, i.e. the letter ה, making it sound as if all these phenomena were already familiar to the people whom he addressed. By use of this definitive article, he intimated that the details would be conveyed to the artisans commissioned to actually carry out the work.
   
   35,21. ויבאו כל איש אשר נשאו לבו, “Every man whose heart inspired him came;” Nachmanides draws our attention to the change in expression here. In connection with the donations, (25,2) the Torah had described the individual’s motivation with the words אשר נדבנו לבו, “whose heart motivates him,” whereas here we are told about a different level of generosity, enthusiasm, i.e. אשר נשאו לבו, “whose heart inspired him.” Men who had no training in performing any of these tasks were inspired and suddenly were able to perform tasks they had never considered themselves capable of performing. Artisans who were skilled in performing tasks but had never trained others to do so, now became skilled at teaching their art, and men or women who had never displayed skill with their hands were suddenly inspired to do so. They came to Moses volunteering to perform the tasks that were required.
   
   35,22. ויבאו האנשים על הנשים, “The men came together with the women;” the meaning of the word על הנשים is that the men “played second fiddle” to the women, who had been the primary movers in getting the whole project off to a flying start. One of the reasons the women were so quick in contributing, was that they had plenty of jewelry with which they were in the habit of adorning themselves. They did not have to go searching for things to contribute. All they had to do was to take off part of their jewelry and to hand it to Moses.
   
   וכל איש אשר הניף תנופת זהב לה', “and any man who raised up an offering of gold for G’d.” Seeing that the Torah had already reported that all kinds of golden vessels had been donated, here we must think in terms of either gold coins or remnants of golden vessels that had somehow disintegrated.
   
   35,23. וכל איש אשר נמצא אתו תכלת וארגמן, “as well any man in whose possession there was blue wool and purple wool.” Finding such cloth dyed in the required colours was more difficult, as not many people owned such. We find a similar expression later when people who happened to own <i>shittim</i> wood for the beams of the Tabernacle are described as אשר נמצא אתו, “who possessed such.” On the other hand, when speaking of contributions of metal such as silver and copper, the Torah uses the word כל “all,” as if to hint that everyone possessed such metals in abundance, so that there was no problem in raising the contributions necessary in the required quantities or even more than that. This expression כל had not been used when the Torah spoke of contributions of gold, seeing that the gold was primarily donated by the women who had golden jewelry, but who did not own silver and copper in their own right. [they could not legally donate what belonged to their husbands. Ed.]
   In <i>Parshat Pekudey</i> the Torah refers to both gold and copper as תנופה, “a raised up” offering. The reason for this may be the absence of any reference to a donation, i.e. תרומה[the word תרומה from the root הרים, to elevate something, obviated the need for reference to תנופה when gold was mentioned earlier. Ed.] Silver donated is described there without being defined as either תרומה or תנופה, presumably because the half shekel silver coins contributed by all the males above 20 years of age were mandatory contributions, not the result of any feeling of generosity on the part of the donor who had to atone for a serious sin he had been guilty of. [seeing that there is a confusion in the text of the author’s manuscript about this, I have substituted my own interpretation.  The Torah, after all, did write that the silver was the proceeds of the people numbered. (38,25,) Ed.] Copper may have qualified for a distinctive adjective as it was not common and much in demand, so that giving it away represented an act of special generosity.
   35,27. והנשיאים הביאו, “and the princes had brought (gemstones).” According to Ibn Ezra when the people at the time of the Exodus asked their Egyptian neighbours for valuables, each person asked for things commensurate to his station in society. The princes therefore had asked for jewels, which they now contributed for use in the breastplate of the High Priest. According to a comment by the Targum Yonatan ben Uziel, and a note in the <i>Tanchuma</i>, the word נשיאים here is rendered as ענני שמיא, “celestial clouds,“ i.e. a kind of angel? And these angels came and contributed these jewels for the breastplate and <i>Ephod</i> of the High Priest. In <i>Yuma</i> 75 the word נשיאים is also used in that sense. (based on Proverbs 25,14 )
   36,3. ויקחו מלפני משה, “They took from Moses’ presence, etc.” The people had brought their contributions to Moses’ tent from where the artisans had taken whatever it was they required on the day that he had received them. He had given orders immediately to transfer the various materials to the artisans qualified to convert them into parts for the Tabernacle. Upon receiving these contributions the artisans sent word to Moses immediately that they had received more than they needed for their part of the work. The Torah did not spell out the amount of the excess materials donated. It was not of historic significance for subsequent generations to know the margin by which the contributions to the Tabernacle had been oversubscribed. Neither was it historically interesting to record what had been done with the excess materials. Possibly, they were used in repairs from time to time, and possibly some materials were used as auxiliary sacred vessels.
   
   36,5. מרבים העם להביא, “the people are bringing too many contributions.” The Torah records this fact in order to flatter the people who had contributed so generously, and in order to praise the honesty of the artisans who, instead of pocketing the excess received, drew attention to it and thus enhanced their reputation as being honest. The person in charge of counting all these contributions also deserves praise for preventing the people from bringing more than was needed, as he was not interested in accumulating the people’s gold and silver.
   
   36,6. איש ואשה אל יעשו עוד מלאכה, “man and woman shall not do more work;” in this instance, as in some others, the word מלאכה refers to money. Another example of this meaning comes to mind in Exodus 22,7 where the words אם לא שלח ידו במלאכת רעהו mean “that he had not laid a hand on his fellow man’s money (possessions).” In this instance, the women were also stopped from spinning and weaving materials for use in the coverings of the Tabernacle.
   
   36,8. ויעשו כל חכם לב, ”the wise-hearted among those doing the work, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah repeats the expression מלאכת המשכן no fewer than five times during the stage where the carrying out of these instructions is described. In two instances the operative instruction is in the singular mode ועשית, i.e. 25,23 and 25,31. In 25,10 the Torah uses the plural mode, indirect speech, i.e. ועשו, whereas in 31, 6-7 the plural mode indirect speech is used again although the directive is addressed primarily to <i>Oholiov</i>. The reason for all this is that initially, Moses, at the command of G’d, instructed the main architects and supervisors of the work, <i>Betzalel</i> and <i>Oholiov</i>, respectively, whereas these two experts instructed the various artisans working under them in their individual duties. None of these workers had become capable of performing these tasks until the holy spirit had descended on <i>Betzalel</i> through his being instructed and charged by Moses, personally. In chapter 35 the directive to make coverings as a portable roof for the Tabernacle was given, but only at this stage some details such as the need to make 10 carpet-like coverings, and the length and width of each of these, were revealed. As a general rule, although Moses had received detailed instructions in chapter 25-27, all the details were revealed to the people concerned as and when the time had come to commence work on them. The artisans already understood that in order to link two large carpets such as described one to another, they had to fashion loops and clasps in order to join them in such a fashion that they could easily dismantle the structure. The artisans had been granted sufficient insights by G’d to enable them to spontaneously attend to the details described in <i>Parshat Terumah and Tetzaveh.</i>
   
   When the Torah in chapter 36,8 first mentions ויעשו in the plural mode, this includes all the people previously described as חכם לב, “wise-hearted.” The subsequent use of the singular mode ויעש, describes individuals of this group of artisans fashioning certain parts of the project. When, in chapter 37,1 the Torah attributes certain furnishings as having been made by <i>Betzalel,</i> mentioning him by name, the Torah tells us that the work of making these furnishings required additional skill, skills not possessed by the חכמי לב. After all, he had been described as מלא רוח אלוקים, “filled with the spirit of G’d.” However, the Torah then reverts to the anonymous ויעש, in order for us to understand that he word ויעש, “he fashioned,” refers to one of the artisans filled with חכמת הלב in the paragraphs dealing with the fashioning of the Table and the <i>Menorah,</i> the golden altar and the copper altar, as well as the basin and the courtyard in all its details.
   Ibn Ezra, on the other hand, is of the opinion that the “anonymous” ויעש continues to describe work performed by <i>Betzalel</i> personally, so that that all the sacred vessels would have been attributed to him by the Torah. Nachmanides does not agree, pointing out that the same word ויעש in 38,10 introduces the construction of the courtyard around the Tabernacle, and it is most unlikely that this part of the project required the kind of holy spirit possessed only by <i>Betzalel.</i> The Torah, at that point or even earlier, reverts to the people endowed “only” with חכמת לב. Just as the actual making of all these components of the project “Tabernacle” are described both in general terms as well as in its specifics, the presentation of the work to Moses is also described both in general terms as in specific terms, i.e. only the finished product was brought to Moses.
   It is noteworthy that during the report of the construction of the Tabernacle and its auxiliaries, we do not find the recurring sentence כאשר צוה ה' את משה, “as <i>Hashem</i> had commanded Moses,” whereas in <i>Parshat Pekudey,</i> in connection with the garments of the Priests, this sentence recurs no fewer than eight times. The reason, presumably, is that when constructing the Tabernacle the Torah sums it all up in the 38,22 when the Torah writes that “<i>Betzalel,</i> son of <i>Uri,</i> son of <i>Chur,</i> had completed all that G’d had commanded Moses.” It is possible that the reason why the Torah repeats these matters in different ways is due to changes in the order of construction having taken place. The Torah, i.e. G’d, wanted to signal that in spite of <i>Betzalel</i> having changed the order in which the Tabernacle and the furnishings respectively were constructed, G’d had approved the changes so that whatever he had done was considered as complying with what “G’d had commanded Moses<i>.”</i>
   37, 29. ויעש את שמן המשחה קודש, “He made the oil of anointing, holy;” the reason why the Torah adds the adjective קודש when describing the making of this oil, is because it was used to sanctify the Tabernacle, its furnishings, both Aaron’s and his sons’ garments. The incense, on the other hand, is described as being טהור, pure, to tell us that it is subject to being contaminated ritually.
   Nachmanides writes the reason why the Torah did not spell out the components that the oil of anointing consisted of as it did when Moses was commanded to make it in chapter 30, was that even when Moses was commanded about the making of the oil of anointing and the incense, the Torah did not furnish a complete list of the ingredients. The Torah had contented itself with mentioning “מעשה רוקח,” the work of perfumers. If it was in order to be brief at that time, it was in order to be equally brief when it reports the compliance with the directive. 
   
   38,8. במראות הצובאות, “using the mirrors of the legions.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the expression is to be understood literally. As to his comment that Moses was first appalled at the thought of using them for sacred purposes, this does not refer to the mirrors, but to the jewelry described as כומז, seeing that this jewelry is worn on the private parts of a woman’s body. 
   Nachmanides explains that there (when the כומז is mentioned) this was one of a number of types of jewelry which the women donated for the use in building the Tabernacle (35,22) He therefore fails to understand how such jewelry could have been described as piling up at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. Perhaps what is meant is that the women brought this jewelry to the tent of Moses [still outside the boundaries of the Israelites’ camp at that time,  and appropriately called “tent of meeting.” Ed.] Moses personally accepted this only at the express command of G’d. At that time there was no Tabernacle, i.e. the Tabernacle whose alternate name was אהל מועד. [i.e. after the reconciliation between G’d and His people, it became known as such, as G’d’s Presence again was manifest within the camp. Ed.]
   Onkelos translates the words above as דאתין לצלאה בתרע משכן זמנא, “the women brought the mirrors (in a manner corresponding to their modesty) to the side of the entrance of Tabernacle.” His words tend to agree with those of Ibn Ezra who describes the women who gave up their mirrors as doing so from a sense of piety, preferring to come to the Tabernacle daily to offer prayers there or near there to admiring their reflection in a mirror..
   It is also possible to understand the whole verse to mean that the basin and the stand supporting it, was constructed of the mirrors which the women had contributed in masses,הצובאות. These mirrors were made of polished copper and as such singularly suited for the purpose for which they were donated.
   Still other commentators understand the wordsמראות הצובאות not as referring to the “what” these mirrors were made of, but to the location. The women, who were not normally admitted to the courtyard of the Tabernacle, and who were anxious to observe some procedures, such as the woman suspected of infidelity drinking the מים המאררים, the waters designed to reveal her guilt or innocence, wanted to watch the proceedings by means of the mirrors reflecting same over a distance.
   Still another explanation understands that the basin was constructed from these mirrors as those priests who offered sacrifices on behalf of women had to be conscious of doing so on their behalf. By looking at the material this basin was made of, they would be stimulated to keep their donors, i.e. women, in mind. It was forbidden for the priests to look directly at the faces of the women on whose behalf they offered their sacrifices, both mandatory ones and voluntary ones. The woman would stand fairly close to the basin, and her image would be reflected in the mirror-like polish of the copper basin. This would enable the priest to obtain a visual image of the woman on whose behalf he was performing his task, so that he could do so with the proper concentration on the donor personally.
   Parshat  Pekudey
   
   38,21. אלה פקודי המשכן העדות, “These are the reckonings of the Tabernacle of Testimony; when the word משכן appears without further details, such as משכן העדות, it refers to the carpet-like coverings forming the roof of that structure, i.e. the lowest layer of these coverings. In order to make sure that we understand that all parts of the structure are meant, the Torah wrote משכן העדות. The idea is that this was the structure that housed (within the Ark) the Tablets that were testimony to the revelation at Mount Sinai.
   Nachmanides writes that many commentators take the view that the words אלה פקודי refer back to the section which described the making and assembling pf the Tabernacle, its furnishings, and its surrounding courtyard, as well as the tasks which the priests and Levites were to perform in connection with this Tabernacle, and the sacrificial service. According to their view the tasks over which the son of Aaron, Ittamar, presided, are all included in the פקודים referred to in our verse.
   Nachmanides does not accept this approach, saying that if it were so, why are the tasks that Eleazar, the elder son of Aaron presided over, not included? Therefore, Nachmanides is of the opinion that the words אלה פקודי וגו' do not refer to what had been written before, but to what follows, namely details of the totals of the donations which had been collected for the project, especially the amounts of silver, gold and copper. The Torah describes the use that was made of the 100 talents of silver contributed for the sockets of the beams of the Tabernacle, the hooks by which the curtains of the courtyard were fastened to their pillars, etc., the copper most of which was used as overlay of the altar in the courtyard, as well as for the various tools used in servicing the fire on the altar, keeping it going around the clock, the vessels needed to remove ashes, etc. All the items that were made of copper and that weighed 70 talents, were under the supervision of Ittamar, son of Aaron. The reason that Eleazar’s name is not mentioned here is that all these items were not handed to him at this time for supervising their transport during the journeys. At this point we are told the amounts of metal used and Ittamar had been entrusted with supervising this. While it is true that the copper altar is mentioned here also, and this was within the domain of Eleazar, so much so that mention had to be made that it was constructed from the donations of copper which, as we already stated, deserved special recognition seeing that this metal was scarce and therefore much in demand. The details of how much gold had been used for that were not mentioned here as some gold was used in furnishings under the supervision of Eleazar, whereas other quantities of gold were used in overlays of the beams which were the mainstays of the Tabernacle, etc. It is completely possible that no one kept track of exactly how much gold was used up in each overlay of wooden furnishings, beams, etc. The basin and its stand have also not been enumerated here as it was not known precisely how much copper was used from the copper mirrors the women had donated for this purpose. Possibly, these vessels were not part of what belonged to the domain of Ittamar
   
   38,22. ובצלאל בן אורי...עשה, “and <i>Betzalel</i> son of <i>Uri</i>  fashioned, etc.” Seeing that <i>Betzalel</i> was the chief architect, and supervised all the people working on the project “Tabernacle,” the Torah accords him the credit as if he personally had done all this with his own two hands.
   Our sages deduce from the words את כל אשר צוה ה' את משה, “everything that <i>Hashem</i> had commanded to Moses,” instead of “everything he had been commanded by Moses,” that even items which Moses had forgotten to tell him about, he divined as things G’d had spoken to Moses about, and he proceeded to include these items in his project. The wording of the Torah proves that changes in the order of what was to be constructed first and what last were what G’d had told Moses, although Moses had not related this in the same order.
   
   38,25. וכסף פקודי העדה מאת ככר, “and the silver contributed by the men of the congregation who had been mobilized for military duty,…amounted to100 talents.” Some commentators, basing themselves on the failure of the Torah to describe this silver as a  “תרומה,” or a similar expression as used with the gold and copper contributions, that a great deal of silver was donated, and the reason why the total was not revealed here was that here we are only interested in how much of it was used in the actual construction of the Tabernacle. The balance was given to the Temple treasurer for use directly or indirectly in maintenance work, as and when necessary, as well as in the purchase of the animals of the mandatory communal offerings, especially at times when there was a dearth of voluntary offerings. If so, the scholar who holds that the tribe of Levi was also counted at the time of the first census is correct, as the shekel contributions of these Levites would make up the surfeit handed over to the trustee in charge of the Temple treasury.
   
   39,3. וירקעו את פחי הזהב, “they hammered out the thin sheets of gold;” Nachmanides comments that nowhere has this process of turning gold into sheets been described in the whole Torah except here. It is quite possible that the Torah here reports on a new discovery of how to make golden threads. Subsequently, these golden threads could be interwoven as easily as linen and wool. It had not occurred to anyone to do this prior to the making of the priestly garments.
   
   39,24. ויעשו על שולי המעיל, “on the hem of the robe they made, etc.” Nachmanides writes that these pomegranates were not integral parts of the robe, but were attached from underneath the hem.
   
   39,25. ויתנו את הפעמונים בתוך הרמונים, ”they placed the bells amid the pomegranates.” This was done before either of the decorative appendages (in lieu of tassels) were connected to the robe. The bells were inserted within the pomegranate-shaped knobs. The Torah repeats the words בתוך הרמונים a second time, to inform us that not only did the artisans insert the bells inside the pomegranates before suspending the pomegranates from the hem of the robe, but they remained in place also afterwards.
   
   39,27. ויעשו את הכתנות שש מעשה אורג.לאהרן ולבניו, “they made the tunics of the fine linen of weaver’s work, for Aaron and his sons.” This means that these tunics and the headdresses as well as the sash for Aaron and his sons were made of the same material.
   The Torah, describes the sash, and the trousers as being made of שש משזר, linen woven of twisted (multiple) threads as well as blue wool, red and purple wool, something that had not been mentioned in the instructions. We must assume therefore that the difference between the two kinds of headgear מצנפת and מגבעת respectively, was not in the materials used, but in the manner in which they were worn. Moreover, when three kinds of thread, i.e. תכלת, ארגמן תולעת שני, are used, the method of combining them is known as מעשה רוקם, embroiderer’s work. 
   
   39,33. ויביאו את המשכן אל משה, את האהל וגו', “They brought the Tabernacle to Moses; the tent, etc.;” according to Nachmanides the words את האהל have to be understood as if the Torah had written: ואת האהל, “and the tent.” The reason that this is not strange is that the term משכן whenever it appears without further adjective, refers only to the coverings of the Tabernacle, the various layers of it, the lowest one, the one that formed the ceiling visible from within. Compare Exodus 26,1:ואת המשכן תעשה עשר יריעות, “and the <i>mishkan</i> you are to construct of ten carpet-like curtains.” It also is written there that upon joining these ten  “curtains,” the משכן will become a single unit. The second layer of coverings made of the skins of goats was known as אהל. Finally, the upper covering consisting of the skins of rams was known as מכסה. (compare 26,7 and 14 respectively.) There are occasions when the entire structure is referred to as אהל מועד, as in ועשית את אהל מועד כאשר צויתיך, “you are to construct the Tent of Meeting as I have commanded you “ A similar description is found is found in verse 40 of our chapter.
   
   39,37. את נרותיה נרות המערכה, ”its lamps the ones of the prescribed order,” Nachmanides writes that it is possible that generally speaking, candelabra were equipped with lamps whose light-giving mechanism was adjustable so that depending on the need for more or less light, the wicks and their supply of oil would be regulated. To reflect this mechanism, the Torah may have added the expression נרות המערכה. The singular mode used in this expression is to inform us that the <i>Menorah</i> in the Tabernacle did not have such a mechanism, but that the oil supply to the wicks was maintained at a constant rate. [Except for the light on the center shaft, the other lamps were lit in the evening, and the oil supply allowed for the length of the night. Ed.]
   
   39,42. כן עשו בני ישראל את כל העובדה, “so did the Children of Israel perform all the labour.” Nachmanides writes that all labour, work performed in connection with the Tabernacle, is called עבודה, “service,” by the Torah. This reflects the fact that all these activities were performed in order to serve the Lord, to honour Him. By doing so the people fulfilled the commandment  (Exodus 23,25) ועבדתם את ה' אלוקיכם, “you are to serve the Lord your G’d.”
   Alternatively, the word העבודה refers to the sacred vessels used in performing these various tasks. These vessels have been referred to on a number of occasions as כלי עבודת הקודש, i.e. due to their designated purpose the vessels themselves acquired an elevated status, as “sacred vessels,” although they only served a sacred purpose. [this latter explanation would account for the Children of Israel, collectively, being mentioned in our verse rather than either the artisans or the priests. Ed.]
   
   40,2. ביום החודש הראשון באחד לחודש תקים את המשכן, “on the day of the first month, on the first day of it, you shall erect the Tabernacle.” On this occasion only, Moses himself was to erect the Tabernacle. From now on, during their journeys in the desert, the Levites would dismantle it as well as reassemble it at the next location.
   The meaning of the word תקים is equivalent to “putting the finishing touches to it.” The reason this is so, is because according to tradition Moses practiced assembling and dismantling the Tabernacle every single day during the 7 days of the inauguration of the priests. Now, on the eighth day, the first of <i>Nissan,</i> when he assembled it for the last time, the heavenly cloud, signifying the Presence of the <i>Shechinah,</i> materialized and took up its position above the Tabernacle, as we know from 40,33 ויכל משה את המלאכה, “Moses completed the work.”  This is followed by ויכס הענן את אהל מועד, ”the cloud enveloped the Tent of Meeting.” Clearly, if the Torah inserted this verse at this point it means that prior to this the cloud was not in evidence. At any rate, on the first day (40,18) of the inaugural sacrifices Moses was told of all the portions in the Book of Leviticus up to and including the last verse in <i>Parshat</i> Tzav. Nonetheless, in spite of having this oral communication from G’d, the cloud had not been in evidence. G’d, as opposed to communicating with Moses from the Holy of Holies, had spoken to Moses directly from heaven, as He had done during the many months since the Exodus.
   However, in the <i>Midrash Chazit,</i> we have a statement saying that the opening line of <i>Parshat Shemini,</i> i.e. the words ויהי ביום השמיני, “It occurred on the eighth day, etc.” was fit (from a chronological point of view) to have been written at the very beginning of the Book of Leviticus, but seeing that the Torah is not bound by such considerations, it considered it more appropriate to write that paragraph adjacent to the legislation not to enter the holy precincts while in a state of inebriation. In other words, the opening lines of the Book of Leviticus were spoken by G’d to Moses after the paragraph in Leviticus 9,23 where the glory of G’d appeared for all the people to see, and after the death of the two sons of Aaron, Nadav and Avihu in Leviticus 10,2.
   
   תקים את משכן אהל מועד, “assemble the Tabernacle including the tent which makes it the Tent of Meeting.” Nachmanides writes that this is the directive the execution of which is reported in 40,18 where the sequence of the assembly of different parts of the Tabernacle is reported. Seeing that Moses had already been shown a preview of the Tabernacle during the time he had spent on the Mountain, he had no difficulty in carrying out the directive. No directive was given where to place the Holy Ark, seeing that the very name ארון העדות, “Ark of Testimony,” contains the hint where it must be placed within the two parts of the Sanctuary. Moses certainly did not need to be told that the Tablets were to be put inside the Holy Ark. He only needed to be told that the first order of business when furnishing the Tabernacle was to place the Holy Ark inside. The Torah was similarly brief in its references to the Table and the <i>Menorah</i>, omitting the precise location of either of these two items within the Sanctuary. This had all been explained to Moses on a previous occasion. The Torah is also brief concerning the donning of Aaron as well as his sons of their priestly garments, not repeating the name of each garment. Mention of these garments here is made only to indicate at what stage of preparation for Temple service these garments had to be donned. They were not to be dressed in their priestly garments until after the Tabernacle in which they would perform their duties would have been assembled.
   
   40,10. והיה המזבח קודש קדשים “the altar will become holy of holies.” Although the copper altar was standing in the courtyard of the Tabernacle, the Torah refers to it as “holy of holies.” The reason is that also the kind of offerings which are categorized as קדשי קדשים are being offered on it. (Compare <i>Zevachim</i> 7,1) The reason why the Torah wrote of the Tabernacle that it was קודש, holy, was to remind us that that the only part of the Tabernacle that qualified for the description קודש קדשים, holy of holies, was the section west of the dividing curtain. Possibly, the reason why the altar in the courtyard is called קודש קדשים, “holy of holies,” was because of its capacity to make people who came into direct contact with it “holy.” Compare (Exodus 29,37) כל הנוגע במזבח יקדש, “whoever or whatsoever touches the altar will become sanctified.” [This means that it becomes subject to far more stringent regulations governing what is sacred and what is profane. Ed.]
   
   40,18. ויקם משה את המשכן, “Moses assembled the Tabernacle.” Nachmanides writes that it is remarkable that in the following the Torah describes how Moses assembled the Tabernacle step by step, without making any mention of the anointing of either the Tabernacle itself or its furnishings. Nor does the Torah here mention the anointing of Aaron and his sons, or the inaugural offerings, even though all these details have already appeared in the commandment given to Moses.
   The reason for this omission appears to be that we have already been told in verse 17 that (apparently, i.e. <i>hukam</i>) the Tabernacle had erected itself (without the help of Moses) on the first day of the inaugural offerings, on the 23rd day of <i>Adar.</i> During the days between the 23rd of <i>Adar</i> and the first day of <i>Nissan,</i> Moses himself would erect and dismantle the Tabernacle every day, and during these trials he did not perform any anointings whatsoever. The command about anointing was repeated on that occasion, similar to what had already been reported in <i>Parshat Tzav.</i>
   
   It follows that when the Torah writes here that Moses arranged the show breads on the Table, that he lit the lamps of the <i>Menorah, (</i>verses 22-23) he did all this after having performed the anointing necessary, as it was forbidden to perform these acts of temple service unless the vessels involved had been consecrated by means of anointing. When the Torah in Leviticus chapter 8, describes Moses as performing Temple service (normally reserved for the priests) he did all this after having consecrated with anointing oil all the parties involved and al the vessels involved.
   
   Personally, I do not understand how Moses would be presumed to have repeated the same procedures with Aaron and his sons for seven days consecutively, without having already anointed them.
   
   40,20. ויקח ויתן את העדות אל הארון, “He took and placed the Tablets inside the Holy Ark.” The word ויקח means that he took the Tablets out of a wooden box where they had been kept since Moses brought them from the Mountain with him on the Day of Atonement and transferred them to the Holy Ark constructed by <i>Betzalel</i>
   40,27,ויקטר עליו קטורת סמים “he burned up incense on it.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the subject of the word ויקטר is Aaron.
   Nachmanides writes that this is a scribe’s error, and it has to be Moses who offered this incense for he had been doing so for all the eight days of the inaugural rites. The same applies to such statements as (verse 23) ויערוך עליו ערך לחם, that he arranged the show-breads on the table, or verse 25) “that he lit the <i>Menorah</i>, or (verse 29) that he offered burned offerings on the altar. All the directives commencing with 40,2 were given for Moses personally to carry out. [Nachmanides is borne out by <i>Rashi</i> writing on verse 29 that Moses performed all these tasks on the eighth day just as he had during the preceding seven days. Ed.]
   The words עולת תמיד לדורותיכם in Exodus 29,42 where the priests have been charged with the Temple service (commencing with 29,38) are meant to become operative after conclusion of the inaugural rites on the first of <i>Nissan.</i> Even though in the chapter commanding Moses to perform all these rights, no specific mention is made of Moses also offering the incense, he understood this to be an integral part of all the other steps of the Temple service he was to perform during these seven days of inaugural consecration rites. Alternately, the presenting of the incense is automatically included in the commandment (40,5) ונתתה את מזבח הזהב לקטורת לפני ארון העדות, וגו', “you are to place the golden altar for burning incense in front of the ark of testimony, in front of the dividing curtain.” As to Exodus 30,6 where the Torah commands Moses to place the golden altar for incense in front of the dividing curtain, and for Aaron to offer incense on it, every morning, etc., this refers to the duties Aaron is to perform on a regular basis after the conclusion of the inaugural rites. We know that Aaron’s commencing his duties began with his lighting the lamps on the <i>Menorah</i> on the evening of the 1st <i>of</i> Nissan, i.e. at the end of the eighth day. In other words, he did not offer incense before, as Moses was specifically described as lighting the <i>Menorah</i> on the evening preceding the 1st of <i>Nissan</i> (40,25) as he had been commanded in 40,4.
   
   40,35. ולא יכול משה לבא אל אהל מועד, “and Moses was unable to enter the Tent of Meeting.” In a different verse (Numbers 7,89) we are told of “Moses entering the Tent of Meeting in order to speak with G’d, etc.” There appears to be some contradiction here. Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text we must understand the words ובבא משה אל אהל מועד in Numbers not as Moses actually having entered the Tent, but that he heard the voice of G’d emanating from the Holy of Holies and on account of that he did not cross the threshold of the Tabernacle.
   An alternate explanation of the two verses is that the meaning of the words in our verse is simply that “Moses could not enter the Tent of Meeting (without obtaining express permission from G’d to do so.” Upon being invited, he would enter the tent, just as he had been invited to ascend Mount Sinai at the time of the revelation, and had not proceeded without being called upon to do so.)
