   Parshat Devarim
   1,1. אלה הדברים, “These are the words, etc.” Nachmanides writes in a separate introduction to this Book, that seeing that the generation Moses was addressing was the one that would enter the Holy Land, Moses detailed most of the Torah’s commandments that applied inside the Holy Land, omitting sacrificial offerings, purity laws as they relate to the priests, seeing that he had already outlined those, and at any rate, the priests do not need a refresher course, being by definition eager and willing to observe the laws in all its ramifications. He did, however, repeat most of the laws that applied to the ordinary Israelite a second time, adding warnings in many instances, especially laws connected to idolatry that he repeated more than twice.
   We also find in this Book a number of commandments that have not been mentioned in the first four Books at all, such as the laws pertaining to the levirate marriage, ייבום, or the laws about a groom who slanders the supposedly unchaste bride of his as having not entered marriage as a virgin. Moses himself had, of course, been made familiar with these laws by G’d when he had been on the mountain, before the spies had been dispatched. The thrust of the verse beginning here is that although Moses outlined these laws in ערבות מואב, the plain of Moav, not a single one of these commandments was new. The only “new” aspect of these commandments was the fact that they were now spelled out to the people.
   Another notable fact in this Book is that we do not find such sentences as וידבר ה' אל משה, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses, etc.” Neither do we find such lines as דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel (and tell them about such and such a commandment!)”
   It is possible that the reason the commandments mentioned here for the first time were not included in the first four volumes of the Torah may be that those commandments were not practiced in the desert. They would be practiced only once the people were in the Holy Land, although some of these commandments pertain to their bodies rather than to the land.
   Another reason for the non-publication of those commandments before now could be that they are not the type that are observed daily, the opportunity to observe them presenting itself only rarely and not to the average person. Before Moses got ready to relate all these various commandments, he used the present opportunity, a few weeks before his death, to admonish the people, and to remind them of past sins, and how they had caused <i>Hashem</i> a lot of grief during these years. He reminded them how G’d had treated them by invoking His attribute of Mercy and loving kindness time and again. He warned them not to become corrupt again by gambling that G’d would continue forever to employ such forgiveness, etc. They should not rely on the fact that because they were human they were bound to err and sin from time to time, and that G’d, knowing this, would overlook their trespasses. While it is true that if G’d were not to take into consideration their evil inclination and their sometimes falling victim to its lure, neither they nor subsequent generations would ever qualify to conquer the Holy Land, however their daily conduct must not be based on such considerations. They must not forget that in spite of the prevalence of the attribute of Mercy, the attribute of Justice constantly tries to oppose that attribute, and they could not rely on the attribute of mercy always prevailing.
   @אלה הדברים, the words that Moses is about to speak refer to the words that are recorded in this volume of the Torah. Moses will first review the whole Torah, commencing with the revelation at Mount Sinai and the Ten Commandments. In verse 6 we would have expected the verse to begin with the words ויאמר משה, something that is missing here. We do find a similar construction where such an introductory remark is missing when Joseph names his first son Menashe, and the Torah reports that he said: כי נשני אלוקים את כל עמלי, “for the Lord has made me forget all my troubles,” (Genesis 41,51, as well as verse 52 concerning Ephrayim) where we would have expected at least the introductory words כי אמר. The reason that Moses used this introduction was to remind the people that not quite a year after that G’d had told the people that they had encamped around Mount Sinai long enough, and that it was time to begin their journey toward their ultimate objective, the Holy Land. This was a pointed reminder that as far as G’d was concerned they had been sufficiently prepared to make war successfully against the Canaanites, whose measure of guilt by then was full, so that the Israelites should have every chance to defeat them. These introductory words continue until 4,40 ושמרת את חוקיו ואת מצותיו אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “you shall observe His decrees and His commandments that I command you this day, to carry them out, etc.” After this Moses called upon the whole nation of Israel that stood assembled before him saying: שמע ישראל וגו', 5,1 and began with a restatement of the Ten Commandments. Having concluded with that restatement, including minor additions, he emphasizes the uniqueness of G’d, i.e. שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our G’d, the Lord is One,” followed by all the commandments contained in this volume of the Torah. This is the reason why we have the formula here: דבר משה אל כל ישראל, that Moses spoke to all of the Children of Israel, and the same formula is used in 5,1 when he is described as calling to all of the Children of Israel, when exhorting them to learn and to keep the commandments. It was important that just as 40 years ago at the revelation to the previous generation all the people were assembled, now when the covenant is about to be renewed with a new generation, the whole people must be in attendance at that event.
   When the Torah describes Moses as באר את התורה הזאת “explaining this Torah,” (verse 5) this is a reference to the Torah which the people had already heard from his mouth once before. He now reviews this part of the Torah and in a number of cases expands on it, filling in details not revealed up until now. He emphasized that all of this had been commanded to him by <i>Hashem</i>, i.e. he had not added anything of his own. The meaning of the word הואיל is that the initiative for this review is his, he had not been told by <i>Hashem</i> to do so. The term is used several times in Scriptures for free-willed agreement, as for instance in Joshua 7,7 ולו הואלנו ונשב בעבר הירדן, “if we had only been willing to remain and settle on the east bank of the Jordan.” When Moses responded to Yitro’s invitation to dwell in his house, his willingness is also described by the word ויואל משה לשבת את האיש, “Moses agreed to dwell with that man.” (Exodus, 2,21)
   @במדבר, “in the desert.” Although at this time the people were already no longer in the desert but in the land adjoining Moav, accessible to civilization, Moses mentions that the Torah had been revealed in the desert. Onkelos claims that all the locations referred to by Moses are merely allusions, thinly veiled, to places where certain events had taken place, particularly the people’s misdemeanours that Moses at this point is not anxious to spell out.
   1,4. אשר יושב בחשבון, “who dwells in Cheshbon.” Nachmanides comments that the fact that Sichon is mentioned as “dwelling” in Cheshbon confirms that it was not his originally, but that he had captured the city from the Moabites. He had converted it to become his capital.
   @אשר יושב בעשתרות באדרעי, “who dwelled in Ashtarot which is in Edre-ee.” This land belonged to the Re-fa-im of old, a race of giants, whereas Og was the King of the Emorites. Seeing that the Torah describes Og as having dwelled in Ashtarot, it is clear that this is the name of a place (a region) within which is found the town of Edre-ee. Ashtarot was a valley, and the giants had built a town in that valley. This becomes clearer when we consider that Og has been described as gathering his troops there. (Numbers 21,33)
   1,6. בחורב לאמור, “at Mount Chorev, saying;” Nachmanides writes that Chorev is not a mountain but a region adjoining Mount Sinai where the Israelites were encamped during that year. [In light of Exodus 33,6, where Chorev is clearly described as a mountain, this is somewhat difficult to follow. Ed.]
   Nachmanides is aware of the difficulty and suggests several alternatives, basing himself on the fact that Sinai is both referred to by the Torah on some occasions as a mountain, and on other occasions as a region in the desert. [I suppose it is reasonable to say that the sheep which had lost its way and which Moses followed only to be confronted by a burning bush, did not climb a mountain. (Compare Exodus 3,1) Ed.] Possibly, in the words of Nachmanides- Moses’ hesitation before investigating that spectacle was based on the very fact that the bush was burning on the mountain whereas he was standing at the bottom at that time.
   Ibn Ezra simply understands the word חורב as an alternate name for Mount Sinai, explaining that the bush was burning on account of the extreme dryness in that region. The people of Israel used either name for that mountain, interchangeably.
   1,9. ואומר אליכם בעת ההיא לאמור, ”at that time I said to you, saying:” Moses refers to the period before G’d had said to the people to get moving away from the region around Mount Sinai. At least, that is what we must assume according to the view that Yitro visited the Israelites prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai. The meaning of בעת ההיא is: ”during the period that we were encamped around Mount Sinai.” The reason why Moses mentions this now is as if he were saying: “here we had received the Torah and you already had all the tens of thousands of judges installed as well as the law enforcers and were ready to begin the journey, and we began our trek from Sinai (Chorev) with all our elderly, etc., and suddenly you delayed us by demanding to first dispatch spies, a demand which resulted in all our plans becoming upset.
   1,12. טרחכם ומשאכם וריבכם, “your contentiousness, your burdens, and your quarrelsomeness.” Nachmanides explains that the plain meaning of the text is that Moses here repeated in an oblique manner what he had said to his father-in-law Yitro when the latter had enquired what Moses was busy with all day long. At that time (Exodus 18,15-16) he had referred to his duties as threefold: He had stressed that his duties included the settling of disputes arising between one Israelite and another. 
   He told Yitro that the duty to teach the people who had just left hundreds of years of slavery, involved only with the physical effort to survive such bondage, G’d’s law, was not only time-consuming, but difficult. This is what he alluded to when mentioning טרחכם, they were not such brilliant students who immediately grasped the knowledge offered, especially when it came to laws which did not appear logical to them. The word משאכם was a substitute for תפילה, prayer, as in ונשאת תפילה, (Isaiah 37,4) “if you will offer up a prayer.” A prophet, such as Isaiah in the verse quoted- is expected to offer up prayers to G’d on behalf of people who need their prayers for relief from problems to be heard by G’d. Finally, the word ריבכם used by Moses is self-explanatory. The words הבו לכם אנשים וגו', refer only to the attributes of the judges who are to be appointed.
   Alternatively, the word משאכם refers to the incidents when the people had demanded water, meat, etc., all matters that were beyond their leader’s ability to provide. The word משא is found in connection with that episode. (Compare Numbers 11,11) 
   1,14. וידועים לשבטיכם, “and familiar to your respective tribes.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the word ידועים means that the men in question are well known to fellow members of their tribes, whereas if the same man appeared before Moses, he, Moses would not know who he is.
   Nachmanides writes that if <i>Rashi</i> were correct this would mean that that the word לשבטיכם would be inextricably linked to the word וידועים. In his opinion the reason why the Torah added the word וידועים is to teach that the judges must be capable and fearless men, i.e they must be known to the people as men of outstanding caliber. They must be known for the piety, fear of the Lord, etc., etc. Every member of his tribe should agree immediately that the person in question is fit to be a judge.
   1,17. כי המשפט לאלוקים הוא, “for the judgment is G’d’s.” Nachmanides writes that it is one of G’d’s tasks to see to it that His creatures practice justice among themselves. He has created man so that he practices fairness, etc., and the judges on earth are performing their task as G’d’s delegates when they save the oppressed from his oppressor, etc. If they (the judges) were to display fear of any man, they would at the same time commit a serious breach of the trust placed in them by G’d.
   1,18. ואצוה אתכם בעת ההיא את כל הדברים אשר תעשון, “I had commanded you at that time all the things that you have to do.” <i>Rashi</i>, quoting <i>Sifri,</i> explains that the “things” referred to by the word הדברים are the ten judicial differences between adjudging disputes involving only money or its equivalent, and judging matters involving life and death. (Compare <i>Sanhedrin 32</i>).
   Nachmanides writes that if that were the meaning, Moses would be addressing the judges. [Nachmanides’ problem may be that if <i>Rashi</i> were right, why would Moses suddenly add the words “I commanded you at that time,” when this is what he had been doing all the time? Ed.]
   He considers that the plain meaning is that Moses here refers to what he had taught the people in Exodus 18,20 i.e. החוקים והתורות, הדרך אשר ילכו בה, “the decrees and teachings and the path they should pursue,” the ones Yitro had told him to make his primary concern. The reason that Moses reiterates what had occurred at that time was that the people knew that the plan to appoint all the judges had originated with Yitro, and that he had told Moses that if he were to adopt it, G’d would be with him and he would be able to cope with the tremendous burden imposed upon him. Moses was at pains to explain, especially to the new generation, that none of these judges had the authority to formulate new laws. They had been instructed by Moses, who had received al the laws from G’d directly. Yitro’s function had been to help Moses how to successfully disseminate G’d’s laws and teachings, and how to ensure that it could be applied with a minimum of inconvenience to the people. His suggestions had been purely administrative, not legislative. Moses had not mentioned the author of these suggestions at this time, not giving Yitro credit for his suggestions, either because he did not want to embarrass the whole people assembled before him by reminding them that what had prompted Yitro to make these suggestions was that he had observed what a difficult people the Israelites were and what a hard time they had been giving their saviour. Perhaps Moses did not want to remind the people at that time that he had married a daughter of Yitro instead of a girl who had been Jewish by birth. It is also possible that the simple reason is that Moses had not adopted any of Yitro’s suggestions until he had consulted with G’d and obtained His consent, thus making the entire appointment of the judges part of G’d’s legislation.
   1,22. את הדרך אשר נעלה בה, “the road in which we should ascend, etc.” This is a reference to the initial steps prior to the conquest. The spies (people) did not voice any other purpose of the spies’ mission than to select the most effective route of approach.
   1,23. ואקח מכם שנים עשר אנשים, “I selected from amongst you twelve men, etc.” Moses did not mention any titles these spies had been distinguished with, seeing that after they had disgraced themselves and led their peers into sin, one is not allowed to make any complimentary remarks about the wicked.
   1,25. ויאמרו טובה הארץ, they said: “the land is very good!” According to <i>Rashi</i> (based on <i>Sifri</i>) the two spies that reported on the land being so good were Joshua and Calev.
   Nachmanides writes that if it were correct that only Joshua and Calev had praise for the land, how could one blame the entire people for believing the majority report of the other ten spies? Perhaps Moses’ accusation against the people for believing the ten spies was based on the fact that what these spies had reported was in direct contradiction to G’d’s own assessment of that land. If, in addition to G’d’s assessment and that of the most outstanding of the twelve spies G’d was considered as proven correct, the people had no excuse to side with the ten spies against the testimony of both G’d and the two senior spies. Once the ten spies realized that Joshua and Calev were firmly in favour of capturing the land of Canaan by war, they began to disseminate evil reports about that land, describing it as a land that consumed its inhabitants, and this is what Moses meant when he said (verse 27) ותרגנו באהליכם, “you slandered in your tents.” I believe, in accordance with what I have already explained in <i>Parshat Shelach lecha</i> on the relevant verses, that publicly, all the spies sang the praises of the land of Canaan. It was only in the privacy of their tents that the campaign of slandering the land and spreading fear was carried on. This is what Moses alluded to here when he recalled that the former generation of Israelites had slandered the land in their tents. The people themselves also had not dared to come out openly against the land within earshot of Moses at the beginning. Later on, they admitted that they had become frightened by the words of their brethren the spies. This is why Moses had told them not to be afraid, as they would not have to do any actual fighting; and G’d would do this on their behalf.
   1,37. גם בי התאנף ה', “<i>Hashem</i> also became angry at me;” Nachmanides reconstructs the proper sequence of events at that time. After Moses had recalled the events of the sin of the spies, and the nature of their sin, in the wake of which a whole generation of Israelites had been doomed to die in the desert, he continues to relate how his own inability to enter the Holy Land was also directly linked to the sin of these people. He contrasts the good fortune of Joshua and Calev, who because of their staunch loyalty to G’d on that occasion, are the only ones of that generation that will settle in the Holy Land. He relates all that had happened on that occasion except for the almost immediate death of the ten spies by a pestilence. He continues to explain that he would not be leading the Israelites across the Jordan, but his successor, Joshua. He did not want to distract the people by dwelling on the disgrace and its consequences of a few individuals. He wanted the people (new generation) to concentrate on what had happened to their parents because they had been involved in that terrible sin.
   @בגללכם, “on your account;” Moses makes it plain that if 40 years later, when there was no water the people had quarreled with him and with <i>Hashem</i>, if he had mistakenly struck the rock instead of speaking to it, and the result was that G’d forbade him to enter the Holy Land, none of this would have happened if on an earlier occasion the people had not been punished by having to wander in the desert all these years. They would have long been settled in that land, and the occasion on which Moses made his unpardonable error would never have presented itself. <i>Hashem</i> Himself, had stressed that Moses and Aaron had missed an opportunity to sanctify Him amongst the Children of Israel, in other words, Moses’ punishment was due to the Children of Israel.
   2,10. האמים לפנים ישבו בה, “in former times the Eymim lived there.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the point Moses is making here is that contrary to a common belief that the land of the Moabites is the land that G’d had promised to Avraham in Genesis chapter 15, where these Eymim had been described as the Refa-im, this is not so, and the Refa-im that lived in the land at that time had not been the original Refa-im, hence the land you knew as being populated by “Refa-im” was not the land promised b G’d to Avraham; therefore dispossessing the Moabites would not be conquering land promised to you by <i>Hashem.</i> The name<i> “Refa-im”</i> applied to the people dispossessed by the Moabites was a “borrowed” name, seeing that this people were of similarly gigantic stature as the original<i> R</i>efa-im, G’d had driven them out on account of Lot’s children.
   Nachmanides has problems with <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, asking why he should interpret our verse as referring to lands of the Moabites and Ammonites, lands which were never intended for the Israelites, lands which were not identical with the land of the <i>Refa-im</i> promised to the descendants of Avraham. <i>Rashi</i> himself has explained that two of the three tribes mentioned in the covenant between the pieces in Genesis 15,19 the קיני, קניזי, קדמוני are tribes whose lands are not again mentioned in promises to the other patriarchs, two of whose lands were reserved for the descendants of Lot, although they had been promised to Avraham’s descendants, (verse 19) in recognition of Lots’ not revealing to Pharaoh that Sarai was Avraham’s wife, [so that in a manner of speaking, Avraham had ceded this land as reward to Lot., pending the coming of the Messiah. The third of these tribal lands was reserved for Esau’s descendants, i.e. Edom, also would become eventually part of Israel, after he coming of the Messiah. Nachmanides’ point is that from a geo-historical perspective, why would the Torah bother to tell us about these territorial changes and not about others unless they were linked to the fortunes of the Jewish people and deliberately engineered by G’d? Ed.]
   He concludes that the correct interpretation of our verse (s) is the exact reverse of what <i>Rashi</i> has written, and that the Torah had reason to write these lines in order that we should not wonder about G’d being so insistent that we not harass either the Moabites or the Ammonites, in view of the fact that their lands had already been promised to our patriarch Avraham? If G’d had not had reason to give these lands to the descendants of Lot in the meantime, the present decree and caution would indeed have been difficult to comprehend. Proof that this is so is the very fact that the original inhabitants of those lands were such powerful human beings that unless G’d had specifically wanted it, the Ammonites and Moabites would never have been able to dispossess them. Seeing that this is so, now was not yet the time for the Israelites to grab these lands.
   2,11. יחשבו גם הם כענקים, ”they too were considered as equivalent to the giants.” This is the reason why mention is made of that fact in this context.
   2,12. ובשעיר ישבו החורים, “and the Chorim used to live in the region of Se-ir.” The same considerations that are responsible for the Israelites not being allowed to make war or even harass the Moabites, (although their lands were on their route to the Holy Land, even) are also the ones why they must not at this time encroach on the land of Edom. That land had at one time been the land of the Chorites, who were identical with the tribe Chivi, mentioned in chapter 15 of Genesis above. Esau, Avraham’s grandson, had received it as a sort of dowry when he married the great-grand-daughter daughter of Tzivon, a prominent Canaanite belonging to that tribe. (Genesis 36,2) Tzivon, as mentioned there, was a son of the original Se-ir.
   It is possible that the reason why the Torah refers to that tribe as <i>Chivi,</i> was because in that neighbourhood there was a type of snake by that name that the people had to be on guard against. Various types of snakes including one by that name are referred to in Isaiah 11,8 where the lair חור of certain types of snakes such as פתן is mentioned. Compare especially Genesis 49,17 נחש עלי דרך It is not unusual, historically, to find that names of certain places, landmarks and such reflect a past association with some animal. Certain letters underwent repositioning when such places or animals were named. What was known as חוי may have been changed to חורי, so that the tribe known as חורי in the days of Avraham may have become the חווי in the days of his grandson Eau, or vice versa. During Avraham’s time these people lived in what later became known as Se-ir. It was most certainly something miraculous that the relatively few descendants of Esau should have dispossessed a far more numerous and well-established tribe. Moses may have referred to all these details in order to underline that possession of the descendants of Esau, Edom had been divinely assisted when settling in that region. It would not do to attack them, the time was not ripe for this in G’d’s timetable. G’d was bound to retaliate against people who deprive others of their homeland unless instructed by Him to do so. He does likewise to nations who dispossess Israel of its ancestral heritage without having been bidden by Him to do so. This may be why Moses says כאשר עשה ישראל, meaning as “Israel is going to do to Esau,” i.e. in the future, seeing that up until then Israel had not done any of this. [When G’d has promised, He will keep His promise, so that the promise by G’d that Israel would dispossess the Canaanites is described as fact rather than mere hope or even expectation. Ed.] Moses makes similar reference to the land of the Ammonites,
   2,20. ארץ רפאים תחשב, “it is considered the land of the Refa-im; ”For this was also land originally owned by the Refai-im.
    ןהעמונים יקראו להם זמזומים, “but the Ammonites called those people <i>Samzumim.”</i> This word is related to Psalms 140,9 זממו אל תפק, “do not let their plan succeed!” The doubling of the letter ז here reinforces the original meaning, i.e. that these people being so numerous and powerful cannot be denied anything they desire. The word תחשב here needs to be understood in conjunction with the name of Sichon’s capital חשבון, which already included the land of the original Refa-im.
   It may also be possible to explain the line רפאים תחשב that the people in that land now are considered like the giants of ancient times, i.e. the אימים, a race which caused fear in all the neighbouring countries. The land occupied by the Refa-im was very large for after the Ammonites had captured some of that land, Og the King of the Emorite in Bashan was a giant dating back to these ancient times, something described in greater detail in Genesis chapter 14 where the defeat of the Refa-im at Ashtarot Karnayim has been documented. This is the reason why our verses describe the lands of Ammon and Moav as having originally been owned and inhabited by the Refai-im. It was the Moabites who applied different names to the original inhabitants.
   2,23. והעוים היושבים בחצרים עד עזה, “and the Avites who dwelled all the way to Gaza.” Nachmanides writes that the reason Moses listed all the details was to inform us that although the Caphtorim, (Cypriots) did not belong to the seven Canaanite nations (tribes) but were of Egyptian origin, the Israelites inherited their land along the Mediterranean coast of Israel [only about 800 years after Joshua drove out or killed most of the Canaanites. Ed.] The legal justification for this was that the Caphtorim had originally dispossessed the Avites, (identical with the Chivites) a Canaanite tribe.
   I am convinced, (Nachmanides writing), that the Avites were identical with the Chivites as it is customary that with the change of language there also occurs a change in the proper names, or at list how they re pronounced. When G’d promised Yitzchok the land, by referring to it as “these lands,” (Genesis 26,3) Yitzchok had already taken up residence in the land of the Philistines. Clearly, the land under discussion here as belonging to the Avites was included.
   Parshat Devarim
   1,1. אלה הדברים, “These are the words, etc.” Nachmanides writes in a separate introduction to this Book that seeing that the generation Moses was addressing was the one that would enter the Holy Land, Moses detailed most of the Torah’s commandments that applied inside the Holy Land, omitting sacrificial offerings, purity laws as they relate to the priests, seeing that he had already outlined those, and at any rate, the priests do not need a refresher course, being by definition eager and willing to observe the laws in all its ramifications. He did, however, repeat most of the laws which applied to the ordinary Israelite a second time, adding warnings in many instances, especially laws connected to idolatry which he repeated more than twice.
   We also find in this Book a number of commandments that have not been mentioned in the first four Books at all, such as the laws pertaining to the levirate marriage, ייבום, or the laws about a groom who slanders the supposedly unchaste bride of his as having not entered marriage as a virgin. Moses himself had, of course, been made familiar with these laws by G’d when he had been on the mountain, before the spies had been dispatched. The thrust of the verse beginning here is that although these laws were communicated by Moses in ערבות מואב, the plain of Moav, not a single one of these commandments was new. The only “new” aspect of these commandments was the fact that they were now spelled out to the people.
   Another notable fact in this Book is that we do not find such sentences as וידבר ה' אל משה, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses, etc.” Neither do we find such lines as דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel (and tell them about such and such a commandment!)”
   It is possible that the reason the commandments mentioned here for the first time were not included in the first four volumes of the Torah may be that those commandments were not practiced in the desert. They would be practiced only once the people were in the Holy Land, although some of these commandments pertain to their bodies rather than to the land.
   Another reason for the non-publication of those commandments before now could be that they are not the type that are observed daily, the opportunity to observe them presenting itself only rarely and not to the average person. Before Moses got ready to relate all these various commandments, he used the present opportunity, a few weeks before his death, to admonish the people, and to remind them of past sins, and how they had caused <i>Hashem</i> a lot of grief during these years. He reminded them how G’d had treated them by invoking His attribute of Mercy and loving kindness time and again. He warned them not to become corrupt again by gambling that G’d would forever employ such forgiveness, etc. They should not rely on the fact that because they were human they were bound to err and sin from time to time, and that G’d, knowing this, would overlook their trespasses. While it is true that if G’d were not to take into consideration their evil inclination and their sometimes falling victim to its lure, neither they nor subsequent generations would ever qualify to conquer the Holy Land, however their daily conduct must not be based on such considerations. They must not forget that in spite of the prevalence of the attribute of Mercy, the attribute of Justice constantly tries to oppose that attribute and they could not rely on the attribute of mercy always prevailing.
   @אלה הדברים, the words that Moses is about to speak refer to the words that are recorded in this volume of the Torah. Moses will first review the whole Torah, commencing with the revelation at Mount Sinai and the Ten Commandments. In verse 6 we would have expected the verse to begin with the words ויאמר משה, something that is missing here. We do find a similar construction where such an introductory remark is missing when Joseph names his first son Menashe, and the Torah reports that he said: כי נשני אלוקים את כל עמלי, “for the Lord has made me forget all my troubles,” (Genesis 41,51, as well as verse 52 concerning Ephrayim) where we would have expected at least the introductory words כי אמר. The reason that Moses used this introduction was to remind them that not quite a year after that G’d had told the people that they had encamped around Mount Sinai long enough, and that it was time to begin their journey toward their ultimate objective, the Holy Land. This was a pointed reminder that as far as G’d was concerned they had been sufficiently prepared to make war successfully against the Canaanites, whose measure of guilt by then was full, so that the Israelites should have every chance to defeat them. These introductory words continue until 4,40 ושמרת את חוקיו ואת מצותיו אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “you shall observe His decrees and His commandments that I command you this day, to carry them out, etc.” After this Moses called upon the whole nation of Israel that stood assembled before him saying: שמע ישראל וגו', 5,1 and began with a restatement of the Ten Commandments. Having concluded with that restatement, including minor additions, he emphasizes the uniqueness of G’d, i.e.שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our G’d, the Lord is One,” followed by all the commandments contained in this volume of the Torah. This is the reason why we have the formula here: דבר משה אל כל ישראל that Moses spoke to all of the Children of Israel, and the same formula is used in 5,1 when he is described as calling to all of the Children of Israel when exhorting them to learn and to keep the commandments. It was important that just as 40 years ago at the revelation to the previous generation all the people were assembled, now when the covenant is about to be renewed with a new generation the whole people must be in attendance at that event.
   When the Torah describes Moses as באר את התורה הזאת “explaining this Torah,” (verse 5) this is a reference to the Torah which the people had already heard from his mouth once before. He now reviews this part of the Torah and in a number of cases expands on it, filling in details not revealed up until now. He emphasized that all of this had been commanded to him by <i>Hashem</i>, i.e. he had not added anything of his own. The meaning of the word הואיל is that the initiative for this review is his own; he had not been told by <i>Hashem</i> to do so. The term is used several times in Scriptures for free-willed agreement, as for instance in Joshua 7,7 ולו הואלנו ונשב בעבר הירדן, “if we had only been willing to remain and settle on the east bank of the Jordan.” When Moses responded to Yitro’s invitation to dwell in his house, his willingness is also described by the word ויואל משה לשבת את האיש, “Moses agreed to dwell with that man.” (Exodus 2,21).
   @במדבר, “in the desert.” Although at this time the people were already no longer in the desert but in the land adjoining Moav, accessible to civilization, Moses mentions that the Torah had been revealed in the desert. Onkelos claims that all the locations referred to by Moses are merely allusions, thinly veiled, to places where certain events had taken place, particularly the people’s misdemeanours that Moses at this point is not anxious to spell out.
   1,4. אשר יושב בחשבון, “who dwells in Cheshbon.” Nachmanides comments that the fact that Sichon is mentioned as “dwelling” in Cheshbon confirms that it was not his originally, but that he had captured the city from the Moabites. He had converted it to become his capital.
   @אשר יושב בעשתרות באדרעי, “who dwelled in Ashtarots which is in Edre-ee.” This land belonged to the Re-fa-im of old, a race of giants, whereas Og was the King of the Emorites. Seeing that the Torah describes Og as having dwelled in Ashtarot it is clear that this is the name of a place (a region) within which is found the town of Edre-ee. Ashtarot was a valley, and the giants had built a town in that valley. This becomes clearer when we consider that Og has been described as gathering his troops there. (Numbers 21,33).
   1,6. בחורב לאמור, “at Mount Chorev, saying;” Nachmanides writes that Chorev is not a mountain but a region adjoining Mount Sinai where the Israelites were encamped during that year. [In light of Exodus 33,6, where Chorev is clearly described as a mountain, this is somewhat difficult to follow. Ed.]
   Nachmanides is aware of the difficulty and suggests several alternatives, basing himself on the fact that Sinai is both referred to by the Torah on some occasions as a mountain, and on other occasions as a region in the desert. [I suppose it is reasonable to say that the sheep which had lost its way and which Moses followed only to be confronted by a burning bush, did not climb a mountain. (compare Exodus 3,1) Ed.] Possibly, in the words of Nachmanides- Moses’ hesitation before investigating that spectacle was based on the very fact that the bush was burning on the mountain whereas he was standing at the bottom at that time.
   Ibn Ezra simply understands the word חורב as an alternate name for Mount Sinai, explaining that the bush was burning on account of the extreme dryness in that region. The people of Israel used either name for that mountain, interchangeably.
   1,9. ואומר אליכם בעת ההיא לאמור, ”at that time I said to you, saying:” Moses refers to the period before G’d had said to the people to get moving away from the region around Mount Sinai. At least, that is what we must assume according to the view that Yitro visited the Israelites prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai. The meaning of בעת ההיא is ”during the period that we were encamped around Mount Sinai.” The reason why Moses mentions this now is as if he were saying: “here we had received the Torah and you already had all the tens of thousands of judges installed as well as the law enforcers and were ready to begin the journey, and we began our trek from Sinai (Chorev) with all our elderly, etc., and suddenly you delayed us by demanding to first dispatch spies, a demand which resulted in all our plans becoming upset.
   1,12. טרחכם ומשאכם וריבכם, “your contentiousness, your burdens, and your quarrelsomeness.” Nachmanides explains that the plain meaning of the text is that Moses here repeated in an oblique manner what he had said to his father-in-law Yitro when the latter had enquired what Moses was busy with all day long. At that time (Exodus 18,15-16) he had referred to his duties as threefold: He had stressed that his duties included the settling of disputes arising between one Israelite and another. 
   He told Yitro that the duty to teach the people who had just left hundreds of years of slavery, involved only with the physical effort to survive such bondage, G’d’s law, was not only time-consuming, but difficult. This is what he alluded to when mentioning טרחכם, they were not such brilliant students who immediately grasped the knowledge offered, especially when it came to laws which did not appear logical to them. The word משאכם was a substitute for תפילה, prayer, as in ונשאת תפילה, (Isaiah 37,4) “if you will offer up a prayer.” A prophet, such as Isaiah in the verse quoted- is expected to offer up prayers to G’d on behalf of people who need their prayers for relief from problems to be heard by G’d. Finally, the word ריבכם used by Moses is self-explanatory. The words הבו לכם אנשים וגו', refer only to the attributes of the judges who are to be appointed.
   Alternatively, the word משאכם refers to the incidents when the people had demanded water, meat, etc., all matters that were beyond their leader’s ability to provide. The word משא is found in connection with that episode. (compare Numbers 11,11) 
   1,14. וידועים לשבטיכם, “and familiar to your respective tribes.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the word ידועים means that the men in question are well known to fellow members of their tribes, whereas if the same man appeared before Moses, he, Moses would not know who he is.
   Nachmanides writes that if <i>Rashi</i> were correct this would mean that that the word לשבטיכם would be inextricably linked to the word וידועים. In his opinion the reason why the Torah added the word וידועים is to teach that the judges must be capable and fearless men, i.e they must be known to the people as men of outstanding caliber. They must be known for the piety, fear of the Lord, etc., etc. Every member of their tribe should agree immediately that the person in question is fit to be a judge.
   1,17. כי המשפט לאלוקים הוא, “for the judgment is G’d’s.” Nachmanides writes that it is one of G’d’s tasks to see to it that His creatures practice justice among themselves. He has created man so that he practices fairness, etc., and the judges on earth are performing their task as G’d’s delegates when they save the oppressed from his oppressor, etc. If they (the judges) were to display fear of any man they would at the same time commit a serious breach of the trust placed in them by G’d.
   1,18. ואצוה אתכם בעת ההיא את כל הדברים אשר תעשון, “I had commanded you at that time all the things that you have to do.” <i>Rashi</i>, quoting <i>Sifri,</i> explains that the “things” referred to by the word הדברים are the ten judicial difference between adjudging disputes involving only money or its equivalent, and judging matters involving life and death. (compare <i>Sanhedrin 32</i>).
   Nachmanides writes that if that were the meaning, Moses would be addressing the judges. [Nachmanides’ problem may be that if <i>Rashi</i> were right, why would Moses suddenly add the words “I commanded you at that time,” when this is what he had been doing all the time? Ed.]
   He considers that the plain meaning is that Moses here refers to what he had taught the people in Exodus 18,20 i.e. החוקים והתורות, הדרך אשר ילכו בה, “the decrees and teachings and the path they should pursue,” the ones Yitro had told him to make his primary concern. The reason that Moses reiterates what had occurred at that time was that the people knew that the plan to appoint all the judges had originated with Yitro, and that he had told Moses that if he were to adopt it G’d would be with him and he would be able to cope with the tremendous burden imposed upon him. Moses was at pains to explain, especially to the new generation, that none of these judges had the authority to formulate new laws. They had been instructed by Moses, who had received al the laws from G’d directly. Yitro’s function had been to help Moses how to successfully disseminate G’d’s laws and teachings, and how to ensure that it could be applied with a minimum of inconvenience to the people. His suggestions had been purely administrative, not legislative. Moses had not mentioned the author of these suggestions at this time, not giving Yitro credit for his suggestions, either because he did not want to embarrass the whole people assembled before him by reminding them that what had prompted Yitro to make these suggestions was that he had observed what a difficult people the Israelites were and what a hard time they had been giving their saviour. Perhaps Moses did not want to remind the people at that time that he had married a daughter of Yitro instead of a girl who had been Jewish by birth. It is also possible that the simple reason is that Moses had not adopted any of Yitro’s suggestions until he had consulted with G’d and obtained His consent, thus making the entire appointment of the judges part of G’d’s legislation.
   1,22. את הדרך אשר נעלה בה, “the road in which we should ascend, etc.” This is a reference to the initial steps prior to the conquest. The spies (people) did not voice any other purpose of the spies’ mission than to select the most effective route of approach.
   1,23. ואקח מכם שנים עשר אנשים, “I selected from amongst you twelve men, etc.” Moses did not mention any titles these spies had been distinguished with, seeing that after they had disgraced themselves and led their peers into sin one is not allowed to make any complimentary remarks about the wicked.
   1,25. ויאמרו טובה הארץ, “they said: “the land is very good!” According to <i>Rashi</i> (based on <i>Sifri</i>) the two spies that reported on the land being so good were Joshua and Calev.
   Nachmanides writes that if it were correct that only Joshua and Calev had praise for the land, how could one accuse the entire people for believing the majority report of the other ten spies? Perhaps Moses’ accusation against the people for believing the ten spies was based on the fact that what these spies had reported was in direct contradiction to G’d’s own assessment of that land. If, in addition to G’d’s assessment and that of the most outstanding of the twelve spies G’d was considered as proven correct, the people had no excuse to side with the ten spies against the testimony of both G’d and the two senior spies. Once the ten spies realized that Joshua and Calev were firmly in favour of capturing the land of Canaan by war, they began to disseminate evil reports about that land, describing it as a land that consumed its inhabitants, and this is what Moses meant when he said (verse 27) ותרגנו באהליכם, “you slandered in your tents.”I believe, in accordance with what I have already explained in <i>Parshat Shelach lecha</i> on the relevant verses, that publicly, all the spies sang the praises of the land of Canaan. It was only in the privacy of their tents that the campaign of slandering the land and spreading fear was carried on. This is what Moses alluded to here when he recalled that the former generation of Israelites had slandered the land in their tents. The people themselves also had not dared to come out openly against the land within earshot of Moses at the beginning. Later on, they admitted that they had become frightened by their brethren the spies. This is why Moses had told them not to be afraid as they would not have to do any actual fighting; G’d would do this on their behalf.
   1,37. גם בי התאנף ה', “<i>Hashem</i> also became angry at me;” Nachmanides reconstructs the proper sequence of events at that time. After Moses had recalled the events of the sin of the spies, and the nature of their sin, in the wake of which a whole generation of Israelites had been doomed to die in the desert, he continues to relate how his own inability to enter the Holy Land was also directly linked to the sin of these people. He contrasts the good fortune of Joshua and Calev, who because of their staunch loyalty to G’d on that occasion, are the only ones of that generation that will settle in the Holy Land. He relates all that had happened on that occasion except for the almost immediate death of the ten spies by a pestilence. He continues to explain that he would not be leading the Israelites across the Jordan but his successor, Joshua. He did not want to distract the people by dwelling on the disgrace and its consequences of a few individuals. He wanted the people (new generation) to concentrate on what had happened to their parents because they had been involved in that terrible sin.
   @בגללכם, “on your account;” Moses makes it plain that if 40 years later, when there was no water the people had quarreled with him and with <i>Hashem</i>, if he had mistakenly struck the rock instead of speaking to it, and the result was that G’d forbade him to enter the Holy Land, none of this would have happened if on an earlier occasion the people had not been punished by having to wander in the desert all these years. They would have long been settled in that land, and the occasion on which Moses made his unpardonable error would never have presented itself. <i>Hashem</i> Himself had stressed that Moses and Aaron had missed an opportunity to sanctify Him amongst the Children of Israel, in other words, Moses’ punishment was due to the Children of Israel.
   2,10. האמים לפנים ישבו בה, “in former times the Eymim lived there.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the point Moses is making here is that contrary to a common belief that the land of the Moabites is the land that G’d had promised to Avraham in Genesis chapter 15, where these Eymim had been described as the Refa-im, this is not so, and the Refa-im that lived in the land at that time had not been the original Refa-im, hence the land you knew as being populated by “Refa-im” was not the land promised b G’d to Avraham; therefore dispossessing the Moabites would not be conquering land promised to you by <i>Hashem.</i> The name<i> “Refa-im”</i> applied to the people disposed by the Moabites was a “borrowed” name, seeing that this people were of similarly gigantic stature as the original<i> R</i>refa-im, G’d had driven them out on account of Lot’s children.
   Nachmanides has problems with <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, asking why he should interpret our verse as referring to lands of the Moabites and Ammonites, lands which were never intended for the Israelites, lands which were not identical with the land of the <i>Refa-im</i> promised to the descendants of Avraham. <i>Rashi</i> himself has explained that two of the three mentioned in the covenant between the pieces in Genesis 15,19 the קיני, קניזי, קדמוני are tribes whose lands are not again mentioned in promises to the other patriarchs, two of which lands were reserved for the descendants of Lot, although they had been promised to Avraham’s descendants, (verse 19) in recognition of Lots’ not revealing to Pharaoh that Sarai was Avraham’s wife, [so that in a manner of speaking, Avraham had ceded this land as reward to Lot., pending the coming of the Messiah. The third of these tribal lands was reserved for Esau’s descendants, i.e. Edom, also to be eventually part of Israel, after he coming of the Messiah. Nachmanides’ point is that from a geo-historical perspective, why would the Torah bother to tell us about these territorial changes and not about others unless they were linked to the fortunes of the Jewish people and deliberately engineered by G’d? Ed.]
   He concludes that the correct interpretation of our verse (s) is the exact reverse of what <i>Rashi</i> has written, and that the Torah had reason to write these lines in order that we should not wonder about G’d being so insistent that we not harass either the Moabites or the Ammonites, in view of the fact that their lands had already been promised to our patriarch Avraham? If G’d had not had reason to give these lands to the descendants of Lot in the meantime, the present decree and caution would indeed have been difficult to comprehend. Proof that this is so is the very fact that the original inhabitants of those lands were such powerful human beings that unless G’d had specifically wanted it, the Ammonites and Moabites would never have been able to dispossess them. Seeing that this is so, now was not yet the time for the Israelites to grab these lands.
   2,11. יחשבו גם הם כענקים, ”they too were considered as equivalent to the giants.” This is the reason why mention is made of that fact in this context.
   2,12. ובשעיר ישבו החורים, “and the Chorim used to live in the region of Se-ir.” The same considerations that are responsible for the Israelites not being allowed to make war or even harass the Moabites, (although their lands were on their route to the Holy Land, even) also are the ones why they must not at this time encroach on the land of Edom. That land had at one time been the land of the Chorites, who were identical with the tribe Chivi, mentioned in chapter 15 of Genesis above. Esau, Avraham’s grandson, had received it as a sort of dowry when he married the great-grand-daughter daughter of Tzivon, a prominent Canaanite belonging to that tribe. (Genesis 36,2) Tzivon, as mentioned there, was a son of the original Se-ir.
   It is possible that the reason why the Torah refers to that tribe as <i>Chivi,</i> was because in that neighbourhood there was a type of snake by that name that the people had to be on guard against. Various types of snakes including one by that name are referred to in Isaiah 11,8 where the lair חור of certain types of snakes such as פתן is mentioned. Compare especially Genesis 49,17 נחש עלי דרך. It is not unusual, historically, to find that names of certain places, landmarks and such, reflect a past association with some animal. Certain letters underwent repositioning when such places or animals were named. What was known as חוי may have been changed to חורי, so that the tribe known as חורי in the days of Avraham may have become the חווי in the days of his grandson Eau, or vice versa. During Avraham’s time these people lived in what later became known as Se-ir. It was most certainly something miraculous that the relatively few descendants of Esau should have dispossessed a far more numerous and well entrenched tribe. Moses may have referred to all these details to underline that possession of the descendants of Esau, Edom had been divinely assisted when settling in that region. It would not do to attack them, the time was not ripe for this in G’d’s timetable. G’d would retaliate against people who deprive others of their homeland unless instructed by Him to do so. He does likewise to nations who dispossess Israel of its ancestral heritage without having been bidden by Him to do so. This may be why Moses says כאשר עשה ישראל meaning as “Israel is going to do to Esau,” i.e. in the future, seeing that up until then Israel had not done any of this. [When G’d has promised, He will keep His promise, so that the promise by G’d that Israel would dispossess the Canaanites is described as fact rather than mere hope or even expectation. Ed.] Moses makes similar reference to the land of the Ammonites,
   2,20. ארץ רפאים תחשב, “it is considered the land of the Refa-im;” for this was also land originally owned by the Refai-im.
    ןהמעמונים יקראו להם זמזומים, “but the Ammonites called those people <i>Samzumim.”</i> This word is related to Psalms 140,9 זממו אל תפק, “do not let their plan succeed.” The doubling of the letter ז here reinforces the original meaning, i.e. that these people being so numerous and powerful cannot be denied anything they desire. The word תחשב here needs to be understood in conjunction with the name of Sichon’s capital חשבון, which already included the land of the original Refa-im.
   It may also be possible to explain the line רפאים תחשבו that the people in that land now are considered like the giants of ancient times, i.e. the אימים, a race which caused fear in all the neighbouring countries. The land occupied by the Refa-im was very large for after the Ammonites had captured some of that land, Og the King of the Emorite in Bashan was a giant dating back to these ancient times, something described in greater detail in Genesis chapter 14 where the defeat of the Refa-im at Ashtarot Karnayim has been documented. This is the reason why our verses describe the lands of Ammon and Moav as having originally been owned and inhabited by the Refai-im.
   2,23. והעוים היושבים בחצרים עד עשזה, “as well as the Avites who dwelled as far south as Gaza.” Nachmanides explains that all these details are provided by Moses to show that although the Caphtorim are not part of the 7 Canaanite nations G’d promised the descendants of Avraham, seeing that they had settled in the coastal plain only after having expelled the Avites, a Canaanite tribe, when the Israelites later on occupied those lands this was quite legal. Further more, in Genesis 26,3 G’d confirmed the fact that the land of the Philistines was included in the Holy Land, as Yitzchok was in the land of the Philistines at the time when G’d promised him ”these lands.” Name changes by people who had supplanted others were historically quite frequent, and <i>Bereshit Rabbah 26,7</i> mentions in particular that the Chivi, as we mentioned a name analogous to נחש, snake, was so- called as these people were experts in what roots were safe to eat and which not, something extremely important to snakes which had been condemned by G’d to eat עפר, things growing directly in the earth. Moreover, in certain parts of the <i>galil</i> the word עוי was used interchangeably with <i>chivi.</i> Moses concludes by informing us that at that time all these lands were occupied by the <i>Chivi</i>, part of which used to belong to the descendants of Esau. <i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> identifies the Avim with the Refa-im, speaking also about the gift promised by G’d to Avraham, seeing that no mention is made by Moses here of the <i>Chivi</i>, it is logical that the Refa-im replace that tribe in Moses’ recital here.
   This also seems to be born out when Moses in Deut. 7,1 speaks of seven nations G’d will fling out of the land and replace them with the Israelites, and six of the seven are identical with the names mentioned by G’d when He promised the land to the Israelites, the seventh, the <i>Chivi</i>, not having been included in the list in Genesis 15,19-21 where the Refa-im, apparently is meant to be identical with the <i>Chivi</i>. If not that, the “<i>Chivi</i>” might be either one of the three other tribes mentioned in that promise and none of the others, i.e. the Keyni, K’nizi, or Kadmoni.
   Our sages claim that Israel never inherited the lands of the three last mentioned tribes, and that this will be fulfilled only after the coming of the Messiah. If that is factual, there can be no question but that the “<i>Chivi</i>” is identical with the Refa-im in the promise to Avraham in chapter 15 of Genesis. The latter (<i>Chivi</i>) was the 6th of the sons of Canaan. (Genesis 10,17) His father had called him “<i>Chivi</i>.” However in the days of Avraham, over 200 years later, his descendants were known as Refa-im. Personally, I feel that <i>Chivi</i> was a nickname, based on his familiarity with the various plants and their roots, as I mentioned earlier. The word רפאים is also used in Scripture as describing things buried underground, as we know from Job 26,5 הרפאים יחוללו מתחת מים ושוכניהם, “are dead things formed beneath the water and the inhabitants thereof?” Or, Isaiah 26,19 וארץ רפאים תפיל, “you make the land cast out the dead.” The children of the <i>Chivi</i> increased drastically, and when the Canaanites eventually took possession of the land now known as the land of Canaan, the family of the <i>Chivi</i> grabbed a major share of that land. All these names describe in one way or another the sixth son of Canaan, <i>Chivi</i>. Since at the time of Avraham the tribe was known as Refa-im, G’d referred to that tribe by the name known to Avraham. Moses, here, refers to it by its original name. Some of these lands had been known as the land of the Chorim, etc. At any rate, at the time of Moses the lands formerly belonging to the <i>Refa-im</i> had already been parceled out to other tribes/nations and their names had been changed. Seeing that some of the lands promised to Avraham were not included in the lands that Israel was about to invade and conquer, Moses had to identify which lands were still forbidden to the Israelites to invade. Hence we have the references to the Eymim, the Bney Ammon, etc. On the other hand, lands that on the face of it had no connection to the Canaanites, such as the regions occupied by the Philistines, or the Caphtorim, were mentioned in order that we know that the people dwelling in them had themselves been interlopers.
   Let us now turn to <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation that the Avim were descendants of the Philistines, seeing that they are lumped together in the Book of Joshua, 13,3 and that the Israelites at this time were unable to dispossess them on account of the oath given by Avraham to Avimelech in Genesis 21,23 (which spanned 4 generations) Seeing that the Philistines there had been replaced by the Caphtorim, Avraham’s oath no longer applied. 
   Nachmanides challenges this interpretation by <i>Rashi,</i> claiming that the Avim have not been included under the heading of the Philistines, as in the quotation from Joshua the five leaders of the Philistines are mentioned first, without any mention of the Avim; only subsequently are the Avim listed as a separate nation. [Presumably, Nachmanides’ argument is based on the fact that the verse begins mentioning that there were only 5 such leaders of the Philistines, so that anyone mentioned after those five have been named is not included. Ed.] Furthermore, assuming that the land of the Avim had become permitted to the Israelites because they were not the original inhabitants there but had been replaced already by a previous invading force by the Caphtorim, who permitted the lands of the Philistines? [We know they had been there at the time of Avraham and at the time of Moses. Ed.] What reason was there that the lands of the Philistines should ever become part of the land of Israel so that Avimelech had felt threatened and asked Avraham for a non-aggression pact covering the next four generations? After all, the Philistines did not belong to the seven Canaanite tribes whose land G’d had promised to Avraham? The Philistines are after all descended from Mitzrayim, the second son of Cham, not of Canaan his fourth son! In light of all the above the true historical facts are that the Philistines as well as the Caphtorim had invaded and captured some of the lands previously occupied by the Canaanites, else how come Avimelech was King in Gerar, a territory at one time belonging to the Canaanites? The Philistines as well as the Caphtorim expanded southwards in the coastal plain and conquered Gaza, Ashkelon, Gat and Ekron from the Cananites. This made it legal for the Israelites to occupy lands that had been illegally acquired by its residents. Those lands, according to G’d’s promise to Avraham, had been intended as their ancestral heritage. As it happened, the Israelites did not actually conquer that coastal plain until long after the time frame provided for in Avraham’s oath to Avimelech had expired. Three generations of Philistines had already died before Joshua began his conquest of the land of Canaan.
   2,24. ראה נתתי בידך את סיחון, “See! I have delivered in your hand Sichon, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this address by Moses is a quote from Moses’ address to the people commencing in verse 31. Here we are merely told that prior to the campaign Moses did send out spies to ascertain the militarily best way of provoking the confrontation. Once G’d mentioned the fact that in this instance Israel was to provoke war, Moses did not send any more spies, etc. The reason was that in the event that Sichon would have proved to be in a conciliatory mood, Moses would have violated G’d’s command to provoke war with Sichon. On the other hand, if Moses knew that the messengers dispatched to ask for permission to traverse the land would be rejected out of hand, why did he bother? We cannot answer that Moses sent these messengers from his own initiative in order to comply with the rule that prior to a war of expansion the opposing side must be given a chance to surrender peacefully, as per Deut. 20,10. That command certainly did not refer to the 7 Canaanite nations of whom he had been told not to allow a single soul to survive! Moreover, normally, the people of cities captured in a war of expansion, authorised by G’d- would become prisoners of war, slaves, etc, whereas if Sichon had agreed, none of his land would have been touched at all? We must therefore translate the line ואשלח מלאכים in verse 26 as being in the past tense. He introduced the whole story by explaining that G’d’s hand had been involved from the first moment, and that Sichon’s refusal had been engineered by G’d so as to set in motion the scenario that would lead to his destruction, and his people would know that their king himself had been to blame. 
   2,25. היום הזה אחל תת פחדך ויראתך על כל העמים, “From this day on I shall begin to place the fear and dread of you upon all the nations, etc.” Nachmanides understands these words as G’d making the nations of the earth afraid of the people of Israel so that when the Canaanites would come out to fight them they would do so with no confidence in themselves. If these words had been words of reassurance to Moses, what was the point, seeing that he would participate only in the two campaigns against Sichon and Og? Clearly G’d’s assurance is aimed at Joshua and the Jewish people as a whole.
   2,29. כאשר עשו לי בני עשו, “as the descendants of Esau have done to me.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the subject is the food and drink that the Israelites were interested in buying while traversing the land of Sichon. The reference could not have been to the crux of the matter, the permission to traverse the land, as the descendants of Esau were known to have refused this, so how could Moses have misrepresented the facts?
   Ibn Ezra has a problem with such an interpretation, as we would be faced with the Israelites contradicting themselves when the Torah cites as a reason that the Moabites could never be accepted as converts the fact that they refused to offer food and water to the Israelites? (Deut. 23,5) He therefore understands the words כאשר עשו לי בני עשו, as referring to the fact that the Israelites had made a detour around the land of Edom not because the Edomites objected to their traversing the land in an orderly fashion, בדרך, בדרך, but because their king had objected. Moses asks to be given the same privileges as the בני עשו as opposed to the מלך אדום had been prepared to grant them. Only the king had been afraid that the Israelites instead of staying on a rural pass would march into a city. Many other commentators do not see a contradiction in what is written in Deut 23,5 with what is written here. There is a difference between volunteering to a thirsty nation some water and selling water to a nation that clearly has managed for 40 years without such “favours” from any other nation. G’d’s objection to the Moabites’ behaviour was based on their lack of humanity in denying much needed water to a nation that owed its entire existence to that nation’s founder Avraham having once rescued him from captivity and the second time from being included in the people who lost their lives in Sodom by praying on behalf of the “righteous“ inhabitants of Sodom. 
   Some commentators feel that the line in Deut. 23,5 refers to the Ammonites, not to the Moabites. The Moabites had hired the services of Bileam to curse the Israelites, an act of extreme ingratitude that is quite enough to disqualify them from membership in the Jewish nation, and to enjoy the direct protection of the כנפי השכינה, the protectively outstretched wings of the Divine Presence. According to that view, at the time, the Moabites had offered bread and water.
   2,34. ונחרם כל עיר מתם, “we destroyed every populated city.” Nachmanides writes that this was justified as the Emorites belonged to the seven tribes of the Canaanites concerning whom G’d had issued the decree: “do not allow a single soul to survive!” (Deut. 20,16) In light of this it is surprising that Moses offered the hand of peace to these people! I plan to explain this (compare Nachmanides on Deut. 20,17) as well as why no such offer was made to Og, King of Bashan, (but to the same tribe of people).The latter had come out swinging, without waiting for on offer of an olive branch.
   3,7. בזונו לנו, “we looted for ourselves.” In 2,35 the mode of the verb used for the same word “looting” is בזזנו. Why the difference? Our ages say that in chapter 2 the loot was universally acclaimed as something very welcome. Here, the Torah wanted to convey that the people already related with disdain, בוז, to the loot. This is also why here the Torah adds the words וכל הבהמה, an expression not found in 2,36.
   3,9. צדונים יקראו לחרמון שריון, “The people of Tzidon referred to Mount Hermon as “Siryon. Nachmanides explains that the principal intent of this verse is to inform us that the Tzidonim, the descendants of Tzidon the firstborn son of Canaan, called Mount Hermon while they were still in possession of it, “Siryon.” The Emorite, i.e. the fourth son of Canaan who occupied that region at the time when the Israelites were in the desert, having wrested it from their cousins the Tzidonites recently, called that Mountain <i>Snir,</i> another word for שלג, snow. They, called it thus to indicate that this mountain is almost all the time capped by snow. Seeing that it is so cold up there, it is without vegetation, חרב hence the letters חר in the name חרמון. Perhaps in the dialect spoken by the Tzidonim, the word שריון also reflects the fact that it is freezing cold up on that mountain.
   3,11. כי רק עוג מלך הבשן נשאר מיתר הרפאים, “for only Og, the King of Bashan remained from the remnant of the Refa-im;” Nachmanides feels that the message of the verse is that in spite of the fact that at that time, Og was the King of Bashan, his origin had been among the Refa-im. In order to suitably impress the reader with the physical dimensions of these Refa-im, of whom Og was typical, the Torah describes the size and raw material that his bed was made of. Any wooden bedstead would have collapsed under his tremendous weight. He lived in a city called Rabbah, which became his capital after the Ammonites had destroyed the Refa-im including his capital city, he was the only one who had escaped at that time. The purpose of telling us all this is that the Ammonites must have been a very powerful people if they had succeeded in defeating a race of giants of the dimensions of Og. The Israelites are reminded of the historical testimony of the achievements of the Ammonites down to their own period.
   3,12. ואת הארץ הזאת ירשנו בעת ההיא, “and we inherited this land at that time.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the words ואת הארץ הזאת refer to the land mentioned just previously. The words מערורר אשר על נחל ארנון, are not connected to what has been described previously, but introduce a new section, seeing that the people of Israel inherited more territory, lands inherited by the tribes of Reuven and Gad mentioned at the end of the verse. This is clear from the fact that Mount Hermon is situated far to the north of the river Arnon.
   Nachmanides writes that in his view the words הארץ הזאת אשר ירשנו בעת ההיא וגגו' were all regions given to the tribe of Reuven.
   3,13. כל חבל הארגוב לכל הבשן ההוא יקרא ארץ רפאים, “the entire region of the Argov comprising all of Bashan, that is what used be called the land of the Refa-im.” Nachmanides trying to justify the letter ה [normally representing a definitive article, implying that the noun following is familiar to the reader, Ed.] in the word הארגוב, writes that Bashan and Argav are lumped together as a contiguous region, seeing that both regions formed part of the land of the Refa-im, the reader is familiar with what Moses is describing here. The region still bore that name at that time due to the fact that it was ruled over by the last of the famous Refa-im, the giant Og. It is also possible that Moses wanted to let us know that the region retained its original name although ownership had changed repeatedly.
   Parshat Vaetchanan
   3,23. ואתחנן, “I pleaded;” Nachmanides writes that when Moses mentioned the conquest of the lands of Sichon and Og, (3,21) adding the words ואת יהושע צויתי וגו', “and I commanded Joshua” (in preparation for his becoming his successor) it was because he wanted to stress that he himself was not going to cross the Jordan. He now added the reason why he felt sure about this, namely that he had already pleaded with <i>Hashem</i> to allow him to at least cross that river, but his plea had not been accepted. It was therefore his duty to pray to <i>Hashem</i> to give Joshua the strength without which no one could successfully lead the Jewish people.
   @בעת ההיא, “at that time;” at the time when the decree that he himself would not cross the Jordan had become final and irrevocable. He had not made mention of his plea on the day it had been rejected.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains the words בעת ההיא as the period during which the armies of Sichon and Og were crushed and their lands conquered. When G’d had not accepted his prayer, Moses tried once more, including the request to appoint a suitable successor for himself. This was the prayer that he alludes to here, i.e. a prayer that had been well received by <i>Hashem</i>. In other words, only the opening words of our paragraph ואתחנן אל ה' are a reference to his plea on his own behalf. The only reason he made a public reference to his personal plea at all was to let the people know that he valued the merit of being allowed to set foot in that land so highly that he even had asked to revoke the decree that denied him entry, even as a private. He hinted that his not being allowed to enter that land was (at least partially) the people’s fault.
   4,1. ועתה שמע ישראל, “Now, O Israel, listen!” after Moses had concluded the words of admonition and reminded them of their various past sins, all of which had caused negative fallout for them, so much so that only the second generation had been allowed to enter the Holy Land, he hints that their entry into this land was contingent on their not copying the mistakes of their fathers. Moses especially warns the people not to tamper with G’d’s commandments by either adding or subtracting from them. [A major insult of the Creator, Who does not need us, the creatures, to edit His work. Ed.]
   4,2. לא תוסיפו, “do not seek to improve by adding, etc.;” an example would be adding a fifth paragraph to the four paragraphs of the Torah embedded inside the phylacteries.
   Nachmanides writes that the addition of a non-existent commandment to form say #614 instead of the traditional 613 commandments, is also included in the wording לא תוסיפו. However, Rabbinic decrees, based on legitimate inter-pretations of the Torah, and introduced as Rabbinic decrees are not included under the heading of the prohibition לא תוסיפו על הדבר אשר אני מצוה אתכם ולא תגרעו ממנו, “do not add to the word that I command you, nor shall you subtract from it.” These Rabbinic decrees, as a rule, serve to protect the average Jew from running afoul of Biblical decrees, and thereby become guilty of various kinds of penalties.
   4,3. עיניכם הרואות את אשר עשה ה' בבעל פעור, “Your own eyes that have seen what <i>Hashem</i> did with <i>Baal-Peor,</i> etc.” Ibn Ezra says that seeing Moses had mentioned the fact that the people had temporarily settled in the valley facing the temple to this deity, and some worshipped there, Moses begins with the laws of idolatry, pointing out that the people who had worshipped Baal-Peor had paid a heavy price for that.
   Nachmanides writes that seeing that Moses is about to launch into discussing details of <i>mitzvah</i> performance, he begins with aspects of idolatry, the root of the entire Torah legislation, and warns the people most graphically of the dangers involved in ignoring that legislation.
   4,5. ראה, למדתי אתכם, “See, I have taught you, etc.” Moses means that he does not only command them laws and statutes, this day, but is also teaching them how to apply these laws.
   Alternately, seeing that he had instructed the people to perform these commandments in the land of Israel when they would get there, he is also about to teach them היום, this day (already), how to observe these laws, seeing he will not cross into the Holy Land with them. Or, the meaning is simply: “I taught you these laws so that when you come to the land you can fulfill them.”
   @חוקים ומשפטים, “decrees and social laws;” Nachmanides writes that Moses warned against idolatry because this is the most serious sin, threatening the whole fabric of Judaism. He now lists a number of חוקים, statutes, decrees, laws that are G’d’s prerogative to decree without elaborating on them or without sharing their rationale with us, His creatures. On the other hand, the rationale of משפטים, laws governing inter-personal relationships, laws governing civilization without which life on this planet would be pure anarchy, are revealed in most instances, or are subject to scholarly research by examining the Torah text minutely.
   @לעשות כן בקרב הארץ אשר אתם באים שמה, “to carry out there in the midst of the land that you are about to come to.” This point had to be underlined, as there are both decrees and laws of a social nature that do not apply in the Diaspora. Alternately, the whole verse is an allusion that the basic purpose of the laws of the Torah was designed for life in the Land of Israel.
   4,6. ושמרתם ועשיתם כי היא חכמתכם ובינתכם לעיני העמים, “observe them for in the eyes of the nations this group of laws represents your wisdom and your insight.” Moses points out that apart from the internal value of the laws of the Torah, they have an “external” value, if performed; the success of a Torah observant Jewish nation is credited to our wisdom, which in turn is credited by the nations to these laws, observance of which is perceived as the key to the success of the Jewish nation.
   An additional benefit accruing to the people for observing the Torah’s laws is that the <i>Shechinah, Hashem’s</i> benevolent presence, will be hovering over us, always close at hand when we need to call upon Him for any legitimate reason.
   4,9. רק השמר לך ושמור נפשך מאד פן תשכח, “Only beware, and be very much on your guard lest you forget, etc.” According to Nachmanides these words are not merely part of Moses’ speech of admonition, but constitute one of the 365 negative commandments. We must not forget the origin of G’d’s commandments which we heard at the revelation at Mount Sinai when G’d spoke out of the fire, etc., and we witnessed His awesome glory, etc. Moses instructs further- worded as a positive commandment,- that we must inform successive generations of the details of that great event. This is important, even though hearing the laws from the mouth of the incomparable prophet Moses would be enough to obligate us to keep them meticulously. We have had so much proof of the legitimacy of Moses as a prophet that whatever comes out his mouth is bound to have G’d’s approval; nonetheless being reminded that originally these laws were communicated to the people without the use of an intermediary, even one as illustrious as Moses, acts as an anchor to our faith in the sacredness of the Torah. Reminding ourselves of that historic experience of the whole nation at Mount Sinai enables us to call anyone who tries to deny the Divine nature of any part of the Torah a liar. Anyone who challenges this, no matter how many miracles he performs, will not be able to shake our faith, and he reveals himself ultimately as a false prophet. This is why G’d said to Moses in Exodus 19,9 that the very fact that the people as a whole would experience an audible communication from G’d directly, would not only strengthen their faith in G’d, but would also strengthen their faith in Moses as a true mouthpiece of <i>Hashem</i>. By copying down the reports of these events in the holy Torah, this would enable also our children and their children in their time to know that all of this is true, that we are not copying down fairy tales. Our children will not accuse us of feeding them lies, when they can see that we, as well as our parents relate to them only what has been written down and copied faithfully, word by word and letter by letter, for many generations.
   4,19. אשר חלק ה' אלוקיך אותם לכל העמים תחת כל השמים, “which <i>Hashem</i> your G’d, has apportioned to all the peoples under the entire heaven.” Each nation has been assigned a star that acts in a manner of speaking as their guardian angel, supervises their fate. [Hence the study of astrology. Ed.] This is why they made themselves visual images of these stars, etc., eventually, even worshipping those images as if they had power independent of the Creator.
   4,20. ואתכם לקח ה', “but you- <i>Hashem</i> took out personally, etc.” Seeing that you are part of <i>Hashem</i> you have never had an intermediary appointed by Him to look after you, but He Himself takes care of you. He took you out of the iron crucible that is Egypt, and in doing so He overcame all the protective guardian angels that were appointed to look after the vital interests of the Egyptians. If <i>Hashem</i> had not first overcome those forces appointed by Him, you would never have been able to escape from there.
   4,21. וה' התאנף בי, “And <i>Hashem</i> became angry at me, etc.” Moses repeats what he had said to the people already in Deut. 1,37, to tell them that G’d had told him at that time to teach the Israelites the laws they would have to observe once they were in the Holy Land. He uses this opportunity to tell the people to hear the laws from his mouth now seeing that soon there would not be a chance for him to teach them, as he was not going to die in the land of Israel, but near where he stood, on the east bank of the Jordan. The paradox of the situation is that Moses had taken the people out of Egypt so that they could keep the Torah in the land of Israel, and he, who had been appointed to teach them the Torah, would not live to experience this.
   4,23. השמרו לכם, “Take care of your selves!” Even though I am not crossing the river with you, I am exhorting you to be most careful.
   4,25. כי תוליד בנים, “When you beget children, etc.” Nachmanides understands the word כי here to mean “after.” Moses warns that after having gotten used to being in the land, having raised children and grandchildren, there may came a time when you take your possession of that land for granted, and you might forget the Lord Who has made all this possible for you.
   4,26. העידותי בכם היום “I call up against you as witness this day!” that you will perish in short order, (if you ignore my warnings) for He will not have a great deal of patience with you once you have become guilty of idolatry.
   Even though this paragraph is in the nature of a warning, Moses did not phrase it as if it were something conditional, i.e. he did not preface it with the word “אם, etc.” The reason is that over and above being a warning, this is a prophecy, and prophecies are not prefaced by “if.” Nonetheless, any prophecy predicting something disastrous need not come true, it is by its very nature a warning, exhorting people to make fulfillment of the prophecy unnecessary. The wording of this paragraph is also what prompted our sages to conclude that Moses in this paragraph alludes to both the destruction of the first Temple, as well as to the destruction of the second Temple. They read this into the wordsונושנתם בארץ, “you will have been in the land for a long time,” and they see in the use of the words בנים ובני בנים a double meaning, as if Moses was exhorting the people to have enough בינה, good sense, to conduct themselves in such a way that what he foresees will not have to become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
   4,27. ונשארתם מתי מספר, “and you will be left few in number.” This is not a reference to the total number of Jews, but a prediction that due to the dispersal of the people in the Diaspora, each host country will have only a small number of Jews. If a census were to be taken of all the Jews in all the various countries, they would still amount to a sizable number.
   4,28. ועבדתם שם אלוהים, “and there you will serve gods.” Moses refrained from adding the word אחרים, “alien, i.e. alien deities, as the Torah does on other occasions. This is an allusion to the Israelites who claim that when in the Diaspora people who engage in idolatry are not ritually impure.
   @ולא יאכלון ולא יריחון, “that are unable to either eat or use a sense of smell.” Nachmanides writes that in the fist half of the verse Moses describes the inability of such so-called deities to ”see,” or to “hear,” meaning that they most certainly do not qualify for the title “deity.” By referring now to their inability to eat or smell, he adds that such so-called deities do not even possess the minimal attributes of all living creatures, the ability to eat or to use their sense of smell. In other words, these man-made objects are just that,-mere objects.
   4,30. ושבת עד ה' אלוקיך ושמעת בקולו, “then you will return unto <i>Hashem</i> your G’d, and you will heed His voice.” This too is an allusion to the redemption from the Babylonian exile when the people did return to <i>Hashem</i> and confessed their sins before Him [in the days of Ezra, Ed.] having listened to the exhortations of the prophets He had put at their disposal. In view of this, Moses was able to reassure the people that they would not disappear from the stage of history. This is reflected in Moses quoting G’d’s promise that He would remember His covenant with the patriarchs. (Leviticus 27,42) At the very end of our passage (verse 40) Moses hints at the final redemption, after which there will be no more exile.
   4,32. כי שאל נא לימים ראשונים, “Wish you would examine the history of mankind, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this verse introduces Moses explaining why <i>Hashem,</i> otherwise of almost unending patience, delaying retribution, will not do so if the Israelites become guilty of idolatry. Anyone examining history cannot fail to become aware of how much G’d has done for His people. He has not bothered to do anywhere nearly as much for any other nation on earth. He has revealed His existence, His presence, His power, to this people as to no other people. If, instead of loyalty and gratitude they were to turn their back on Him, what possible use could it be, to tolerate this and wait patiently for them to recognize the error of their ways? [I paraphrased a little. Ed.]
   4,37. ותחת כי אהב את אבותיך, “and because He loved your forefathers, etc.” according to Ibn Ezra the reference is to the three patriarchs.
   @ויבחר בזרעו אחריו, “and chose his offspring after him;” the singular mode of the word זרעו, “his offspring,” shows that Moses refers here specifically to Yaakov, the last of the patriarchs. Had Moses used the plural mode זרעם, he would have been referring to the eight nations descended from Avraham.
   @ויוציאך בפניו, “He took you out before Him.” According to Ibn Ezra, Moses refers to the anger at the Egyptians that prompted G’d to release the Israelites. In Leviticus 26,17 we also find the word פנים as meaning “anger.” Other commentators understand the word בפניו as referring to an angel of G’d. Compare Isaiah 63,9 ומלאך פניו הושיעם, “and the angel signifying His Presence, delivered them.”
   4,41. אז יבדיל משה שלש ערים, “Then Moses set aside three cities, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the Torah means that on the day that Moses set side these three cities he addressed the words of the covenant to the people.
   Nachmanides writes that this is not correct, but that Moses assembled the whole nation (at the beginning of what is related in this Book) in order to explain the Torah to them, doing so in a spirit of admonition. When he concluded with his general admonitions, he warned them about specific sins, such as idolatry, the importance of remaining aware at all times of the uniqueness of the Creator. He concluded by exhorting them to observe the various statutes and general commandments of G’d in order to ensure their continuous well being, to ensure that <i>Hashem</i> would continue to shower His goodness upon them. Having done so, he invited the people to assist him in keeping the commandment of setting up cities of refuge. After that he proclaimed in a loud voice: שמע ישראל וגו', as we read at the beginning of chapter 5. He had commenced with explanatory comments of the Torah, and had similarly concluded with that theme [during the assembly reported in these 4 chapters. Ed.] 
   4,47. ויירשו את ארצו ואת ארץ עוג מלך הבשן, “they inherited his land as well as the land of Og, King of Bashan.” Seeing that Moses reverted back to what he had been speaking about at the beginning of his review of the Torah, a review occasioned by the successful campaign against Sichon and Og, this subject is touched upon again to show that Moses continued with his discourse explaining the Torah.
   5,5. אנכי עומד בין ה' וביניכם בעת ההיא, “I was standing between <i>Hashem</i> and between you at that time;” Nachmanides explains this statement as a reference to Moses having ascended the Mountain in order to listen to G’d’s words, words he relayed to the people until the day when <i>Hashem</i> addressed the people personally. (Verse 6) The period covered by Moses began on the first day of <i>Sivan</i> as we read in Exodus 19,1-2. Moses had been instructed to relay G’d’s words to the people commencing with the line כה תאמר לבית יעקב, “Thus you shall say to the House of Yaakov” in verse 3 of that chapter. G’d’s instructions continued until He said לך רד ועלית, in 19,24.
   Ibn Ezra says that the passage we are reading here was said by Moses after the revelation at Mount Sinai, and that the meaning of the words is that after G’d had spoken to you “face to face,” and you had been unable to endure this and remain alive at the same time, G’d decided to use me as your interpreter as you yourselves had requested. Therefore, from then on I have been standing between you and between <i>Hashem</i>. Nachmanides does not accept this interpretation but prefers the interpretation of our sages, referring to his interpretation on Exodus 20,7 that the Israelites actually only heard and understood the first two of the Ten Commandments from G’d’s own mouth, and that they did not understand the other Commandments though their ears heard them. They had been under far too great an emotional impact. From the third Commandment onwards, Moses was already the interpreter. At any rate, at the time of the revelation, from the point of view of physical proximity, Moses had been asked by G’d to position himself so that he would be closer to the source of these words which appeared to issue forth from the Mountain, than the people who had remained at the foot of the Mountain.
   @לאמור, “to relay by word of mouth.” <i>Rashi</i> says that this refers to repeating the revelation at Mount Sinai, the words G’d had spoken to the people at that time.
   Nachmanides writes that there is no need for this commentary at all, but that the fact that at the time the people had been so terrified by the accompanying thunder and lightning that they were unable to even properly understand G’d’s words. This had made it necessary that Moses repeat to them what G’d had said on that occasion. Moses was now going to verbalise what the people had remembered only in their minds, i.e their unspoken desire to have him be the go between <i>Hashem</i> and themselves. 
   Nachmanides continues that the part of the Torah known to us all as משנה תורה, “review of the Torah,” commences now with the restatement of the Ten Commandments. Moses did not introduce any changes into the first two of these Commandments, the ones that the people themselves had heard directly from the mouth of G’d. Moses also did not edit in the sense of “expand on” the third Commandment. He began explaining when he substituted the word שמור instead of זכור at the beginning of the fourth Commandment, that of Sabbath observance. He explained that aspect of the Sabbath legislation to them now, their already being familiar with the aspect known as זכור. He informed them that the שמור aspect had been revealed at the same time as the זכור aspect. He added the words:
   @כאשר צוך ה' אלוקיך, “as the Lord your G’d has commanded you “ <i>Rashi</i> understands these words to refer to the part of the Sabbath legislation given to the people at Marah, prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai, where they had also been taught about the red heifer and various items of civil law. Here he added:
   @ושורך וחמורך, “as well as your oxen and your donkeys;” Moses explained that not only the immediate working of the soil that produces our livelihood is forbidden on the Sabbath, but that those who work the soil, the farmer’s agents, -if you will,- who help him produce a crop, must also rest on the Sabbath. In this context he added further 
   @למען ינוח עבדך ואמתך כמוך, “in order that your servant, and your servant-maid rest just like you.” A reason for all this is:
   @וזכרת כי עבד היית, “so that you will remember that you yourself used to be a servant;” Moses explains that just as G’d when He took you out of Egypt relieved you of the need to work seven days a week, you in turn, are to give your workers a day of rest, the same day as yours. In light of this, the true meaning of the phrase, beginning with the word למען in our verse, is that when you allow your servant to rest on the Sabbath you will be reminded that you yourself did not have this privilege until <i>Hashem</i> took you out of Egypt. This is what prompted G’d to 
    5,15. צוך ה' אלוקיך לעשות את יום השבת, “the Lord your G’d commanded you to “make” the Sabbath day.” Ibn Ezra comments that the word תעשה means that G’d commanded that the day of rest had to be on the Sabbath, i.e the anniversary of the seventh day of creation. [It would not do to pick any day of the week to commemorate that we enjoy a day of rest because the Lord took us out of Egypt.] 
   As to the fact that we commemorate this aspect by reciting the <i>kiddush,</i> Maimonides writes that in the first version of the Ten Commandments the Torah speaks of the special honour accorded to that day. The aspect of commemorating the Exodus on the Sabbath does not override the previously revealed aspect of commemorating the seven days of creation, on the last of which the Lord rested. This is why Moses refers to the previously revealed legislation of the Sabbath in which commemorating the seventh day of creation had been given as the primary reason. To sum up: there are two major reasons for the Sabbath rest. 1) To strengthen our faith in the Creator of the universe, who made constructive rest part of nature by demonstrating His own abstention from creative activity on that day. 2) The Lord’s special love for us, [not so for the other nations who labour under the curse to have to work for a living unceasingly, the legacy of Adam having ignored the command not to eat from the tree of knowledge. Ed.]
   Nachmanides does not seem too impressed by Maimonides’ approach, as he cannot see how resting on the Sabbath is conceptually related to the Exodus from Egypt any more than any of the other commandments that represent symbols of our history, especially the Exodus. On the other hand, he does agree that Sabbath observance most certainly is conceptually related to the whole work of creation performed by the Creator during the six days preceding the history of mankind.
   Nachmanides therefore would have Moses not add another dimension to the rationale of Sabbath observance, but to restate the aspect of G’d the invisible Creator having rested on the original Sabbath, to His people who more than any other people had experienced how He manifested Himself visually in their lives making this an additional point to reflect upon on every Sabbath when they would observe constructive rest. All the miracles performed by G’d in Egypt were, in a manner of speaking, a re-enactment of what our sages call חדוש העולם, a replay of the creative process, seeing that G’d proved Himself time and again to be able to make “nature” do His bidding when He wanted and where He wanted. Whereas the first time around there had been no witnesses who could report to us on what they had experienced, in Egypt there had been millions of such witnesses. [I have rephrased this slightly. Ed.]
   5,16. כאשר צוך ה' אלוקיך, “as the Lord your G’d had commanded you.” You heard it from <i>Hashem,</i> directly; and Moses adds immediately:
   @ולמען ייטב לך, “and so that it will be for your benefit.” The construction here is similar to Psalms 85,13: “The Lord also bestows His bounty, and our land yields its produce.” [Basically, without G’d’s input the land would not yield its produce, but the latter is visible evidence, the former is just as real but invisible to man. Ed.] He continued to explain the ninth Commandment
   5,17. לא תענה ברעך עד שוא, “Do not testify falsely against your fellow;” The version in <i>Parshat Yitro</i> used the term שקר untrue, false, whereas Moses here appears to expand the prohibition to someone who testifies to something irrelevant, something vain, something which is not enforceable by a court of law, for instance. Frivolous testimony, which may only serve to undermine one of the parties’ good reputation is prohibited by the Torah, also, one of the reasons being that the testimony employs directly or implicitly the name of the Lord. Moses continues with his elaboration, on the tenth Commandment,
   5,18.ולא תחמוד , “and you shall not covet, etc.” In <i>Parshat Yitro</i> the commandment employs only the verb תמד, whereas here Moses added an additional phrase commencing with the verb אוה, to desire (in the reflexive mode). From the wording in <i>Yitro</i> we would have thought that only when steps are taken to translate one’s burning desire into practice does one transgress this prohibition. If Moses had not added the dimension of merely “desiring” a field, or an ox, we might have thought, that only when one engages in translating one’s desire into practice is this prohibited, but that “daydreaming” about it is not objectionable. Hence, he restated part of the original version to make the point we just mentioned.
   @שדהו, “his field,” here Moses introduces a possession, other than chattels, i.e. real estate, something that is sold with אחריות, with certain guarantees by the vendor to reimburse the purchaser if his title will be challenged. Adding this dimension to the list of matters one must not covet closes the circle, i.e. all possessions that are subject to being sold and bought must not be coveted, even if one is willing to pay more than the market price for it in order to satisfy one’s craving for certain possessions. [I have slightly amended the wording in the interest of readers not thoroughly familiar with Jewish civil law. Ed.]
   5,19. ולא יסף, “which did not abate.” According to Onkelos the meaning of the expression ולא יסף is the same as ולא פסק, “it did not stop, was not interrupted.” [Such as someone catching his breath. Ed.]; neither did it weaken as it continued. The constancy of the voice showed that it was not a human voice.
   Nachmanides writes that the Torah had written in Exodus 19,19 that the sound of the <i>shofar</i> blast kept increasing in volume, and the sages explain that the reason for this was to enable the listeners to adjust to the increasingly overpowering volume. We therefore must distinguish between the sounds the people heard from the <i>shofar,</i> and the voice they heard from <i>Hashem</i>. G’d’s voice when He uttered the Ten Commandments, remained steady, even, did not rise or fall. It is fair to assume that Onkelos, who holds that the voice did not cease, bases himself on Jeremiah 48,33 ונאספה שמחה וגיל, where the same root means that “the joy over the harvest will be gone,” so that with the prefix לא the meaning would be that the joy would be continuous, never ending. [Our author quotes a couple of examples where the root יסף is also used in the manner in which Onkelos understands it in our verse. I suppose the concept that a voice is interminable is so unusual, that our author tried to justify Onkelos. Ed.]
   5,24. ואת תדבר אלינו, “and you will speak to us.” <i>Rashi,</i> explaining the feminine pronoun את when being applied to Moses, an outstanding example of manhood, sees Moses as reflecting that the people with their many demands, complaints, etc., had weakened his stature so that he felt no stronger than a woman. What upset him most about his people was, that instead of being desirous to come ever closer to <i>Hashem,</i> demonstrating their love for Him, they tried to distance themselves, relating to Him from feelings of fear and fright. If so, Moses expressed concern that G’d might react negatively to the people’s conduct. This is not compatible with the fact that G’d had told Moses that what the people had done was out of a feeling of profound reverence, “fear of the Lord” for Him, meaning that it was something positive. He therefore continues that the true interpretation is in accordance with what he himself had written, i.e the people not realizing that they would be hearing only the Ten Commandments, thought that G’d would reveal the entire Torah in the same manner, at once. Thinking about that, they became very much afraid that they would not be able to endure such a revelation for such a length of time. At any rate, G’d was pleased with their reaction and revealed only the Ten Commandments at that time.
   You should realize that the people’s request included not only that the supernatural nature of the revelation be cut short on that occasion, but they meant that at no time in the future would they want to be exposed to such overwhelming experiences as they had just experienced. They meant to include in that request even the generations after them, something that the Talmud (<i>Pesachim</i> 50) calls: לאו כל שעתא מתרחש ניסא, “miracles do not happen all the time;” we derive the meaning of what the people had in mind from verse 21 in our chapter: “this day we have seen that man can survive being addressed by G’d directly.” The word הזה, “this,” is restrictive, meaning only on this day was there such demonstration. It will not occur again. The people as an exchange for foregoing such revelations in the future, undertook to have complete faith in G’d’s prophets, thus making such revelations unnecessary. G’d’s (Moses’) response was יקים לך (Deut. 18,15) ...כמוני יקים לך נביא מקרבך, “He will make arise for you a prophet just like me, etc.” They were to follow the instructions of such prophets, just as they followed Moses’ instructions after the latter had enquired for guidance by G’d.
   5,26. מי יתן והיה לבבם זה להם ליראה אותי ולשמר את כל מצותי, “Who can assure that their hearts should remain theirs to fear Me and observe all My commandments!” The reason there is some doubt about this is that G’d has granted us free will and although “everything is within the power of heaven,” the exception is the ability of man, the creature, to choose his path in life.
   5,29. ושמרתם לעשות כאשר צוה ה' אלוקיכם אתכם, “You shall be careful to act in accordance with what the Lord your G’d commanded you;” Nachmanides writes that this verse is a warning to meticulously observe the Ten Commandments, commandments which G’d personally gave to them at the Revelation.
   6,1. וזאת המצוה החוקים והמשפטים אשר צוה ה' אלוקיכם ללמד אתכם לעשות, ”This is the commandment, the statute and the civil laws which the Lord G’d commanded to you to carry out.” The reason I was commanded to teach you these laws is because <i>Hashem</i> accepted your request to hear the balance of the Torah from my lips.
   6,2. למען תירא את ה' אלוקיך, “so that you will fear the Lord your G’d.” The purpose of learning the Torah in all its constituent parts and to carry out its imperatives, is to implant in you a degree of awe and reverence for the author of such a Book, the Lord your G’d. [The opinion of Ibn Ezra on 5,30, not spelled out by the author. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that he finds it impossible to accept that learning and keeping the Torah has as its objective 1) to acquire awe and reverence for our Creator, and 2) in order to enjoy a long life as a reward. 
   According to Nachmanides the separation of these two objectives, as spelled out by Ibn Ezra is misleading. In his opinion, study of the Torah is meant to result in performance, which in turn will lead to the reward for the performance. The three steps are so closely interrelated that they are continuous, not separate. [Having children and enjoying their development as worthy successors are all part of this lifestyle. my words. Ed.] This in turn assures continued tenure of the Holy Land, and G’d’s benevolent supervision of our affairs both as individuals and on a national scale. G’d’s overriding interest is to help us to be righteous persons and to reap the benefit thereof.
   6,3. ושמרת לעשות אשר ייטב לך, “You shall be careful to perform so that it will be good for you.” Moses underlines that the whole purpose of what he commands the people is for its own benefit.
   @ארץ זבת חלב ודבש, “a land flowing with milk and honey.” According to Ibn Ezra these words are the continuation of the verse concluding with the word לרשתה, “to inherit it,” in verse 1. He claims that this is so although it seems to be far removed from that sentence above. Alternately, we would have to conclude that the prefix ב is missing here and the Torah had meant to write בארץ זבת חלב ודבש, “in a land which flows with milk and honey.” Yet another possibility is to assume that the word לתת, “to give,” is missing and the verse has to be understood as concluding with the words כאשר דבר ה' אלוקי אבותיך לתת לך ארץ זבת חלב ודבש. 
   6,4. שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד, “Hear, O, Israel, <i>Hashem</i> is our G’d, <i>Hashem</i> is One.” Nachmanides agonizes over why, suddenly, Moses has seen fit to describe <i>Hashem</i> as “ours,” (ending נו) instead of as “yours,” (ending כם) as he did all the time while admonishing the people. Even in this very paragraph Moses again refers to <i>Hashem</i> as your <i>Hashem,</i> אלוקיך in the very next verse. He concludes that our verse is special, as Moses includes himself as the means by which <i>Hashem</i> had demonstrated His uniqueness, as He had not performed nearly as many miracles in all of history as he had performed by means of Moses. Having made that point, Moses reverts to his usual manner of referring to <i>Hashem</i> as the G’d of the people whom he addresses.
   6,5. בכל לבבך, “with all your heart.” Nachmanides, in the footsteps of the <i>Midrash,</i> understands the word “heart” here as representing the source of all our desires, as for instance, in Psalms 21,3 תאות לבו נתת לו, “You have granted him the desire of his heart.”
   @בכל נפשך, “with all your soul.” This refers to the source of man’s intelligence, his brain, the analytical part of man, as opposed to the emotional part whose source is in the heart.
   As to our sages, who interpret the word more as the physical life force of man, when they understand Moses as exhorting the people to even sacrifice their physical life in the service of <i>Hashem</i> when the occasion demands it. (<i>Rashi</i> based on <i>Sifri</i>) They derive this from the wordבכל “with the whole, etc.” which is meant to add an additional dimension to the maximal imperative demanded by Moses in our relationship to <i>Hashem</i>. It is clear that the word בכל cannot mean that we should not only love <i>Hashem</i> with “half” our soul. The word must be intended to add an additional dimension to our love. Possibly, the word is inserted for stylistic reasons, seeing that it is used in connection with לבבך as well as with מאדך. Or, in order to make this more acceptable from a linguistic aspect, enduring pains, or losing limbs, is considered something less than losing one’s whole life, so that loving G’d with one’s whole soul must mean that one is prepared to give up one’s whole life for Him.
   @בכל מאדך, “with all your resources.” Nachmanides explains the word as if the Torah had written מאד מאד, “very very much,” i.e. “love Him exceedingly much.” 
   According to our sages the dimension of love for G’d mentioned here is the one that is expressed in terms of one expending money or its equivalent to demonstrate that love. The reason why ממון, money or tangible assets are referred to as מאד, is because it is viewed in terms of something one amasses, i.e. המון, “a great quantity of something,” is closely related to the word ממון. Compare the proverb, Psalms 37,16 טוב מעט לצדיק מהמון רשעים רבים, “better the little that belongs to a righteous person than the great abundance of the wicked.” Moses demands that we love the Lord with the great abundance at our disposal. As to the very nature of “loving” the invisible and incorporeal G’d, our sages define it negatively i.e. what is not love of G’d. You are not to study Torah in order to make a name for yourself as a great scholar, or in order to qualify for long life both in this world and in the world to come; but you should do so because of who the author of the Torah is, i.e. לשמה, in admiration of His great name. (<i>Nedarim</i> 62) This, of course, raises the question of why Moses said למען ייטב לך ולמען תאריך ימים על הארץ, “in order that you will be well off and in order that you will enjoy many years on earth. etc., etc.” These words are not to be understood as an encouragement to perform the Torah for the sake of reward, but to inspire a degree of fear, seeing that such reward implies that if one does not qualify for it one qualifies for being deprived of what we nowadays would term “quality of life.” Alternately, the message in Moses’ words is that the pious must be oriented in two directions when performing the commandments; 1) love, 2) fear, awe. He must be conscious of love for him by His Creator, and requite that love, and at the same time he must be in trepidation not to anger his Creator by treating His commandments with disdain by neglecting them.
   6,7. ושננתם לבניך, “You are to teach them thoroughly to your children;” Nachmanides writes that this too is merely a spelling out of something that had been clearly implied ever since the first commandment was given to Avraham to circumcise himself and his male descendants, and the Torah added that this commandment would be valid throughout the ages (Genesis 17,10) as well as many commandments with the rider that they are לדורותיכם, valid, applicable throughout your generations. Unless the knowledge of these command-ments will to be taught to each new generation, how could such commandments be observed in later generations? Similarly, in the next verse we are told that some of these laws have to be embedded in the phylacteries or the doorposts of your houses (verse 9), although we have read this in Exodus 13,9 spelled out already. What is new here is only the manner in which the written record of these paragraphs is to be constructed, etc. There are further details, which were handed down to Moses verbally, such as the precise type of knot that is required to enable us to wear the phylacteries on the head, etc. 
   Moses here added the commandment of the <i>mezuzah</i>, something not mentioned in Exodus 13,9.
   6,10-11. והיה כי יביאך, “It shall be when He brings you, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the purpose of this paragraph is to warn the people not to forget their past, when they were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord had saved them from that miserable fate, not to take their new found status for granted and not to forget the loving kindness shown them by <i>Hashem.</i> They must forever retain a degree of fear of the Lord and, in a manner of speaking, relate to Him as a servant does to his master.
   According to the view of our sages (<i>Chulin</i> 17) our verse means to permit the Israelites to enjoy what they would find inside the houses captured in the Land of Canaan during the war of conquest, even if the loot consisted of matters ordinarily forbidden to them by Jewish law. Such matters include even pork, or the fruit of fields in which two or more species of plants had been sown too closely together, violating the law against mixing seed. It is not quite clear whether the cisterns are mentioned as they may have been constructed by mortar containing something forbidden, and such forbidden material would endure long past the time of the conquest, when the temporary relaxation of forbidden perishables mentioned here had long since ceased to be legal. It is noteworthy that whereas Moses relaxed a whole slew of forbidden food, drink, etc., during the period of the war of conquest, no single concession regarding matters related to idolatry is mentioned. This will be made crystal clear not only in verses 14-15, but again when the Torah repeats in Deut. 7,25 that the people must not display any desire for the golden or silver vessels used by the local inhabitants in any manner related to idol worship. To make this point clear Moses insists that any altars or places of worship of the Canaanites be completely razed. (7,5-6)
   6,13. את ה' אלוקיך תירא, “You shall fear <i>Hashem</i> your G’d<i>;”</i> After having commanded the people to love <i>Hashem,</i> Moses had to add that they must also fear Him, else they might, in their over-enthusiasm forget the boundaries of what is forbidden by becoming too familiar with <i>Hashem</i> and violate crucial prohibitions only to incur harsh penalties.
   @ואותו תעבוד, “and Him you shall serve!” The manner in which you shall serve the Lord shall be reminiscent of the manner in which a servant serves his master. It is possible that Moses here alludes to the sacrificial service that is also known by the term עבודה, (compare עבודת מתנה in Numbers 18,7 or ועבד הלוי , in Number 18,23) We find a similar interpretation by the <i>Sifri</i> on the verse אחרי ה' אלוקיכם תלכו.....ואותו תעבודו in Deut. 13,5, where the “service” is understood to refer to the service in the Temple. There is an additional dimension derived from that, i.e. when there is no Temple in which to perform that service, the ”service” consists of studying how the service in the Temple will be performed when it will be rebuilt soon in our days.
   Ibn Ezra interprets the words את ה' אלוקיך תירא ואותו תעבוד as the former referring to the meticulous observance of the negative commandments, and the latter, as the meticulous observance of the positive commandments. This interpretation is not possible when applied to the verse cited by <i>Sifri</i> in Deut. 13,5. 
   @ובשמו תשבע,”and (only) in His name are you to render an oath.” This does not mean that it is a commandment to swear oaths, but if the occasion arises when you cannot avoid having to swear an oath, the only truth you must swear by is the truth known as <i>Hashem.”</i> This is why Moses follows up immediately with
   6,14. לא תלכון אחרי אלוהים אחרים, “You shall not follow after other gods.” While on the subject of fearing G’d, loving G’d, serving G’d, we must not forget that no other so-called deity is to be feared, or otherwise appeased as they have absolutely no power and therefore neither deserve to be appeased or need to be feared.
   Some commentators say that we must note that Moses did not say <i>tishava,</i> but<i> tishavea</i>,<i> a</i> significant nuance. The wording as we have it here implies that if gentiles who are aware of how seriously a Jew takes his oath want to force us to swear to the truth of something by our G’d, as opposed to by their god, you must abide by what you swore to under such conditions even though you acted under duress. Not only this, but your being asked to render an oath in the name of your G’d reflects the fact that you are known as a G’d fearing person, exactly what Moses commanded you to be at the beginning of this verse.
   It is also possible that the words לא תלכון וגו' at the beginning of our verse refer to the opening words of verse 13, i.e. את ה' אלוקיך תירא, ”You are to fear the Lord your G’d,” and the words above define the extent to which you are to fear the Lord, i.e. sufficiently not to ever follow other philosophies, other alien deities. Your fear of the Lord is to be so tangible that His very name is to you like an oath; whenever you run to carry out one of your plans the very mention of His name is sufficient to ensure that if it is something constructive you will carry it out as if you had sworn to do it, and if it involves something negative, not compatible with His will, you will refrain from carrying it out as if bound not to do so by a personal oath.
   The Talmud in <i>Temurah</i> 3 deals with this verse at length, claiming that an oath concerning secular matters is permitted by the Torah. [but the author of the famous commentary <i>Torah Temimah,</i> Rabbi Baruch Epstein, points out that the treatment in the Talmud leaves most of us more confused than we had been before. The major problem is the contradictory attitudes between Maimonides and Nachmanides on the whole subject of when a Jew may swear an oath not legislated by the Torah. Ed.]
   6, 17. לא תנסו את ה' אלוקיכם, “You shall not test the Lord your G’d.” The best known example of the Jewish people violating this commandment is found in Exodus 17,6 when the people tested “if the Lord is in our midst or not.” [The result of this insult to G’d was the attack by Amalek reported in the very next verse. Ed.] Making our loyalty to G’d dependent on His demonstrating His existence and His care to each one of us individually, is not only childish, but insulting to the Creator. How many times does G’d have to prove either His existence or His power to the Jewish people? Moses therefore warns the people not to stipulate that if they do not experience the hoped for results from their keeping the commandments they would abandon that path. Part of true faith is to accept even what appears to be a major, and sometimes irreversible setback in our aspirations with good grace, undiminished love for G’d, who by being the Creator, surely knows best and has His creatures’ best interests at heart. Moses makes this very point and that is why he continues with
   6,17. שמור תשמרון את מצות וגו'... ועדותיו, “observe the commandments…and His testimonies” Most of the “testimonies” are commandments designed to perpetuate in our collective memories these very miracles G’d has performed for us. We eat unleavened bread on Passover to commemorate the Exodus, we either offer the Passover, or remember it symbolically on our <i>Seder</i> plate when unable to offer sacrifices. We leave our homes and spend a week in a flimsy hut in order to commemorate that our G’d whom we worship kept an entire nation not only alive and well, but did so for 40 years in a totally inhospitable desert, although their conduct on occasion would have caused other rulers to abandon them. What is said here concerning not testing G’d is equally applicable to G’d’s established prophets. Once a prophet has proven his credentials as a true prophet, he is not to be subjected to constantly having to prove that he is still enjoying G’d’s ear. In the course of his speeches, Moses will also tell the Jewish people that should there be times when there are no prophets this is no reason to abandon G’d’s commandments, as there are competent sages, Rabbis, who are always at hand to inculcate the younger generation with authentic teachings of the Torah and the Books of the Prophets, as well as the deliberations of the oral law in <i>Mishnah</i> and G<i>emara.</i>
   6,18. ועשית הישר והטוב, “You shall do what is fair and good;” Nachmanides, approaching this line from a purely textual perspective, writes that Moses exhorts the people here that when they observe G’d’s commandments they should develop the feeling that what they are doing thereby is doing what is pleasing in the eyes of the Lord. In other words, the Jewish definition of “fair and good,” is what has been revealed by G’d to be so in His eyes. [Moses does not ask us to develop an independent moral code, possibly superseding the one G’d has established for us. Ed.] The assurance למען ייטב לך, “so that you will be well off,” is tied to your accepting His standards of what is fair and good.
   Our sages in the <i>Midrash</i> view the words ועשית הישר והטוב, as Moses, at this point, introducing a new concept in, especially, inter-personal relationships, the concept known as לפנים משורת הדין, “over and beyond the requirements of the law.” Up until now Moses had exhorted the people to be law-abiding, both in their ritual lives and in their relationships with their fellow man. Now, he asks them to do more than that. An Israelite, deserving of that title, is expected to seek out opportunities to demonstrate his concern for his fellow by voluntarily giving of himself or of his material wealth. The parameters are left open. The guidelines for such conduct over and beyond the strict requirement of justice are the knowledge that the Creator, by definition, is doing so all the time, and has even created a <i>quasi</i> legal instrument called <i>teshuvah,</i> repentance, enabling His creatures to escape the dreadful consequences of their failures that they would have to look forward to had G’d not afforded them the opportunity to turn the clock back by repenting, and thus rehabilitating themselves. A practical example of this kind of self-restraint is not to take revenge or emphasize one’s righteousness compared to one’s fellow who had demonstrated total insensitivity to such considerations. (Compare Leviticus 19,18: “do not take revenge and do not bear a grudge.” What was phrased there as a prohibition, or other legal restraints of unacceptable behaviour even when provoked, such as not even to curse a deaf person, Moses expands to initiatives of doing good, as something to be sought out as proof that we the creatures try to emulate the virtues of the Creator.) [I have paraphrased some of the last few lines. Ed.]
   6,20. כי ישאלך בנך מחר מה העדות, וגו', “When your child asks you tomorrow (figuratively speaking)” The first category of questions by children who observe our rituals are questions concerning symbols commemorating historic events, i.e. עדות. Subsequently, questions will concern laws that appear not to be rooted either in our history or logic, חקים. Lastly, the child will question משפטים, penalties exacted for violating the Sabbath, by being stoned to death, for instance, or why someone sleeping with a woman and her mother should be subject to the death penalty by burning, etc. etc. The child will not ask his father concerning a whole range of laws that make sense to him, laws that are effective in fighting crime, etc. Moses tells the father that in the first instance he has to inform his child about the Exodus from Egypt and what had preceded it. This answer, basically is the introduction to the Ten Commandments in which <i>Hashem</i> introduces Himself as the One Who liberated the people of Israel from bondage under terrible conditions, something that surely entitles Him to expect something from us in return when He requests this. Having demonstrated His power to us at the time and having exerted Himself on our behalf is all that is needed to justify His legislating a lifestyle for us.
   6,22. לעינינו, “before our very eyes.” We the generation telling all this to our children, were privileged to have seen with our own eyes all that we are relating to you, to whom this will remain only “hearsay.” Seeing that to us this is more than hearsay, but something we experienced on our bodies, saw with our own eyes, we are certainly bound to acknowledge Him in every sphere of our lives. It does not matter whether the legislation is embodied in a framework of historical symbols, עדות, social laws, משפטים, or even laws that defy our powers of reason to understand, חוקים; we are bound to respect and obey them equally. WE are certain that all of them have been designed to make our life on earth and eventually in our own land, so much better than it would be without them.
   6,25. וצדקה תהיה לנו, “and it will be a merit for us, etc.” Although we are duty bound to observe all these commandments, and the idea that we would be entitled to be rewarded for doing so is quite beyond reason, Moses assures the people that such reward will nonetheless be in store for them, this being the nature of <i>Hashem,</i> Who devises ways and means to enable His people to acquire merits.
   Ibn Ezra writes that some scholars see in our verse (the word צדקה) an allusion to the world to come, where the reward for keeping the commandments will be handed out.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the meaning is that it is no more than fair and just that we keep <i>Hashem’s</i> commandments as by what He did at the Exodus He has acquired us as His eternal servants obligated to do His bidding.
   7,6. בך בחר ה' אלוקיך להיות לו לעם סגולה, “<i>Hashem</i> has chosen you to be for Him a nation a treasured people.” This status as a treasured people is evident by the fact that instead of appointing one of His angels to be your guardian angel, as He has done for all the other nations, He Himself acts as your guardian. This is why Moses continues and says
   7,7. לא מרובכם, “(what motivated G’d was) not your being numerous, etc.” although it would have seemed appropriate that a great King, the King of the universe, should select a most numerous people as His special favorites. Throughout our history we have been taught (Proverbs 14,28) that ברב עם הדרת מלך, “where there is a multitude that is a king’s honour.” This would enable the King to appoint many generals to be in charge of different divisions of his armies. Although, in your case, you are not a numerous people, nonetheless <i>Hashem</i> chose you. 
   @חשק, “desired;” the meaning of this word in this connection is that He established a permanent inseparable bond with you. We find this root in the same context in Exodus 38,12 and 38,18 וחשוקיהם כסף, where it describes how the silver bands connected the lace hangings of the Tabernacle to the pillars supporting them.
   @ויבחר בהם, “He chose them;” He chose you out of all the nations that He had at disposal. The word בחר always means that the one doing the choosing had the option to select his choice from a number of candidates. The reason why He chose the Jewish people was out of a feeling of love for them. G’d had seen that this nation was worthy of His love more than all the other nations. Moses does not spell out a special virtue of the Jewish people that made them worthy of this extraordinary love of <i>Hashem.</i> When someone has been chosen as another person’s especially beloved, he must henceforth endure with equanimity anything that results from the fact that he is so beloved. Israel qualified as being especially beloved by G’d because they were a tough nation, a nation capable of enduring a great deal when being tested by their lover, <i>Hashem</i>. He took a liking to you on account of your forefathers the three patriarchs whom G’d had subjected to so many trials all of which they had endured uncomplainingly so that He eventually swore an oath to them promising to give them the Holy Land. He swore the oath in order that His promise previously not reinforced by an oath, should not become null and void on account of sins that the offspring of these patriarchs might become guilty of. As a result of this oath, G’d took this nation out of Egypt amongst all the miracles that were needed to accomplish this.
   @ויפדך, He liberated you, redeemed you;” an allusion to how G’d smote the Egyptians on account of the Israelites; (compare Isaiah 43,3 נתתי כפרך מצרים, “I have given (away) Egypt as a ransom in exchange for you.”)
   7,9. וידעת, “You must know;” the Exodus from Egypt surely taught you that the Lord your G’d is the true G’d, the One who created heaven and earth; this also taught us that this G’d is faithful and keeps His promises, including the various covenants which He entered into with your forefathers. You should know that just as this G’d keeps His promises so He will also exact retribution from those who deserve it. Each one of His enemies will be dealt with individually according to the severity of his sins. While it is true that sometimes we observe that G’d’s patience with a wicked person is extremely long, He will eventually, in His own good time, deal with such people, just as He dealt with the Egyptians. The reason that such retribution sometimes appears as long overdue, is that G’d also practices His virtue of rewarding everyone for his good deeds, and such wicked people as experience all this patience by G’d must have had good deeds to their credit for which they had not yet received a reward. Moses now reverts to 
   7,11. ושמרת את המצוה, “You shall observe the commandment, etc;” In order that you will not belong to the group of people classified as those who hate Him and who will perish, it is incumbent upon you to keep the commandments, all types of them, Belong to the group of people described as those who love Him, the ones who receive favourable mention!
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why Moses at this point repeated the previous call to observe the commandments, is to compare G’d’s keeping His promises to the patriarchs by redeeming their offspring; hence you should keep your part of the bargain by keeping His commandments.
   Parshat Eykev
   7,12. והיה עקב תשמעון, “it shall be the result of your listening, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the unusual word עקב, “heel,” as a reference to the sort of thing one steps on without giving it a second thought. If we relate to those commandments of <i>Hashem</i> that in our superficial way of evaluating things we consider as insignificant, irrelevant, by observing even such commandments by <i>Hashem</i> meticulously, Moses tells us that we will qualify for extraordinary success in our daily activities on the farm, etc. If we accept this approach by <i>Rashi</i> as correct, the Torah here speaks of two distinctly separate matters. The משפטים judgments, surely do not fall into the category of things the average man belittles, considers irrelevant. Moses must be understood as saying that in order to qualify for all the blessings that follow immediately, it is not enough to meticulously observe the seemingly immaterial command-ments, but we must meticulously observe the laws governing inter-personal relationships, laws that form the fabric of society, of civilization We must not even belittle those when the amount at stake seems trifling.
   Nachmanides suggests that possibly <i>Rashi</i> had in mind the משפטים that deal with matters and amounts that appear trifling, and that many judges would feel inclined not to waste their time on. Moses warns not to develop a cavalier attitude towards such “trifling” matters.
   Other commentators understand the word עקב as something that is the result of what preceded it, its outcome. We find that word in such a context in Psalms 19,12 בשמרם עקב רב, “by observing them there is much reward.” The meaning of our verse then would be: “it will be, as a result of your observing My commandments, etc., especially the ones governing human relationships, that <i>Hashem</i> on His part will fulfill the promises inherent in the covenant He made with you.”
   The beginning of something, in classical Hebrew, is usually referred to as בראש, “at the head,” i.e. the Torah employs body parts to illustrate beginnings; it is therefore not strange that it employs another body part, the heel, as something describing the end, the conclusion.
   Onkelos translates the word עקב as חלף, “in exchange for.” The word appears in that context in Numbers 18,21 and 18,31 where it describes the various gifts set aside for the priests as being an exchange for the Temple service performed by them on behalf of the people at large. He understands the concept of reward as a “balancing of the scales”, reverting to “zero” by wiping out an indebtedness. It is like Isaiah 40,4 והיה העקוב למישור, “that which had been bent will be straightened out again.” The meaning of our verse then would be: “in compensation for your observing My social commandments on account of My maintaining the terms of My covenant, I will indeed respond generously.”
   The reason Moses stressed the social laws especially is that many of the other commandments are not applicable in many peoples’ daily lives. He who is not a farmer does not have to observe the dozens of laws that address the farmer. Women are altogether not obliged to observe positive commandments linked to a specific time frame. The social laws apply to one and all at all times hence Moses uses them as an example. Overall, Torah observance by the people is measured against the background of how the social laws are observed. Furthermore, seeing that even the bringing to justice of someone guilty of certain sins against his fellow man does not reverse the situation created by the sin, and therefore many people tend to have compassion with the perpetrator when he was not an intentional criminal, Moses has to stress that the element of deterring a potential sinner overrides such considerations, as we hear again and again וכל העם ישמעו ויראו ולא יזידון עוד, “and the whole people shall hear and see and not sin again.” (Deut 17,13, <i>et al</i>) When discussing the person who tries to lure others into sin, especially idolatry, Moses reinforces this exhortation by warning the people not to advance excuses for the sinner, not to cover up for him, and not to do anything that would make it difficult to convict the culprit. Family members of guilty persons are especially warned not to allow their family ties, or their fear of a violent family member to override their duty to society at large.
   7,13. ואהבך, “He will love you;” Nachmanides writes that what Moses means is that if the Jewish people will perform the social commandments from feelings of love for <i>Hashem</i>, He, in turn, will love them. It is possible that the word ואהבך could be meant transitively, i.e. that G’d will make the Jewish people beloved in the eyes of the families whose members have become the “victims” of the application of these social laws. They will not hate the judges who convicted members of their families.
   @והרבך, ”He will multiply you;” your numbers will not decrease through the loss of the sinners who have been put to death by the judicial process as demanded by the משפטים, the social laws of the Torah. A prime example would be the mass executions if there ever were to be a עיר הנדחת, a city the majority of whose inhabitants had turned to idolatry. (Deut. 13,3-19)
   7,15. והסיר ה' ממך כל חולי, “<i>Hashem</i> will remove every sickness from you.” This refers to sicknesses that are part and parcel of everyday life. Moses adds:
   @וכל מדוי מצרים “as well as all the bad maladies specifically prevalent in Egypt.” Probably, what are meant are different kinds of intestinal maladies, cancer of the colon, etc. Moses singles out these diseases with which the Israelites were familiar from their stay in Egypt, to assure them that G’d will cure them even from such diseases as part of the reward for observing the משפטים. He would instead afflict our enemies with such diseases. It is also possible that Moses hints here that if once afflicted with these diseases the meticulous observance of the social laws would cause G’d to heal the afflicted person, whereas non observance of these laws may bring in its wake such afflictions.
   When singling out specific commandments representing the social laws, משפטים, Moses singles out first (8,19) and foremost the eradication of every person guilty of practicing any kind of idolatry. 
   7,23. והמם מהומה גדולה, “He will confound them with great confusion;” Moses reassures the people that although the Canaanites will not be wiped out overnight, G’d will utterly confuse them so that none of them will pose a threat. They will survive only long enough for the Israelites to have sufficient children and grandchildren to replace their numbers and not allow part of the land to become desolate because there are not enough of them to work the land. There will remain only small pockets of Canaanites throughout the land during that period.
   7,24. ונתן מלכיהם בידך והאבדת את שמם, “He will deliver their kings into your hand and you will cause their reputation to perish.” The few Canaanites remaining in the land during that time will not amount to anything, politically or militarily. Anyone who tries to make a stand against you will fail.
   7,25. פסילי אלוהיהם תשרפו באש, “You are to burn their hewn or cast idolatrous images by fire.” Moses tells the people that although he had told them that G’d will conduct the war against the Canaanites [by means of various poisonous insects (verse 20) Ed.] just as He had done against the Egyptians at the sea of Reeds, He will not destroy their deities as He had done at the time when the Israelites had come out of Egypt. This is a chore that the Israelites themselves will have to perform. 
   8,1. כל המצוה, “The entire commandment, etc.” Although I have already warned you concerning how the category of commandments known as משפטים are to be observed, similar instructions apply to the performance of the other commandments of the Torah as your successful life in your own land including your enjoying children and increasing amounts of livestock as well as bountiful harvests will depend on this, as mentioned earlier.
   8,2. וזכרת את כל הדרך,” you will remember the entire route, etc.” Nachmanides explains here that Moses reminds the people that they had first hand experience that by keeping G’d’s commandments, they, who had come this far, had enjoyed G’d’s miracles throughout their trek in the desert only because they did keep the commandments.
   @למען ענותך לנסותך, “in order to afflict you by testing you;” Entering a desert that did not offer means of survival was indeed a great trial for you, and you were totally dependent daily on manna from heaven, never knowing if it would materialize on the following day. G’d did all this in order to train you to observe His commandments and to follow His instructions, where to go, when to rest, etc. He could have led you on a highway leading through cities, but He did not, as He wanted you to know that you could survive by means of His largesse alone. This experience taught you that following His commandments is the fountain of life.
   8,3. אשר לא ידעת ולא ידעו אבותיך, “you had no idea that one could subsist adequately on an exclusive diet of manna, nor did your forefathers know this.” Another way of understanding this verse is not the new dimension of the people‘s knowledge, but Moses wants the people to appreciate the extent of G’d’s loving kindness. Their forefathers, who had been loyal followers of G’d at all times, and had not rebelled time and again, had not been provided for by G’d as they had done, having their needs presented to them on a platter, so to speak. They had had to earn their livelihood by hard work, in particular their founding father Yaakov.
   There is yet another way in which we can understand our verse, i.e. that the words ויענך, וירעיבך, ויאכילך את המן are each something different, a subject by itself. The word ויענך, “He afflicted you,” refers to the trial of having to wander through a barren desert. The word וירעיבך, “He let you starve,” refers to the period until the manna fell, some 30 days after the Exodus, the time when the people had complained to Moses that he had taken them out of Egypt only in order to kill them in the desert. Finally, the words ויאכילך את המן, they were taught the great lesson that man does not live by bread alone, but by every utterance that emanates from <i>Hashem.</i> In<i> Yuma</i> 74 the Talmud uses our verse to establish the principle that there is a basic difference between the outlook of people “who have bread in their basket, and those who do not.” Although, G’d provided on a daily basis, the people, as opposed to shoppers in a supermarket, could not feel at ease until after the new supply had arrived and was seen to have arrived. The ongoing miraculous nature is what is stressed here and what distinguishes a Jewish people in the desert from Jews before and after who also had to put their trust in G’d. The words למען ענותך refer to the statementאשר הוליכך במדבר.ארבעים שנה, “Who has led you through the desert for 40 years,” as this is all part of the ongoing miracle, whereas the words למען אנסנו הילך בתורתי in Exodus 16,4 where the manna appears for the first time, does not refer to the manna as daily miraculous food, but refers to G’d in general providing the people’s needs. There, G’d uses this as a test to see whether the people are grateful for G’d’s largesse. The latter is the way to understand the verse before us at its face value. However, the commentary given previously is more in keeping with the moral/ethical values Moses is trying to convey throughout the Book of Deuteronomy.
   8,4. שמלתך לא בלתה, “your garment did not wear out on you.” <i>Rashi</i> [based on <i>Pessikta de Rav Kahane.</i> Ed.], explains the phenomenon as G’d’s clouds of glory that traveled with the Israelites everywhere, dripping moisture on their garments so that not only did they look as if freshly laundered and pressed, but the children’s clothing grew as the children grew. Ibn Ezra, quoting other scholars, claims that the Israelites had taken a vast variety of clothing out of Egypt with them. He himself considers it possible that one of the properties of the manna was that it did not cause perspiration in the people who ate it. He explains the phenomenon of the feet not experiencing swelling during all these years as also due to the qualities contained in the manna. Alternately, the slow pace at which the people moved was the reason that their feet did not swell. [Considering that in a period of 40 years the people traveled lass than 700 miles, it is hard to see anything miraculous in their feet not swelling. Ed.]
   Nachmanides disagrees with Ibn Ezra, seeing that Moses was at pains to explain to the people that observing the commandments had been the reason for their phenomenal success during the last 40 years. Moses simply points to the immediate past being an allusion to the future when, if they continue on the right path, G’d will continue to make life easy for them. It would be counterproductive to explain what Moses said here as being natural phenomena, when the whole point of Moses’ recalling the past is to encourage the people so that they would continue to qualify for the kind of miracles they experienced in the past. The basic lesson Moses is trying to get across is that man lives on everything that emanates from G’d, not just from what grows out of the earth and the oceans. New clothes are no insurance against moths, or other destructive agents of nature, so that a degree of G’d’s supervision is needed regardless of how secure one feels with what one owns.
   8,5. כי כאשר ייסר איש את בנו, “for just as a father from time to time chastises his son, etc.;” when a father does so, he does it for his son’s benefit; similarly our father in heaven employs such means for our benefit seeing we are His children.
   @כן ה' אלוקיך מיסרך, “so is the Lord your G’d disciplining you.” The temporary afflictions experienced by the Israelites in the desert are examples of G’d’s using educational tools at His disposal. Solomon in Proverbs 29,17 phrases it thus: יסר בנך ויניחך, “Discipline your son and he will give you rest;” he continues with “ויתן מעדנים לנפשך, “and he will be a cause of delight to your soul.” By first disciplining one’s son, the goodies the father will provide will be so much more appreciated.
   8,7. כי ה' אלוקיך מביאך אל ארץ טובה אל ארץ נחלי מים, “for the Lord your G’dd brings you to a good land, a land containing streams of water, etc.” The whole land is like an irrigated garden for it contains many natural fountains as well as underground reservoirs of water. The latter irrigate the lowlands, the former the hilly regions. From there they run down as rivulets. The point Moses is making is that some of the springs are fed by accumulated rain that has been absorbed beneath the surface of the mountains, other sources of fresh water are the excess remaining from the nightly dew some of which rises after sunup and penetrates as mist into the surface of the mountainside. Moses refers to the latter as מעיינות, springs. Other springs simply emerge from deep in the earth, released from the subterranean aquifer. Moses refers to them as תהומות, “the depths (of the earth)”. Sources of fresh water are readily available both in the mountains and in the plains.
   8,9. אשר אבניה ברזל, “whose stones yield iron, etc.” The place you choose to look for stones will surprise you by harbouring iron.
   According to the Jerusalem Targum, the meaning is that the stones in the Land of Israel will prove to be as strong as iron. In other words, the land is full of quarries from which valuable building stones can be hewn. These stones will be useful in the construction of walls and fortifications. The reason why Moses did not praise the land for the silver and gold one might find there, is that the stones he mentioned would prove more useful than the silver and gold, which are only luxuries, not necessities.
   8,10. ואכלת ושבעת וברכת, “you will eat, be sated, and bless the Lord.” This is the verse from which we derive the positive commandment to bless <i>Hashem.</i>
   @על הארץ הטובה אשר נתן לך, “for the good land that He has given you.” At all times, and in every location whenever you will feel sated, you are to bless Him in acknowledgment of both the nourishing food and the land on which it grows. You are to especially express gratitude that the land is ours as an inheritance to be passed on to your children. This commandment is not dependent on our owning or living in the land during any particular period.
   8,18. וזכרת את ה' אלוקיך כי הוא הנותן לך כח, “you are to remember the Lord your G’d, for it is He Who gives you strength, etc.” Nachmanides explains that it was a well known fact that the Israelites counted among them men of outstanding bravery, experts in martial skills, and others of sheer physical strength, for had not their founding father Yaakov compared some of his sons to lions, wolves, etc.? Had they not defeated the most powerful Canaanite Kings in war? Therefore Moses takes pains to remind the people that such strength had been granted to these individuals by <i>Hashem</i>; they are not to credit their achievements in any sphere of activity to כחי ועוצם ידי, “to my own strength and the power of my hand,” but they are to remain mindful of the fact that without the active support of <i>Hashem</i> they could not have achieved any of this.
   Moses repeats once more his clarion call: שמע ישראל in chapter 9 reminding the people that the nations in the land of Canaan, on a man for man basis, are far more powerful than the individual Israelites, and they are more numerous, and it is only due to Hashem’s intervention on their behalf that past and future victories are possible. Those people even number giants as part of their population. If you were to leave everything to natural causes, you would never achieve your aspirations to subdue them. You must therefore constantly remain conscious of the fact that you have <i>Hashem,</i> Who is your commander-in-chief, and with such a commander-in-chief how could you fail?
   9,4. אל תאמר בלבבך, “do not say, even in your heart, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the meaning of the verse is that you may be tempted when you observe how G’d puts all these people to flight before you to credit your success to a combination of your righteousness and their wickedness. Moses warns you not to credit anything to your righteousness, but that only their wickedness caused them to lose their land.
   Nachmanides does not agree with this interpretation, i.e. that the Israelites’ righteousness did not have any bearing on their success. Moses is telling the people that whether righteous in deed, or even righteous in their hearts, this could not have been a reason for G’d to dispossess another nation of their heritage. It was only their wickedness that is due to their suffering the fate that will unfold in another few weeks after Moses’ death. He underlines,
   @לא בצדקתך, “not on account of your righteousness;” as mentioned before, be it in deed or even also in thought; the only reason these people will lose their land and lives is their confirmed wickedness. An additional reason why they lose their lands to you, and not to another nation, is the oath <i>Hashem</i> had sworn to your forefathers to give this land in due course to their descendants. In the event that someone might counter that we have a specific verse in the Torah stating that G’d had chosen us because we are beloved by Him, and how could this be unless we had been righteous? Surely, G’d does not love a wicked rebellious people, and if so our righteousness must have played a role in our being victorious in our assault on the Canaanites! The answer is that our sins cannot annul an oath sworn by G’d to our forefathers, seeing that He had given the gift of this land to them reinforced by an oath. <i>Hashem</i> does not only love the good people, so that one could claim that they had had a share in receiving this land as a reward for their goodness. Besides, Moses reminds the people that whereas previous generations of Israelites might have been good, this present generation had been rebellious from the word “go!” How could they even dream that their goodness had played a role in their receiving the gift of this land! Moses now proceeds to illustrate the point he has just made.
   9,8. ובחורב הקצפתם, “already at Mount Sinai you angered, etc.” Nachmanides writes that at the beginning of the Book of Deuteronomy, before embarking on elaborating on a substantial part of the Torah, Moses had taken the people to task for collectively committed sins that had not yet been forgiven, such as the sin of the spies and the sin at the מי מריבה, the waters of strife. Following that, he had explained the Ten Commandments in somewhat greater detail. He had especially dwelled on the unique nature of G’d the Creator, and guardian of Israel, and on the eternal bond between Him and the Jewish people. Moses issued specific warnings regarding all manner of idolatry, and he issued general warnings regarding observance of the Torah’s command-ments. Now he begins to zero in on specific commandments, but before beginning to single them out individually he once more recalls the people’s sins committed by them even after they had received the Torah in an act of revelation by <i>Hashem</i>. He did not admonish them on the various acts of insubordination in and around the sea prior to their receiving the Torah at Mount Sinai. The reason is that ever since their acceptance of the Torah at Mount Sinai their obligation to keep the commandments had become far greater than before they had entered into a covenant with <i>Hashem.</i> This is why he now prefaces his words by saying: ”already while at the Mountain you angered G’d.”
   9,15. ואפן וארד מן ההר, “I turned and descended from the Mountain;” Nachmanides writes that he has already explained that Moses had prayed on behalf on the people before beginning his descent from the Mountain, as we know from Exodus 32,11. At the conclusion of that particular prayer G’d had already assured him that He had reconsidered His original intent to wipe out the whole nation. Moses, at this time, does not even refer to that prayer as he is intent on describing the 40 days of continuous pleading on behalf of the people, and even on behalf of Aaron, that he had spent on his return to the Mountain after he had shattered the Tablets 
   9,17, ואתפוש בשני הלוחות, “I grasped the two Tablets;” this too is part of the admonition, i.e. Moses described that he was unable to refrain from smashing the Tablets. He mentioned this as he wants to elaborate on the second set of Tablets, and what had occasioned the need for such a second set.
   It is also possible that he hinted at the favour he had done for the people at that time when he had risked immediate death by destroying G’d’s handiwork deliberately. He had done so for the sake of the people, as our sages explain in <i>Shemot Rabbah</i> 46 it is better to be convicted of infidelity while still only betrothed, than to be convicted after already being properly married. As long as the people had not received the Tablets, the final step in the nuptials between G’d and the people begun on the day of the revelation had not yet been taken.
   9,19. כי יגורתי, וגו', “for I was terrified, etc.;” on account G’d displaying His anger at you in so many ways. First I was afraid that He would destroy you utterly as He had threatened to do; my fear had not yet abated as even the anger described as קצף, is still a great threat to the object of that anger. True, that G’d had relented somewhat, and no longer wanted to wipe all of you out with one fell swoop, but if I spent forty days and nights prostrate on the Mountain praying on your behalf I did so with good reason, until at the end of that period G’d accepted my plea, finally. I also had to pray on account of Aaron. I prostrated myself on that occasion, as I could not do so before. Moses describes the gold dust of the burned golden calf as having been “thrown: into the brook at the foot of Mount Sinai,” instead of mentioning that the people had been made to drink from it as reported in Exodus 32,20. He omitted this detail out of sensitivity for their feelings. He did not want them to feel like a <i>Sotah</i>, a wife suspected of marital infidelity. Such a woman is made to drink from the water in which the ash of the red heifer has been dissolved.
   9,22. ובתבערה, ובמסה, ובקברות התאוה, Ibn Ezra says that תבערה, is the name of a place, and that the people never made camp there for longer than a single day. This is the reason why this place has not been listed in the stopovers in <i>Parshat Massey.</i> The reason why Moses lumped together <i>Taveyrah</i> and <i>Massa</i>, is because at both of these locations the people had been guilty of complaining and putting G’d on trial, testing Him. Before the incident at <i>Massa</i> nothing had happened to the people at all.
   Some scholar says that the attack by Amalek was triggered by the people’s conduct at <i>Massa,</i> and that although Amalek had attacked the rearguard or stragglers of the people, Moses described G’d’s anger as “burning,” concentrating on the more serious sins of the people.
   9,25. ואתנפל לפני ה', “I threw myself down before <i>Hashem;”</i> Nachmanides interprets these words as “I was forced to throw myself down on your behalf for forty days and forty nights on account of the terrible sin you had committed,” for initially, <i>Hashem</i> had threatened to destroy you all together, until I had completed my prayers.
   9,26. ואמר אד-ני אלוקים...אל תשחת עמך, I said: “Lord, G’d, do not destroy, etc.” This had been Moses’ prayer before he descended from the Mountain, a prayer that had been responded to by G’d with the words: “I have reconsidered the evil that I said I would bring upon My people.” Moses did not mention the content of the prayers he offered during his forty days on the mountain after he had destroyed the golden calf, and executed the people most guilty of dancing around that calf for, in the words of Job 11,9, “its measure is longer than the earth,” [it would have been beyond the common people’s ability to comprehend. Ed.]
   9,28. מבלי יכולת ה' להביאם אל הארץ, “beyond G’d’s ability to bring them to the land, etc.” Nachmanides points out that in Moses’ prayer to G’d after the debacle with the spies he uses the expression מבלתי יכולת ה' אל הארץ אשר דבר להם ומשנאתו אותם הוציאם להמיתם במדבר, instead of the words used here, i.e מבלתי יכולת ה' להביא את העם הזה אל הארץ אשר נשבע להם וישחטם במדבר.. Why, did Moses mention G’d’s oath to bring the people to the Holy Land in Numbers 14,16, whereas he did not mention a word about G’d having hated this people already in Egypt, and the orchestration of the Exodus only being a preamble to mask G’d’s inability to keep His promise? At the sin of the golden calf he only mentioned that G’d had “said” that He would bring them there? Nachmanides reminds us that the supposed argument by the nations Moses presents to G’d, must be understood in terms of how matters appear to these nations. If G’d had made the people perish after only a few weeks away from Egypt, the surviving Egyptians would have interpreted this as proof that G’d had never intended the people to get to Canaan, but had wanted to kill them where no one would be a witness to His inability, but in fact G’d had already hated the people in Egypt, and that is why He had allowed them to suffer so long. The Canaanites could not have used quite the same argument after the people had survived and prospered in the desert for a year and a half. They, and the surrounding nations, would have concluded that the Jewish G’d, though willing to bring the people to Canaan, had found out that after all this was beyond His power, and rather than have witnesses to His failure, He had killed His own people. 
   10,1. בעת ההיא אמר ה' אלי: "פסל לך שני לוחות אבנים", “At that time <i>Hashem</i> said to me: ‘carve for yourself two stone Tablets;’” This was a sign that G’d looked once more favourably upon me, seeing that He was willing to inscribe these Tablets Himself. However, the second set of Tablets was distinctly different from the first set, seeing that the first set of Tablets was entirely the work of <i>Hashem,</i> He even supplied the raw material, presumably material not even found on earth.
   @ועשית לך ארון עץ, “you will make for yourself a wooden ark.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that this is not the Holy Ark constructed by Betzalel when he made the Tabernacle about 3-4 months later. The meaning of the instruction in our verse is that the Tablets would be housed in the ark made by Moses until the time when the Tabernacle would be built and inaugurated. [at this point in time G’d had not even instructed Moses to build a Tabernacle. Ed.] After the Tabernacle was built, the ark constructed by Moses now would house the broken pieces of the first set of Tablets. 
   Nachmanides comments that our sages do not appear to agree with <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation (<i>Baba Batra 14</i> and M<i>enachot 9</i>9) The opinion expressed in the Talmud is that both the second set of Tablets and the broken pieces of the first set reposed in the same ark, i.e. the ark constructed by Betzalel. This appears as the more logical scenario, seeing that the ark constructed by Moses was not inside the innermost and most sacred part of the Tabernacle during the 40 years the people traveled through the desert. According to tradition, the only time the Holy Ark left the Tabernacle/Temple, was when the High Priest Eli’s sons took it with them in the war against the Philistines, as a result of which it fell into captivity until it was eventually repatriated by King David to Jerusalem, about 50 years later. According to the sages, the ark Moses constructed was to serve his carrying the second set of Tablets in on his descent from the Mountain, and they would repose there until the consecration of the Tabernacle almost 6 months later. The reason that Moses was not instructed to make an ark prior to receiving the first set of Tablets was that it was foreseen that these would be smashed and did not need an ark to house them. Therefore the words ויהיו שם in verse 5 mean that the Tablets would remain in that ark pending the construction of the Holy Ark surrounded by gold and covered with the golden lid on which were mounted the two cherubs.
   Taking a more pragmatic approach to the text, i.e. the <i>peshat,</i> it is possible to understand G’d’s instruction to make a wooden ark as already referring to the ark that would be constructed by Betzalel later, seeing that long before <i>Betzalel</i> was appointed to be the artisan in charge of constructing the Tabernacle, Moses had been charged by Gd with that project in Exodus 25,10 after G’d had told Moses to collect the requisite donations from the people for that project (Exodus 25,2-9). Execution of that project had been sidelined due to the sin of the golden calf until after G’d had become reconciled to the atonement for that sin having been adequate, [although it was never totally forgiven Ed. (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 102)] When the time had come, G’d briefly told Moses to make an ark for the Tablets, this being none other than the ark already mentioned in Exodus 25,10. It was a way of G’d indicating to Moses that what had been interrupted due to the episode of the golden calf could now be resumed, including the collection of the donations for that project. This is the meaning of Moses adding after the words ויהיו שם, “they remained there,” the words: כאשר צווני ה', “as <i>Hashem</i> had (previously) commanded me.” He meant that the Tablets were to repose within that ark permanently. 
   When Moses descended from the Mountain carrying the second set of Tablets he deposited them in the אהל מועד, “the tent of testimony,” [the one Moses had retreated to after the sin of the golden calf, compare Exodus 33,7. Ed.] in order to remain there until the Tabernacle had been constructed. If Moses had not smashed the first set of Tablets, he would have deposited them in that tent until Betzalel would have completed the Ark that was intended to house the Tablets permanently. It is most likely that what happened to the second Tablets also happened to the remains of the First Tablets. 
   [By the way, Eliyahu Ki Tov, ז'צ'ל in his booklets on the portions of the Torah’ illustrates by a calculation how both the first set of the Tablets in their fragments plus the second set, plus the Torah scroll written by Moses could be fitted within the dimensions given by the Torah for the size of the Holy Ark. He also adds a fascinating calculation as to the combined weight of the Holy Ark when it was being transported. Ed.]
   It is impossible to explain this in a different fashion, as Moses most certainly did not take the fragments of the first set of Tablets back up the Mountain with him. [This is true as long as we stay within the parameters of the <i>peshat</i>, without speculating on what happened to the letters of the Tablets, etc., etc., as the <i>Midrash</i> does. Ed.]
   We must not ask that according to what Moses relates in verse 3 and 5 respectively, that he must have placed the Tablets in an ark at hand as soon as he descended with these Tablets and that they remained in that same ark. We must not understand all of these steps as having occurred exactly in the sequence Moses portrays them. He was only interested in concluding the subject of the Tablets and the Holy Ark within which they reposed after the Tabernacle had been built. The principal part of Moses’ message was verse 4, in which he testifies that what <i>Hashem</i> wrote on the second set of Tablets was exactly what He had written on the first set. This being so, this set of Tablets also qualified for being housed in the original Holy Ark that G’d had told Moses about in Exodus chapter 25. <i>Hashem’s</i> holy name was honoured by His writing reposing in a Holy Ark on earth. With the words
   	10,3. ואעש ארון, “I constructed an ark,” Moses concludes this interlude and returns to his main theme.
   10,5. ואפן וארד מן ההר ואשים את הלוחות בארון אשר עשיתי, “I turned around and descended from the Mountain and placed the Tablets in the ark that I had constructed.” I did this immediately after descending from the Mountain
   .
   @ויהיו שם, “they remained there.” Permanently. 
   [This is a part of Moses’ admonition. The emphasis is not on the fact that these Tablets were received, but on the <i>quasi</i> secrecy with which they were received, and the fact that other than Moses no one had ever seen what was written on these Tablets. Had the first set of Tablets survived intact their presence after having been displayed by Moses would have been an ongoing reminder of the revelation at Mount Sinai. Partly based on Rabbi Avraham Sabba in his <i>Tzror hamor.</i> Ed.]
   @כאשר צוני ה'. “As <i>Hashem</i> had commanded me.” G’d had commanded that some of His glory be present on earth in the camp of the Children of Israel.
   10,6. ובני ישראל נסעו מבארות בני יעקן, “The Children of Israel journeyed from Be-eroth-bney Yaakon.” <i>Rashi,</i> feeling the need to explain how this apparently unrelated verse fits in here, and posing the rhetorical question if these wells came to the place called <i>Mosserah,</i> explains the verse by following <i>aggadic</i> interpretations, saying that seeing this is where Aaron was mourned in style, it appeared to the people as if this was where he had died.
   Ibn Ezra, forever attempting to find a straightforward interpretation clearly suggested by the text, [author’s words, not mine. Ed.] is hard pressed saying the words בארות בני יעקן (of the descendants of Se-ir, Edom) were not places by the same name mentioned in Numbers 33,31. [The name of this individual appears in the Bible three more times, in Chronicles I 1,42, in Numbers 33,31, and 32. Ed.] He claims that the place is the one we know as <i>Kadesh.</i> Similarly, according to<i> Ibn Ezra,</i> מוסרה mentioned here is not identical with the מוסרות mentioned in Numbers 33,31. Only the “<i>Kadesh</i>” mentioned in Numbers 33,37 is identical with בארות בני יעקן. The name of the desert surrounding הר ההר is מוסרה. From that location the Israelites moved on to <i>Gudgoda. Gudgoda</i> is not the name of a mountain. It is a term for a region comprising Tzalmona, Punon, and Ovot. (Numbers 33, 31-42) Yotvata, is the place referred to as באר, as we know from Numbers 21,16. This is also why it is described as ארץ נחלי מים, a land with brooks and rivulets providing water. The region responded favourably to water diviners. The verse (7) משם נסעו הגוגודה belongs with ויכהן אלעזר תחתחו “and Eleazar, his son, performed the priestly duties in his stead.” (6) I have already explained that after departing from Mount Sinai the (individual) Israelites no longer offered offerings on the Altar. [Ibn Ezra on Exodus 29,42. ]
   It is possible that when arriving at Tzalmona they began to offer these sacrifices again and that is when Eleazar began his duties in practice. Perhaps on New Year’s Day, as well as on the Day of Atonement, these rites were performed. [In his commentary on Exodus 29,42 Ibn Ezra justifies the non-performance on most days with the non-availability of the requisite amounts of wine and olive oil, etc. Ed.] The justification for referring to Eleazar as performing his duties as his father’s successor at this point is that as a result of the golden calf episode the firstborn who up until that time had performed the priestly duties were exchanged for the Levites who had remained loyal, and among their various duties was the one to carry the Holy Ark on their shoulders during the journeys of the Israelites. Already in Numbers 6,23 Eleazar had blessed the people together with his father, i.e. had performed some priestly functions.
   Nachmanides refuses to accept any part of Ibn Ezra’s commentary on this subject (locations) declaring that the sudden emergence of locations that had not been mentioned in <i>Parshat Massey</i> is totally inadmissible. Furthermore, he sees nothing strange in locations appearing as having slightly different names on different occasions. He quotes numerous examples of this being the case. The Torah does so not only when referring to place names, but also when referring to the same people by different names. In this case where there is hardly any different between מוסרה and מוסרות, there is even less reason to “make a federal case” out of such nuances. He also sees nothing special about the variation from חור הגדגוד in Numbers 33,32, and הגדגודה in our verse here to justify looking for Ibn Ezra’s far-fetched stretching of the meaning of the text on these two occasions. He feels that the various locations mentioned here are so close to one another that they did not warrant separate mention in Numbers chapter 33. By allowing for the fact that the camp of the Israelites was about 12-15 kilometers in length, the front section had reached another location before the rearguard had even left it. He assumes that the people hardly moved more than 3 or 4 kilometers in an average day’s journey. When the Israelites journeyed sometimes for only a single day, they could easily have straddled both locations while encamped. He also argues that quite possibly, seeing mountains are named, the top of the mountain was named by a different name from the base of the same mountain, although both names fitted the same location. In a location known as חשמונה (Numbers 33,29) there were numerous wells in the field, collectively known as the wells of the sons of Yaakon, בארות בני יעקן, in order to water their flocks. The Israelites passed that region in their journeys and moved on to a place known as מוסרה. They encamped around the wells known as בארות בני יעקן, and remained there for some time. Moses singled out two places, Gudgoda and Yotvata as areas that were also well watered, skipping others which did not have much to commend them, seeing they had all been mentioned already in <i>Parshat Massey</i>. It is also possible that when Aaron ascended the mountain הר ההר to die there, a mountain that was facing the place known as מוסרה, that the people then moved back to Mosserah to mourn and eulogise Aaron in a manner befitting such a beloved leader. This is what is reported here when Moses writes that they journeyed from בארות יעקן to מוסרה, and that the notables of the people used these 30 days to each pay their respects to Aaron at his grave, ascending the mountain where he had died in order to do so. The Torah had not actually written that the people made camp in בארות בני יעקן. Once the thirty days of mourning were over, they moved on at greater speed all the way to Gudgodah. From there they moved to Yatvata The location was known as Yatvata on account of the abundant supply of drinking water in that region. This was by way of contrast with the desert of Tzin, which qualified for the description ציה וצמאון, completely devoid of water, a region in which one could only perish from thirst. The reason why Moses inserted reference to the death of Aaron at this juncture, may have been that he had already mentioned praying on behalf of Aaron who might have died many years earlier if not for Moses’ prayer. He wanted the people to know and to remember that if Aaron did not die until the fortieth year this was proof that that he had not been guilty of sin but died of old age. He did not die until his son Eleazar was sufficiently mature to become his successor.
   As to the formulation (verse 6) ובני ישראל נסעו, “the Children of Israel journeyed” (in the third person), as opposed to Moses speaking in these portions in direct speech i.e. “you have done,” “I have done, etc.,” Moses spoke to them in direct speech when he admonished them. Here he was merely relating some historical facts, without implying criticism of the people.
   10,8. בעת ההיא הבדיל ה' את שבט הלוי, “At that time <i>Hashem</i> set apart the tribe of Levi, etc.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the “time” referred to by Moses was the episode of the golden calf.
   Nachmanides adds that if we accept <i>Rashi’s</i> comment it refers not to the actual setting apart of the tribe of Levi by <i>Hashem,</i> but to the time when <i>Hashem</i> made up His mind to do so. In fact, no action was taken until the second year in the second month. Alternately, what <i>Rashi</i> had in mind was Exodus 32,26-29, when Moses asked for volunteers to execute the people who had actively worshipped the golden calf as a deity. At that time only members of the tribe of Levi had responded to that call. 
   Personally, (Nachmanides writing) I believe that the correct interpretation is that the words בעת ההיא which appear here a second time, refer to the same time as the first time Moses used this expression, (10,1) the time when Moses had been invited to carve out the Tablets for G’d to inscribe the second set of Ten Commandments upon. At the time when G’d became reconciled with His people, He did make some changers in the hierarchy of that people by appointing the Levites <i>en masse</i> to take over the functions previously reserved for the first born in each family. At that time G’d had also become reconciled to Aaron’s role in that tragic episode, and He commanded to make the special vestments for the High Priest which proclaimed to all the people that Aaron as well as his sons were held in high esteem by <i>Hashem.</i> At that time Moses had also been commanded to arrange for the seven days of consecration of the Tabernacle and the inauguration of the priests into their positions. This also enabled Moses to say that Eleazar became High Priest in place of his (deceased) father, as there was no need for him to be anointed first, seeing that the anointment to the priesthood, by the oil of anointment was for the members of that family something hereditary, and did not need to be renewed every time a new High Priest was appointed. The setting apart of the priests from the ordinary Levites, and the Levites from the other tribes of the Israelites, occurred simultaneously. <i>Hashem</i> had decided at the time of the episode of the golden calf that these changes were imperative for the development of the people as His people, and that is implied in the lineנתונים נתונים , that the Levites were, so to speak, placed at the disposal of the priests to assist them in their holy tasks. (Numbers 8,16-19)
   Another possible approach to the words בעת ההיא on this occasion, is that at that time <i>Hashem</i> decided to set apart the priests from the remainder of the tribe of Levi, in that they too were allowed to carry the Holy Ark. [only the descendants of Kehat, one of the families of the tribe of Levi, had qualified for that privilege, anyways. Ed.] We have proof that the priests did carry the Holy Ark from Deut. 31,9 ויכתוב משה את התורה הזאת ויתנה אל הכהנים בני לוי הנושאים את ארון ברית ה', “Moses wrote down this Torah and gave it to the priests, the members of the tribe of Levi, who carried the Ark of the covenant of <i>Hashem</i>.” They are the ones who would perform the sacrificial service and bless the people in the name of <i>Hashem</i>.
   @עד היום הזה, “until this day.” Moses added this on account of Eleazar the new High Priest, and it is as if he had written “then <i>Hashem</i> set apart the tribe of Levi, etc., etc., a condition which remains in force till his day.”
   10,12. ועתה ישראל מה ה' אלוקיך שואל מעמך כי אם ליראה, “And now, what is it that the Lord tour G’d asks of you, except to be reverent?” Nachmanides writes that the word ועתה, “and now,” is a continuation of what is written at the end of verse 13 לטוב לך “for your benefit.” In other words, Moses wants the people to understand that any demands made by <i>Hashem</i> on His people are never motivated by what is “good for Him,” but by what is good for His people. The route may be a little circuitous, i.e. when the Jew, by obedience to G’d, demonstrates a degree of reverence for Him, then all the commandments he performs will turn out to be for his benefit. As proof that performance by the Jewish people of these commandments cannot be designed to benefit the Creator, Moses reminds the people
   10,14. הן לה' אלוקיך השמים, ושמי השמים, הארץ וכל אשר בה “Here the heaven, the most remote regions of heaven even, the earth and all that is therein, etc.” Seeing that He owns it all, and that ownership confers tremendous glory upon Him, how could He be in need of your contributions for His sake rather than for yours?
   10,15. רק באבותיך חשק ...ויבחר בזרעם, “Only your forefathers did <i>Hashem cherish,</i> to love them, so that He chose their offspring, etc.” Moses means that the Jewish people are the choicest of their forefathers’ offspring, as opposed to Ishmael, Avraham’s sons from Ketura, and Esau.
   @כיום הזה, “as of this day.” This is a formula meaning that what is true and applicable on this day concerning this subject, will continue to remain true and applicable.
   10,16. ומלתם את ערלת לבבכם, “Circumcise, (remove hindrances) the foreskin of your hearts!” This is required in order for your hearts to become receptive to <i>Hashem’s</i> words.
   @וערפכם לא תקשו, “and do not stiffen your necks.” A subtle reminder of the fathers of the present generation of Israelites who had been characterized as קשי עורף, “stiff-necked.” Obstinacy was a characteristic of the Egyptians, one that the Israelites due to their lengthy stay in Egypt had adopted also, believing it to be a virtue. It manifested itself by the Israelites still believing that there were positive aspects, advantages, to certain forms of idolatry. Moses, in addressing the new generation, a generation that had not been raised in Egypt, tells the people not to allow themselves to become victims of the same errors their fathers had become victims of, and not to be brainwashed by concepts that had proven utterly false. Surely, someone as close as they were to the Lord of lords, the Creator Himself, did not need to have recourse to one of His ministers, or even only deputy ministers!
   10,17. אשר לא ישא פנים, “Who does not show favour,” to any of the other deities and their followers to protect them more than others.
   @ולא יקח שוחד, “and Who will not accept a bribe.” Even when He is confronted by a totally righteous person, who did commit a single sin, and who wishes to atone for it by foregoing his claim to a reward for a merit he has to his credit, (trading off performance of a commandment against violation of a commandment) He will not overlook the sin committed by not exacting retribution where it is deserved.
   The proper manner to explain the words אשר לא ישא פנים, is that <i>Hashem</i> is not going to show favoritism to the powerful people on earth in their litigation against the less powerful. Neither will He accept bribes by the wealthy in their quarrels with the poor. But, He will punish the guilty according to their deserts. Verse 18 spells out that G’d will especially see to it that the underprivileged will not become victims of perverted justice.
   10.18. לתת להם לחם ושמלה, “to give them bread and clothing.” G’d will provide the basic necessities of life for those who have no one else to look after them.
   10,21. הוא תהלתך, “He is your praise.” Nachmanides explains this to mean that whenever you feel that you want to praise someone you will praise Him. He is the only One worthy of praise.
   Another possible explanation is that when any other nation praises you, the Jewish people, it will always be in connection with and on account of your special relationship to Him.
   @והוא אלוקיך, “and He is your G’d.” You are the only nation upon whom G’d “bestowed” His name. All the other nations have been assigned by G’d to the supervision of their fates by one of His deputies. Your superiority is visible through all the miracles G’d performed on your behalf.
   11,1. ושמרת משמרתו, “you shall keep His charge.” Nachmanides understands these words to mean that we must maintain an attitude of reverence and fear even, which will ensure that we will not sin. Having previously commanded us to love Him (G’d), Moses now commands us to fear Him, as familiarity of the beloved might cause the beloved to sin inadvertently. This fear/reverence relationship covers all the various types of commandments in the Torah.
   Alternatively, this may be a command by Moses to emulate G’d in our relationship with creatures of whom G’d has demonstrated that He is especially solicitous. He declared His concern for the poor, the orphan and the widow, so we must relate to them with equal concern. He practices the virtues of being merciful; hence we, His creatures, must learn to practice that same virtue.
   11,4. אשר הציף את מי הים סוף על פניהם...ויאבדם ה' עד היום הזה, “Who poured the waters of the Sea of Reeds upon their faces…and He wiped them out until this day.” Nachmanides agonises over the meaning of the words עד היום הזה, “until this day.” After all, all the Egyptians who perished in the sea remain dead forever. What does any of this have to do with “היום הזה”? It is possible that Moses by speaking of היום הזה, reverts to the loss of horses and riders that the Egyptians experienced at that time 40 years ago, and which to the best of his knowledge had not been made good until the time when he was speaking. As a result of that stunning military defeat, according to Moses, Egypt had become relegated to being a “third rate kingdom.”
   Ibn Ezra understands Moses to mean that never since that time until now did there arise among the Egyptians personalities of impressive stature as Egypt had produced many of while the Israelites were still in that country. This would have been a fitting punishment for a people who in spite of being blessed with an abundance of riches allowed themselves to descend to unparalleled depths of depravity. They reached a zenith in their wickedness when they set out in pursuit of a nation that had been redeemed by the Creator Himself, personally.
   11,6. ואשר עשה לדתן ואבירם, “and what He has done to Datan and Aviram, etc.” Moses does not mention what G’d had done to Korach and his family and followers and how heavenly fire consumed the 250 people offering incense. The sin of those people who had encroached on privileges reserved for the priests was such that it is irredeemable even after death. History has shown that King Uzziah who tried to arrogate similar privileges to himself, was similarly stricken. What had happened to those 250 men therefore was not something unique to the generation of the Israelites in the desert; this is why Moses did not mention it as such at this time. [Compare Chronicles II chapter 26. Uzziah only became stricken with leprosy, was not burned by heavenly fire, according to that report. Perhaps the fact that he was stricken after having been specifically warned was sufficient of a miracle for Moses in the opinion of our author to compare his fate to that of the 250 men who had heeded Moses’ dare to offer incense. Ed.]
   11,10. לא כארץ מצרים היא אשר יצאתם משם, “it is not like the land of Egypt from which you have departed.” According to Nachmanides, the plain meaning of these words is meant as a warning to the people to be careful to observe the commandments of the Torah in that land as that land depends on rainfall, not like Egypt; therefore, non observance would lead G’d to withhold the necessary rainfall at the appropriate times. Moses impresses all this upon the people a second time in the second paragraph of the קריאת שמע that commences with verse 13 in this chapter. Moses refers to the land of Egypt and what goes on there to remind them that although it is easy for the Creator to arrest the flow of the river Nile if He so desires, and to thereby bring to an immediate end the prosperity of that land and its inhabitants, He does not interfere with His natural law without severe provocation. To interfere with the rainfall in the land of Canaan represents far less of an interference with natural law than arresting the flow of the river Nile, hence the people of Israel better be on their guard not to provoke G’d. Moreover, He Who had to go out of His way to enable the Israelites to be liberated from bondage by a number of miracles, would not hesitate to respond if the people for whom He had taken all this trouble were to show themselves ungrateful by violating His rules of conduct.
   11,13. בכל לבבכם ובכל נפשכם, “with all your heart and all your soul.” <i>Rashi</i> points out that Moses had already warned the people individually to do just that, whereas now he warns them to love G’d with all their collective hearts and with all their collective souls (hence the plural endings in both words).
   Nachmanides explains the matter as follows: G’d is not prepared to perform miracles at all times, especially when it comes to interference with the amount of rain required and the season at which the rain descends. He does not, on account of a few individuals deviate from His laws, re-arrange all of nature, so that the sinner’s field is not irrigated and the fields of the righteous enjoy abundant rainfall, although the two fields are adjoining. Therefore, in this paragraph Moses addresses the people as a unit when exhorting them to love G’d with all their hearts and souls, whereas in the first paragraph of the קריאת שמע when he addressed them as individuals he did not threaten what would happen if some individual were not to follow his instructions. He will however, address that problem in chapter 29 17-19. As a rule, G’d reserves miracles for extreme situations, such as total perversion of the people or total righteousness. The former will produce recognisable unnatural catastrophes, whereas the latter will produce extraordinary and recognizable bounty by G’d, the Provider. 
   11,15. ואכלת ושבעת, “you will eat and be satisfied.” According to Ibn Ezra these words refer to the previous words (verse 14) דגנך, ותירושך, ויצהרך, “your grain, your wine, and your oil,” rather than to the more recent words עשב בשדך, “the grass in your field.”
   Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation is that the words ואכלת ושבעת refer to the both דגן, תירושך, ויצהרך as well as to עשב בשדך. They even refer to the livestock mentioned in our verse as בהמתך. The <i>Sifri</i> interprets this as meaning that when your livestock has enough to eat, then your land will be able to provide the harvest it is meant to provide. Another possible approach is that the word ובהמתך does not refer to what you will eat, but to the fact that your livestock will produce its young, just as the soil will produce its yield.
   11,18. ושמתם את דברי אלה, “You will place these words of Mine, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that Moses means that even after you will be exiled, when the prompt fulfillment of the promise we just read is not likely, you are not free from the obligation to observe those commandments of the Torah that are not tied to residence in the Holy Land.
   Nachmanides writes that it is obvious that those commandments that are to be fulfilled with our bodies, as opposed to with our land, remain applicable also in the Diaspora, but the <i>Sifri</i> writes that this obligation is derived from this verse. In other words, according to that interpretation our verse serves as a בנין אב type of interpretation. Just as when it comes to thanking the Lord for having received our food and blessing Him, this is an obligation that applies wherever we find ourselves, so other commandments that are capable of fulfillment all over the globe remain in force also during periods of exile.
   It is possible, that from the perspective of the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, that Moses implies that the father should speak about these aspects of the Torah to his children, just as Moses had commanded in the parallel paragraph of the קריאת שמע in Deut. 6,7 that the father must teach the Torah diligently to his children and seize every opportunity at home and outside, by day and by night to inculcate these precepts in his children’s minds and hearts. Moses adds the words כימי השמים על הארץ, “like the days of the heaven over the earth,” to remind us that this is an ongoing obligation, one without a time limit.
   11,22.כי אם שמור תשמרון, “For if you will diligently observe, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that this paragraph too refers to what has been written previously when Moses warned that non-observance of the commandments will lead to exile from the Holy Land. He adds here, by implication, that if these commandments are not observed, there will be no need for an exile as the people will not take over that land in the first place. If you neglect the commandments after you have established yourselves there, your tenure will be short-lived.
   @ולדבקה בו, “and to cleave to Him;” Ibn Ezra sees in these words the ultimate objective of Torah observance and love of <i>Hashem</i>, i.e. if you will observe all the commandments in the right spirit, you will achieve the closest relationship with <i>Hashem</i> that it is possible for a human being to have, the relationship known as דבקות, cleaving to Him.
   Nachmanides understands these words as a warning, one of the types of warnings against worshipping idols. He bases this on Joshua 23,7-8 where Joshua juxtaposes pursuit of idols with cleaving to <i>Hashem</i> exclusively. In that paragraph of the Book of Joshua we read as follows: “and without intermingling with these nations that are left among you. Do not utter the names of their gods or swear an oath by them; do not serve them or bow down to them. But ‘hold fast,’ to the Lord your G’d, בו תדבקון, as you have done to this day.” Moses, according to Nachmanides, does not aim at what the select few are capable of achieving in the search for closeness to G’d, but he speaks about the minimum that every Jew must strive for.
   It is possible that the reason why Moses introduced the term דבקות here is because by striving for this kind of closeness one concentrates on G’d and what His expectations are of His creatures, so much that one does not have time or desire to explore other religions and what the nations of the world see in them that they pursue those deities. This would again be parallel to Moses’ exhortation to speak to one’s children of the Torah during all hours of the day and night, and in all localities, barring places reserved for excreting. The positive of what we are to do, is matched by the negative, as for instance in the verses quoted from the Book of Joshua. Nachmanides suggests that an ideal relationship with <i>Hashem</i> could be that when one speaks to fellow humans one does so only from the lips outwards, whereas one’s heart, and one’s mind is still tuned in to <i>Hashem</i>, simultaneously. He speculates further that possibly these elitists among us have reached a level of spirituality that can be compared to the wish we express at every funeral that the soul of the departed be enfolded by what our sages have described as צרור החיים, the bundle of eternal life. [Compare Samuel I 25,29, Avigail’s wish to David, and Maimonides’ comment in his <i>hilchot Teshuvah 8,3.</i>Ed] The words כאשר עשיתם עד היום הזה may be Moses’ way of describing the intimate relationship that existed between G’d and His people, who received a daily portion of heavenly bread, a supply of meat, apparently materializing miraculously, a well that moved with them every step of the way so that drinking water was always at hand in the desert, etc. Joshua, who speaks to the people after these miracles have ceased and the people have begun to live a “normal” life, exhorts them not to forego the intimate relationship with <i>Hashem</i> that had been forged during the years in the desert.
   11,24. כל המקום אשר תדרוך כף רגלכם בו לכם הוא, “Every place where the sole of your foot will tread will become yours;” According to our sages (<i>Sifri</i> on our verse) Moses assured the people of two distinctly separate promises here. 1) Any place the Israelites felt they wanted to conquer would not be denied them. Having done so, the commandments of the Torah would apply in any of the lands conquered as the people were under an obligation to conquer the lands as far as the river Euphrates. Secondly, there is another promise,
   
   11,25. לא יתיצב איש בפניכם, “no one will stand up against you;” neither in the land of Canaan, nor in the surrounding countries will you encounter serious opposition. As far as the opinion expressed by some scholars, that David’s conquest of Syria was in the category of a private conquest, not part of the commandment to conquer the land promised to the patriarchs, the reason is that the campaign had not first been approved by the <i>urim vetumim</i> in the breastplate of the High Priest, this was only because he had not yet conquered all the territory belonging to the seven Canaanite tribes. (Compare <i>Gittin</i> 47<i>)</i>
   Parshat Re-ay
   11,26. ראה אנכי נותן לפניכם היום ברכה וקללה, “See, I present before you this day, a blessing and a curse.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, the reason why Moses suddenly switches to the singular mode when addressing the whole people, is that he is addressing each one of them as individuals.
   Some commentators feel that Moses’ words, in this instance, were addressed to Joshua, and that he charged Joshua with blessing the people when they would cross the Jordan. Still other commentators feel that all the blessings and curses in the Book of Deuteronomy are expressed in singular mode, there is therefore nothing unusual here.
   A different approach altogether, concentrating on the choice of the introductory word ראה, “See!” describes the different manner between how Moses approaches the Israelites’ choice of their fate to that of the nations at large. When one engages in drawing lots for something, one exercises extreme caution to ensure that neither of the lots is visible to the parties participating in the draw. Moses, in outlining the choices before the Jewish people, makes sure that they can see clearly the choices at each one’s disposal. He therefore urges them to choose “life,” which is equated with “blessing.” He, so to speak, invites the people to let him place his hands on “blessing,” by their choosing to opt for performance of G’d’s commandments. He underlines this even more by not phrasing their choice as “iffy,” i.e. with the word אם, i.e. “if you do so and so you will receive a blessing,” but as something definitive, i.e. אשר תשמעון, “that you will hearken, etc.” The term אשר is also reminiscent of the word אשרי, “hail to.” Moses implies that he already hails them for having chosen correctly.
   11,29. ונתתה את הברכה על הר גריזים, “you shall deliver the blessing to Mount Gerizim;” <i>Rashi</i> writes: כתרגומו, meaning that he agrees with Onkelos’ translation of the word הברכה as “the ones pronouncing the blessing, i.e. the Levites.”
   Nachmanides does not agree. He argues that seeing that Moses had as yet not instructed the Levites to pronounce these blessings, how could they be the subjects in this verse? He feels therefore that the meaning of our verse is that Moses encourages the people to choose the path of blessing (instead of the path that leads to a curse). This is why he first warned of the alternative in verse 28, explaining that the curse would result from failure to heed the laws of the Torah.
   Moses commanded that the blessing be dispensed on Mount Gerizim, i.e. that there they would bless the people that hearken to the commandments of <i>Hashem,</i> whereas the ones failing to do so would be cursed on Mount Eyval. It is also possible that all the tribes would be blessed, conditionally, and all the tribes would be cursed conditionally. Another scenario could be that the Levites pronounced both the blessings and the curses, or even that a single person pronounced both the blessings and the curses. After that (27,12) Moses explained which tribes were to position themselves on which of the two mountains at that time, and all had to confirm both the blessings and the curses by answering “Amen” when they heard same. The reason why this whole procedure is reported in two sections, part here and part in chapter 27, is that Moses had introduced it here when the people were not on location, whereas in chapter 27 he is at pains to point out that this procedure is to be one of the very first commandments performed as soon as the people had crossed the river Jordan.
   11,32. ושמרתם לעשות את כל החוקים ואת המשפטים, “you are to carefully perform all the statutes and all the social laws.” Here too, Moses mentions the statutes and social laws ahead of other types of legislation. When mentioning these laws in details, he deals first with the need to abolish all traces of idol-worship, just as he had done in <i>Parshat Vaetchanan</i>.
   12,5. לשכנו תדרשו, “you shall seek out His presence.” You are to come from afar and enquire as to the directions you have to travel to get to the location of the Tabernacle/Temple. You are to gradually congregate in larger and larger numbers, each encouraging the other to make the pilgrimage to the House of the Lord.
   12,6. מעשרותיכם, “your tithes;” according to <i>Rashi</i> the reference is to the “second” tithe, as well as the tithe of the newly born animals which needs to be consumed in Jeru-salem, (or its equivalent). The expression תרומת ידכם, refers to the first ripe fruit of the seven species for which the Land of Israel is especially famous.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary is indeed the view of our sages of old, (<i>Sifri, 63)</i> whereas the plain meaning of the text Moses mentions refers to the various sacrificial offerings which all need to be consumed within the holy precincts; having mentioned that requirement, Moses adds the various gifts intended for the priests and Levites, encouraging the Israelites to bring these to Jerusalem (or wherever the Temple stood at that time) in order to rejoice together with the priests and Levites who were found there in large numbers. These were not looked upon as poor people in need of a hand out, but as the people’s representatives who performed the service in and around the Temple as delegates of the people at large. He explains the term תרומת ידכם, as an allusion to the generosity, ידכם, of the donor, seeing that as opposed to the tithes, the Torah had not mentioned how much of the harvest had to be reserved for the priest under the heading of תרומה, “heave offering.”
   Personally, (still Nachmanides writing) I feel that the term תרומת ידכם refers to free-willed gifts, or offerings on the altar, not connected to obligatory parts of the harvests that the Torah commanded to set aside for various members of the Jewish society. In connection with offerings for the altar, Moses mentions three separate categories, עולה, burnt offering, none of it being eaten by even the priests, זבח, meat-offerings, the major part of the animal being eaten by the donor, and נדר, or נדבה, different categories of vows that have to be fulfilled by a certain time in the holy precincts. The former was promised formally, using specific wording, giving the animal in question the same status as an obligatory offering, the latter was donated without the donor using predetermined language. (Not having said הרי עלי, “I am assuming the obligation of an offering”, but having simply said: “this will be a free-willed offering.”) The תרומה that Moses speaks of does not refer to livestock, but to money or other chattels that the donor elevated to a degree of holiness by the manner in which he designated it for the Temple treasury. He may even bring an animal of his to the Temple and then proclaim: “this is a gift of mine to be used as the Temple treasurer sees fit.” The wording תרומה in this context reflects what we have read in Exodus 35,24 כל מרים תרומת כסף וגו', “every person who elevates a gift of silver, etc.” As long as this gift had been under the control of the donor it had not yet become sanctified at all. What the returning soldiers handed over to Eleazar in Numbers 31,29 as donations from their loot is referred to as תרומה, although its ritual status was completely secular at the time. The reason why Moses did not refer to תרומותיכם, and said תרומת ידכם, was to prevent us erring and thinking that he referred to gifts which the donor had been obligated by the Torah to bring to the priest, although the size of that gift was at his discretion. The common denominator of all the various items mentioned in our verse was that they had to be present within the holy precincts of the Temple Mount.
   12,8. לא תעשון ככל אשר אנחנו עושים פה היום, “Do not do as we are in the habit of doing here this day;” Ibn Ezra writes that what Moses referred to here, according to the plain meaning of the text, as suggested by some commentators, is that the strict division between holy precincts and less holy precincts had been blurred in the desert due to the frequent need to break camp, and to journey. Accordingly, Moses would warn that such liberties as people took in the desert they will not be able to take once the people are settled on their land.
   Ibn Ezra does not agree with this explanation, but he feels that Moses refers to the people in the camp who were not so pious, not so observant, who took liberties with the sacrificial offerings after the death of Aaron. He tells these people that they must bring the firstborn of their animals to the priest as prescribed by Torah law. It is most unlikely that Moses included himself in the laxity practiced, even though he uses the word אנחנו, ”we,” when referring to people doing things that were not approved of.
   Nachmanides explains our verse almost completely different, i.e. Moses referring to restrictive rules that would be relaxed [in some respects, i.e. meat, in order to qualify as food, did not first have to be sanctified. Ed.] After the people were settled on their land.
   While in the desert, anyone wishing to eat meat, his own animal, had to first designate it as a sacrifice and bring it to the courtyard of the Tabernacle where it would be slaughtered. Seeing that the Tabernacle moved from site to site with the people, there was no fixed site where such offerings had to be presented. It was therefore assumed by them that as long as they offered such animals on an altar, say, next to their own tents, this would be all right. Not only that, but if someone did not feel the urge to eat meat, he did not have to bring any animals as sacrificial offerings at all. He therefore did not feel that he had to come to the Tabernacle even on the Holydays if he did not feel like eating any meat. A situation had arisen where the “man in the street” made his own judgments on such matters. Similarly, the impression had spread that as long as those who wanted to eat meat had performed the burning of the parts of the animal meant to be burned on the altar had been burned there and the blood sprinkled, no more had to be done, seeing that each family would have their own altar next to their home. Moses therefore warns that this was not at all what the situation would be like once they would be settled in their land. 
   This is also what our sages had in mind when they said that it was general practice for the Israelites to offer their vows on private altars. [As opposed to the pilgrimages undertaken to the Temple where the requisite offerings for the festival would be offered. compare <i>Zevachim</i> 117. Historically, it is a fact that even under the most pious kings of the Kingdom of Yehudah, until about 100 years before the destruction of the first Temple, during the reign of Yoshiyahu, the practice of private altars on which people sacrificed voluntary offerings to <i>Hashem</i> had not been eradicated. It took over 900 years after Moses’ death to finally accomplish this Compare Chronicles II 34,3 Ed.]
   Our author, commenting on the above, questions the line in which Nachmanides claims that while in the desert the people had not been given permission to offer these private offerings near their respective tents instead of having to bring them to the Tabernacle. He claims that from the above-mentioned comment in the Talmud <i>Zevachim</i> it is clear that such permission did exist regarding offerings known as קדשים קלים, offerings of a relatively lower degree of sanctity, i.e. the ones that could be consumed in their tents by the owners. He concludes that what Nachmanides may have meant by the words “wherever they pleased,” was “within the encamp-ment,” which itself was “holy in the sense that the <i>Shechinah</i> rested over the entire camp all the time.
   12,20. כי ירחיב, “When He will expand (your boundaries);” Nachmanides makes the point that the term כי ירחיב, in this paragraph is not to be confused with the expression ואם ירחיב, in 19,8, where the Torah foresees further expansion of the Land of Israel [most commentators consider this a post messianic period. Ed.], but in verse 9 there we read –in connection with the establishment of cities of refuge- that more than the original three on the east bank of the Jordan must be added. In that context the meaning of the word is “when,” in the sense of after completion of the conquest. If the meaning of the two expressions were identical, eating meat that had not first been consecrated as an offering would not be permitted for the Israelites until after Joshua had completed the conquest and settled the people on their allocated parcels of land. In chapter 19 the line we quoted must be understood in connection with the paragraph at the beginning of that chapter, a paragraph which discusses changes that would occur after G’d has more or less wiped out the seven Canaanite tribes from the region of the West Bank of the Jordan. The need to establish additional cities of refuge begins only after the people have been settled. Verse 9 there may even refer to the time when the remainder of the ten tribes mentioned in G’d’s first promise to Avraham in Genesis chapter 15 have also been eliminated. In our verse the reference is to the beginning of the conquest, and according to <i>Chulin 17,</i> בשר תאוה, meat of animals that had been slaughtered without having been consecrated as offerings first, became permissible at once, as soon as settlement began. Even though, on the face of it, permission of such meat appears to be contingent on the owner living far away from the Temple, the words כי ירחק ממך המקום, “when the Temple is far away from you,” (verse 21) is not to be understood as actual physical distance of the individual concerned. The Torah means that when the Israelites, instead of living next to the Tabernacle, as they did for 40 years in the desert, will be scattered throughout the Land of Israel, it would not be practical to require them to come to Jerusalem, to the Temple every time they wanted to eat meat.
   12,21. וזבחת וגו...כאשר צויתיך, “you will slaughter…in accordance with what I have commanded you.” Our sages understand these last words to mean that Moses had instructed the people orally in the details of ritual slaughter.
   According to Nachmanides the plain meaning of the words is that Moses refers to the previous occasion in the Book of Leviticus when he had taught the priests all the particulars of ritual slaughter when they had been instructed in the sacrificial Temple service. (Compare <i>Vayikra Rabbah, 22.)</i> At that time the word used by the Torah for ritual slaughter had been ושחט. (Leviticus 1,5 <i>et al)</i> In classical Hebrew the meaning of the word is to sever the trachea and the esophagus of the animal. The reason why a different term for slaughtering has been chosen by Moses on this occasion, is presumably because the word שחט had always been used in connection with animals, some or all of whose blood would be sprinkled on the altar after slaughter, whereas this is not the case when the animal had not been consecrated as an offering. The word זבח implies a secular activity then, but the procedure is the same as that employed for animals to be offered on the altar. The author adds that the verse וישחטם במדבר in Numbers 14,16 refers to the slaughtering of the Jewish people, but not as sacrificial lambs. In that verse Moses puts imaginary words in the mouths of people, about an event that did not even take place. The line could not therefore be used to refute our premise. 
   12,22. אך כאשר יאכל את הצבי ואת האיל, “However only in the manner in which the deer or hart may be eaten;” seeing that while in the desert only peace-offerings could be eaten by laymen, not venison, which by definition are not fit for offering on the altar, the former are subject not to be consumed while one is in a state of ritual impurity, a restriction that does not apply to eating venison of the permitted categories.
   @את הצבי ואת האיל, “the deer and the hart;” [most of what follows is culled from Nachmanides’ commentary, although the author here does not attribute it until much later. Ed.] Two mammals with split hooves, chewing the cud, which, because they are free roaming, cannot be offered as sacrifices in the Temple. It is not the objective of this verse to teach that the fat parts on these free-roaming animals that are similar to those on the domestic beasts, must not be eaten, as they must be burned on the altar; they are permitted, seeing the whole animal has remained profane in status. Moses draws a comparison between cows and deer as different categories of mammals only in that henceforth both types may be eaten also when not in a state of ritual purity. This point is clear by the absence of the word כל, “all of it,” when permitting it to be eaten. Nowhere do we have a verse that says יאכלנו כצבי ואיל alone, without this statement being limited by the context in which it appears. The meaning of the word
   @אך in this instance, is that it introduces a warning. Seeing that prior to the latest piece of legislation it had been forbidden to eat any meat unless the person eating it was ritually pure, and the meat had originally been part of a consecrated animal, and had not been remained uneaten for more than the period allocated to that type of sacrificial offering, I might have thought that all the restrictions applicable to consumption of sacrificial meat did not apply to בשר תאוה, meat from non-consecrated animals, and that it would most certainly be in order to also consume meat from animals that had been consecrated and whose blood had been offered on private altars. Moses therefore is at pains to spell out that the only restriction that does not apply to the eating of such animals is that although allowed to be eaten, the fat parts and the blood must not be eaten, although they are not fit for the altar. The reason why Moses had to warn the people at this juncture once more not to eat blood from non-consecrated animals was because when the prohibition to eat blood was spelled out, the Torah had also stated ואני נתתיו לכם על המזבח לכפר, “I have reserved the blood to serve for you as an atonement on the altar.” (Leviticus 17,11) I might have thought that the prohibition to eat blood applies only to blood that could serve as our atonement, and that therefore blood from non consecrated animals is permitted. Moses makes sure that no one can make such a mistake. In connection with the חלב, the fat on the kidneys and parts of the liver that is burnt on the altar, Moses does not repeat the prohibition as applicable also to non-consecrated animals. The קרב, “the entrails” of consecrated animals (Leviticus 1,13) are not all forbidden, whereas that of non-consecrated animals, are not all permitted.
   Furthermore, seeing that here Moses commanded that the manner of slaughtering these domestic mammals that are potentially fit for the altar, is the same as that of doing so for permissible free-roaming animals, I might have concluded that the domestic animals’ blood when the animal slaughtered as בשר תאוה, meat that may be eaten in a state of ritual impurity, needs to have its blood covered (burial) just as does the blood of the free-roaming beasts after slaughter. Moses therefore adds the words: על הארץ תשפכנו כמים, “you shall pour it out on the earth just as you do with water.” (Verse 23) Moses did not say בארץ תשפכנו, which would mean that the blood of such animals has to be buried inside the earth.
   There is yet another concern that Moses wanted to address here, again something he was afraid the people might easily misunderstand. It is a fact that while in the desert, none of the שלמים, peace offerings, the ones whose meat are eaten primarily by the owners, could be eaten until after the requisite procedures with its blood had been performed by the priests. It is also a fact that when no such procedures were performed with the free-roaming animals, it was almost automatic that meat would be eaten that still had some blood in it. One might have thought that this was in order, just as one might have thought the same concerning all manner of birds, none of which other than the pigeons are fit for offering on the altar, that therefore such blood would be permissible without the procedure of “burying,” i.e. “covering” it in the earth first. One might also have thought that the birds would not require the same degree of slaughter and that stabbing them to death would suffice. [After all, even with the pigeons that are offered as sacrificial offerings the Torah did not stipulate שחיטה, slaughter, but מליקה, nipping, (Leviticus 1,15) Ed.] 
   Moses therefore had to spell out that the blood of birds, other than the pigeons and turtle doves which qualify as offerings on the altar, must also be covered, the reason being that the pigeons and turtle doves did not qualify as שלמים, peace offerings on the altar, but only as burnt-offerings or as sin-offerings. In both instances the layman did not get to eat of those. I might therefore have assumed that just as mammals that have not been consecrated as offerings, do not need their blood covered, neither do these birds, or that the blood could be consumed after the bird had been stabbed to death. One might even have assumed that bird’s blood could be eaten and was not included in the prohibition of mammals’ blood. Moses therefore goes on record that it must be poured out, just like water. In fact, pouring out the blood might be misconstrued as a practice customary among the pagans who worshipped demons, satyrs, and the like. Moses therefore repeats that צאן ובקר, most of the bodies of which are offered on the altar, must have almost all the blood poured down the drain of the altar, except for the minute amount sprinkled on the altar. This needed to be repeated in the event that an animal had proven to be unfit as an offering, having developed a blemish that had not existed before. In effect, the blood of such a blemished animal is neither treated like the blood of a sacrificial animal, nor like the blood of an animal that had not been consecrated at all.
   Nachmanides writes further on our subject, adding a historical perspective, which explains the apparent change of attitude to blood. Immediately after the Exodus, when the Israelites were still very much under the influence of the practices of the Egyptians, they considered the new desert environment described by Moses as the region in which all these demons and satyrs were at home. (Compare Deut. 32,10 for a description of that howling wilderness.) The Torah had already stated in Leviticus 17,7 that certain sacrificial rites performed in the Tabernacle were designed, among other reasons, of course, to disabuse the people from still offering sacrifices to the demons and slaughtering animals in that process. According to Maimonides, in his <i>Moreh nevuchim</i>, section 3, chapter 46, it was part of that rite that men and beasts, i.e. the satyrs, sat at the same table and shared the blood of the animal sacrificed in their honour. It became essential then as a first step in reeducating the people to establish that slaughtering livestock was acceptable only if its blood was earmarked for the altar of <i>Hashem.</i> Permitting בשר תאוה, eating of meat from animals that had not been first consecrated to <i>Hashem,</i> would have made the task of weaning the Israelites from their former customs so much harder. 
   Now, however, Moses is addressing a generation who did not have to discard heathen practices as they had been raised under the כנפי השכינה, the protective wings of the presence of <i>Hashem.</i> Therefore, considerations mentioned in Leviticus 17 no longer applied. Moses, i.e. the Torah, was not concerned that once settled in the land of Israel, where due to the distance of most of the people from the Temple, non-consecrated meat had to be made available, did not worry about pouring out the blood. The Egyptians had abhorred cattle and sheep and had not eaten their meat anyways as we know already from when Joseph entertained his brothers at lunch. (Genesis 43,32) However, the Egyptians, great hunters, did feast on venison, and therefore steps had to be taken to prevent the blood of free-roaming bests from being eaten. The Torah therefore decreed burial of a kind for the blood of such animals. (if they were the kind Jews may eat.) Covering such blood with earth would ensure that it is not offered to the satyrs. [Abravanel and others raise many objections against that interpretation, Ed.]
   12,23. רק חזק לבלתי אכול הדם, “only remain steadfast not to consume the blood!” Our sages quote this line as proof that the Israelites had been deeply steeped in blood. [The prohibition against eating blood is repeated 7 times in the Torah. Ed.] Nachmanides writes that although the reason given by the Torah here and elsewhere for not eating blood, i.e. that it is equivalent to eating the animal’s life-force, its “animalistic soul,” is certainly adequate, and justifies the many repetitions of that prohibition, he, personally, does not feel satisfied with this reason. There must be some additional reason for Moses exhorting the people by calling out “only remain steadfast, etc.” What is the special steadfastness and faith that Moses believes is necessary in order to withstand the supposed allure of eating blood? Expressions such as the one used by Moses here are normally used when someone is encouraged to keep his courage when going to war, as Moses himself used when he charged Joshua with the task of leading the people after he had gone. (Compare Deut. 31,23) We find such exhortations when they concern the whole range of commandments, but never when they concern the observance of only a single commandment, and especially a negative commandment where one is not required to do something but is only required to refrain from initiating an act of rebellion against G’d!
   But it appears to me that Moses employed this expression because he was aware to what extent the Israelites, while still in Egypt, had clung to this particular kind of idolatrous practice. They had slaughtered animals to these deities, for why else would the Torah in Leviticus 17,7 have accused them of having done so by writing; “so that they will not continue to slaughter to the satyrs, etc.?” They had gathered the blood of these animals in order to present them to the demons and had eaten some of the blood. By doing so they were considered as if they had called upon these demons, especially in order to have their future foretold for them.
   Clearly, that was not the major reason why the Torah prohibited the eating of blood. The Torah has revealed that reason repeatedly when referring to the blood representing the essence of life, and that we must not eat it, as we would absorb too much animalistic “genes” by doing so. G’d has arranged things so that by presenting the animal’s blood to Him on the Altar, it atones for our cardinal sins, resurrects us in a manner of speaking, instead of us becoming more like animals. The Torah was concerned that people who had their future foretold by them after eating blood, and the predictions had come true, that this would be a strong stimulant for other people copying such practices, and it requires great fortitude to withstand such a temptation.
   12,28. שמור ושמעת את כל הדברים האלה, “Safeguard and hearken to all these words;” the reason why Moses changed the customary formula of observing various types of commandments by listing them as חוקים, משפטים, עדות וגו', is that he wanted to include matters which go beyond legislated mode of behaviour and which fall under the category of ועשית הישר והטוב, “do what is fair and good,” to go beyond what is demanded of them, in order to demonstrate that they act in the spirit of the Torah voluntarily, not only under compulsion and threat of penalties.
   12,30. איכה יעבדו הגוים האלה את אלוהיהם ואעשה כן גם אני, “how did these nations serve their respective gods, and I will do the same.” Nachmanides, disagreeing with <i>Rashi</i> who sees in these words a warning, writes that these words must not be understood as a warning by Moses not to engage in idolatry. The prohibition not to engage in idolatrous practices had been spelled out often enough. Rather, it is a warning to the people not to adapt heathen forms of worship and apply them to the worship of G’d, as the rituals and pomp and ceremony of the heathens appeals to them, and they thought that all that was wrong with it was that it had been directed at the wrong address. Moses stresses that everything connected to idolatry is a תועבה, an abomination, in the eyes of <i>Hashem</i>.
   12,31. כי גם את בניהם ואת בנותיהם ישרפו באש לאלוהיהם, “for they even burn their sons and daughters by fire in honour of their gods.” Clearly, it must be an abomination to G’d to have His creatures burned when they are free from sin. Moses, in insisting that the Israelites observe כל הדברים all the words that he had commanded them, warns that they must neither add so-called “improvements” of their own, nor must they abolish part of the ritual G’d had commanded them.
   Our sages (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 60) derive from this verse that one is culpable for worshipping idolatry even when one does so in a manner which is most disrespectful according to our mores, seeing it is the method such deities are being worshipped by those believing in them.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, Moses warns at the beginning of the verse: “you must not do so to (or even for) the Lord your G’d,” i e. to worship G’d as they do, on every hill, and in every valley. Neither must you convert such sites to henceforth serve as houses of worship for <i>Hashem.</i>
   13,2. כי יקום בקרבך נביא או חולם חלום, “If there will arise among you someone proclaiming himself as a prophet or as someone receiving messages from heaven in a dream, etc.” 
   [There is a bracket by the publisher in my edition that calls attention to a <i>gematriya</i> our author (did not completely) publish in his commentary known as <i>Baal Haturim</i> in which the letters of the word נביא , prophet, (63) are shown to have the same numerical value as the word ובנה, “and her son.” The author did publish the other half of this, i.e. that the word בקרבך is equivalent in numerical value (324) of the words זו האשה (324) “this is the woman,” i.e. the woman experiencing the immaculate conception, who gave birth to the founder of Christianity who was <i>halachically</i> a Jew. Clearly, the author, living as he did in Christian Spain in the 14th century where the Inquisition held sway, did not want to expose himself to the accusation by the Inquisition that he had labeled that man as a false prophet. <i>Chumash</i> editions printed in predominantly Christian countries either omit the author’s comment on this verse altogether or present it in an entirely unintelligible form i.e. that the numerical value of the word בקרבך=the numerical value of the word זו. Ed.]
   To the question why the Torah (Moses) refers to such an impostor as נביא, prophet, the answer is simple, i.e. the Torah calls him by the title this man claims to possess. He claims that G’d appeared to him while he was fully awake and appointed him as His messenger. 
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible that the Torah does not refer to an impostor at all, as some people possess souls that have been endowed with some gift of prophecy. Such people have some knowledge of future events although they themselves do not know the origin of such knowledge. They are in the habit of going into temporary seclusion and during that period and while in such seclusion, a spirit reveals to them parts of future events and the when and where of such events. When his listeners find out that the predictions by such people came true, they refer to him as a “prophet.” While we can only speculate on the source of such “prophets’” knowledge, Nachmanides suggests that possibly the soul of such a person, during its nightly sojourn in heavenly regions, established some kinship with disembodied heavenly beings who divulged such knowledge to his soul.
   Ibn Ezra writes that it is possible that the person described by Moses is someone who had “stolen” his prophetic announcement from a true prophet whom he had overheard as speaking of a vision he had. The “so-called” prophet discussed by Moses uses his knowledge of the true prophecy to establish his credibility concerning additional predictions that he had invented himself. [Compare Jeremiah 23,30 on this subject. Ed.]
   @ונתן אליך אות ומופת, “and he furnishes you with a sign or a miracle.” Nachmanides defines the meaning of the word אות as a visible sign that what the prophet predicted may indeed come to pass. [If the impostor predicted an event which in his words would occur in, say, three years’ time, he would need something to enable him to enroll his followers before the three years were up. Ed.] He would predict that the “sign” was something that would occur in short order and when it did, it would establish his credibility. The root of the word אות here is analogous to Deut.33, 2 ואתה" מרבבות קודש,“ “having arrived, materialized, with myriads of holy angels.” The word מופת refers to something supernatural that this impostor performs in the presence of all his listeners, immediately, again, in order to establish his credibility as having contact with the supernatural. In both instances the objective of such a “prophet” is not to compete with accredited prophets, but to mislead his listeners into believing that he had had a revelation asking him to make the people “update” their religious beliefs by introducing worship to additional deities. 
   [This editor used to have difficulties with believing that the Jewish people could be naive enough to “fall” for such heretical claims by impostors, until I had learned the passage on Rav Ashi’s nocturnal encounter with the apparition of King Menashe, son of the illustrious King Chizkiyah, and his wife, daughter of the famous prophet Isaiah, and the commentary on that <i>aggadah</i> by Rabbi Yitzchak Arama in his <i>Akeydat Yitzchok.</i> Compare<i> Sanhedrin</i> 102, and this editor’s translation of <i>Akeydat Yitzchok,</i> pages 374-378. Ed.]
   When Moses demonstrated that by throwing his staff on the ground it turned into a snake, and when he took hold of its tail it reverted to becoming a harmless staff, the people were encouraged to believe him when he predicted that G’d had charged him with orchestrating their release from bondage which, of course, would take a little longer to accomplish.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, what Moses speaks about is an impostor who does not even claim to speak in the name of <i>Hashem,</i> but who claims to have been appointed as a prophet for an alien deity, and this is what is meant by ואשר ידבר בשם אלוהים אחרים, “that he speaks in the name of other gods.” 
   He will die, ומת, (compare Deut. 18,20) because this is the penalty for anyone prophesying in the name of other gods whether truthfully or not. That person is guilty of idolatry that carries the death penalty.
   However, our sages (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 90) explain our verse as speaking of a “prophet” who claims to speak In the name of <i>Hashem</i>,” claiming to have been authorized by <i>Hashem</i> to deliver his message that it is now in order to practice some aspect of idolatry, and that the deity in question is a junior partner of <i>Hashem</i> having assisted in the creation of the universe. The impostor may also try to convince you that <i>Hashem</i> is truly a greater G’d than anyone preceding him. This, while sounding harmless to the average Jew, is a basic form of idolatry, because it posits that there was anything of substance before <i>Hashem</i> created the universe. He claims to have been authorized to ask you to acknowledge these earlier gods in some way, even if ever so briefly. All such propositions are equally idolatrous, and the proponent qualifies for the death penalty.
   The Torah here commands explicitly that even if such a “prophet” claims to preach in the name of <i>Hashem</i> and his lifestyle is no different from that of any other pious Jew, these are not any considerations in his favour; he tried to lead you astray, hence he must be executed. The impostor in question dresses up his message by acknowledging the Exodus from Egypt, by acknowledging the revelation at Mount Sinai, etc., as he knows full well that it is useless to even question such historic events which are firmly anchored in the people’s collective psyche. 
   [This is why the founders of the Christian religion built on the truth of the “old” testament, but by updating G’d’s attributes tried to introduce a new version of <i>Hashem</i>. Ed.]
   There never has been another <i>Hashem</i>, there never will be, and His essence or attributes are not subject to change. He revealed Himself at Sinai, in order to leave us in no doubt about all this.
   13,4. כי מנסה ה' אלוקיכם אתכם, “<i>Hashem,</i> your G’d is testing you, etc.” the reason why <i>Hashem</i> allows such a person to perform a miracle, or to correctly foretell an unlikely future event, is to put your faith in Him to a test, to see if you will use such people to try and foretell future events for you, thus subverting your absolute faith in Him. During the period in our history when there were prophets, the people when puzzled about events, would indeed turn to the accredited prophet and ask him to enquire from G’d about the meaning of events which they could not reconcile with what they had been taught to expect. Nachmanides has explained that the term ”test” when used by the Torah always refers to how it looks to the person being tested. G’d Himself never needs to test anyone as He is aware of man’s belief and reactions to so-called “tests.”
   13,5. אחרי ה' אלוקיכם תלכו, “You shall follow <i>Hashem</i> your G’d;” Nachmanides interprets these words as Moses urging the people to follow G’d’s advice exclusively, and if they feel the urge to know something in the future because they are consumed with worry, to turn only to Him <i>via</i> His accredited prophets. They are to emulate our matriarch Rivkah, who, when she was unable to account for what by all accounts was an unusual pregnancy, went to “enquire from a Divine source.” (Compare Genesis 25,23)
   13,5. ואותו תיראו, “and Him you shall fear.” You should be secure in your heart that life and death are domains that are exclusively His, only He can decree death, and only He can decree life, therefore there is no point in fearing anyone else.
   @ואת מצוותיו תשמורו, “and His commandments you shall observe;” the Torah taught to you by Moses.
   @ובקולו תשמעו, “and to His voice you shall hearken.” As a prelude to observing all His instructions, the ones communicated by His accredited Rabbis, in addition to that which is spelled out in the written text of the Torah. The reason why Moses appears to repeat himself here to some extent is because he wants to counter any effect of the words of a false prophet. Some people, out of fear that maybe the false prophet is a true prophet and not listening to him could bring harm on oneself, are inclined to “play it safe.“ Moses therefore warns such people not to do so. There is no other authority than <i>Hashem</i> that is authorized to issue any instructions whatsoever to His people. This is all part of the warning in 12,31, לא תעשה כן לה' אלוקיך, “do not do thus to the Lord your G’d.” The exclusivity of the nature of <i>Hashem</i> must be preserved at all times and in all places.
   Ibn Ezra understands the words אחרי ה' אלוקיכם תלכו, as an appeal by Moses for the Jewish people to emulate <i>Hashem</i> whenever and wherever that is possible. We are to follow in His footsteps to the extent that He has revealed them to us. The words: ואותו תיראו, he understands as warning us not to ask “why” before we perform His commandments. The words ואת מצותיו תשמורו, he understands as meaning that “performance” of the commandments is what is what is important, not any additional reason of why you do it, i.e. because you agree with it. The words: ובקולו תשמעו, he understands as any explanations, rationales, supporting these commandments being only a reminder of the essential element of each commandment being its performance whenever possible. The meaning of the words ואותו תעבודו, “Him you shall serve,” is “in deed,” whereas the words ובו תדבקון, “and to Him you shall cleave,” mean “with your heart, throughout your life from its beginning to its end.”
   13,7. אשר לא ידעת אתה ואבותיך, “that you did not know, and that your forefathers did not know either.” Moses mentions “your forefathers,” so that in the event that someone close to you, as close as your friend, i.e. even your own father, would try and seduce you to follow idolatrous ways, enquire from the other ”fathers” if they had ever heard of such deities as your own father now proposes that you should worship. They will confirm that your father is lying to you.
   13,9. לא תאבה לו ולא תשמע אליו, “do not accede to him and do not hearken to him.” Moses points out that both a mere expression to accede to such requests, or even listening to it without protest and giving the impression that you consider such proposals seriously, is culpable in <i>Hashem’s</i> eyes.
   @ולא תחוס עינך עליו, “and your eye must not pity him,” you must not have pity on him so as not to cause him to be executed.
   @ולא תחמול ולא תכסה עליו, “and do not be compassionate with his plight, nor cover up for him.” You must not dodge your duty to testify against such a person in court.
   13,12. ולא יוסיפו לעשות כדבר הרע הזה, “so that they shall not continue to commit such evils.” If the law against people preaching idolatry publicly or privately were not strictly enforced such a “disease” would become an epidemic.
   13,15. ודרשת וחקרת, “You shall seek information and investigate.” Nachmanides, commenting on this phrase-ology, writes that there is a reason why the Torah urges painstaking investigation in connection with the phenomenon of the עיר הנדחת, the city of which the majority of the inhabitants have adopted idolatry, and also in the case of an individual who is found committing idolatry, whereas the same is not required for the false prophet or the seducer. The self-professed false prophet has already advertised his sin to all the people whom he addressed with his “divinely inspired” message. No court is needed to establish these facts. In the case of the seducer, מסית, the Torah had already called upon his victim or prospective cohort to come forward and to testify against the seducer. It has warned the victim not to be moved by pity. What more could the court do if the people addressed by the Torah fail to come forward? A seducer, who always acts under the cloak of secrecy, cannot be brought to trial except through the cooperation of the victim with the Torah. Knowledge about the first two situations is usually based on rumours first, not on eye-witnesses. The Torah therefore urges not to accept such rumours as fact, but to investigate the accusations thoroughly and without prejudice. 
   We have a similar instruction by the Torah concerning conflicting testimony about a crime or sin by separate sets of witnesses. There too, the Torah (Deut. 19,18) writes: ודרשו השופטים היטב, “the judges must conduct careful examinations etc.,” seeing it is difficult to know which set of witnesses speaks the truth, both having a clean record up to that time.
   13,18. ונתן לך רחמים ורחמך והרבך, ”He will grant you mercy and be merciful to you and multiply you.” Moses wants us to set aside the concern that by applying death penalties we will decrease the number of Jews, and he promises that, on the contrary, by testifying against such sinners and bringing them to justice, <i>Hashem</i> will see to it that we will continuously increase in numbers.
   14,1. בנים אתם לה' אלוקיכם, “You are children to <i>Hashem</i> your G’d;” Seeing that in Leviticus 21,5 the Torah had forbidden the priests to make bald spots on their heads and their flesh as signs of mourning because even in mourning they are not truly orphans, being holy unto G’d, Moses wants to assure the people at large that they are no less beloved by <i>Hashem</i> than are the priests. All the Israelites are holy, and all are <i>Hashem’s</i> children. As proof of this, they are to observe the same restriction spelled out for the priests already in Leviticus. According to the tradition cited by our sages (<i>Sifri 89</i>), the prohibition mentioned here applies only to such incisions when they are made as signs of mourning for a dead relative, both in the case of ordinary Israelites and in the case of the priests. (Although the prohibition in Leviticus did not mention the word למת.) 
   Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that you have been told that <i>Hashem</i> considers you as His children and He loves you more than a mortal father loves his children, you must not register your dismay at what you perceive as something that <i>Hashem</i> has done to you by disfiguring the body He has lovingly given to you. Just as you know that a mortal father’s actions are always motivated by his love for his son, so G’d’s actions are even more definitely motivated by what He knows as being good for His children, even if at the time we, His children, are unable to understand this. We must always subscribe to the cliché of “Father knows best.”
   It is possible that the reason that this prohibition first appeared as if it applied only to the priests was that when a priest engages in such disfiguration he thereby disqualifies himself from performing his duties in the Temple until such a blemish has healed. Now the time had come to extend this prohibition also to the ordinary Israelites.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains that seeing that you are <i>Hashem’s</i> children it is incumbent upon you not to disfigure “His” property. Ultimately, your body belongs to Him.
   Nachmanides disagrees with <i>Rashi,</i> saying that if he were correct this prohibition would apply also if it did not involve mourning for a dead person.
   14,2. כי עם קדוש אתה, “for you are a holy nation.” Moses reminds the people that we, the Jewish nation, are not like other nations; therefore you must not conduct yourselves as they do.
   Some commentators phrase it thus: Moses, by reminding the people that they are all G’d’s children, explains that there would not be any point in disfiguring oneself even if one loses father or mother, as we always retain our immortal Father, <i>Hashem.</i> 
   Personally, (Nachmanides writing) I believe that the principal meaning of the words כי עם קדוש אתה is an assurance that every Israelite basically is entitled to a life after the death of his body, i.e seeing that you are a holy nation, and that you are children of <i>Hashem,</i> you are not even the kind of creature that could die in the accepted sense of the word, i.e. that the death of your body would mean the end of your existence. Seeing that this is so, your parents when no longer “clothed” in a physical shell known as “body,” are not really dead, and therefore you did not suffer the kind of loss that gentiles suffered when they lose their parents. If, nonetheless, weeping, and other forms of mourning, were not outlawed for you by <i>Hashem</i>, this is a concession to the nature of human beings who upon being irrevocably being separated from their near and dear ones, express their grief in this fashion. Our sages, keeping in mind our verse, have decreed that such mourning must not exceed the limits prescribed by our sages.
   14,3. לא תאכל כל תועבה, “You must not eat anything that is an abomination.” Nachmanides writes that this wording [the additional word כל, all, Ed.] expands the prohibition we have been taught in Leviticus chapter 11 in the sense that it teaches that the reason why eating the foodstuffs mentioned is forbidden, is because their consumption would leave a spiritually negative effect on our pure, G’d-given souls.
   The meaning of the term תועבה whenever it appears, is “something hateful and despicable,” the common denominator of the forbidden foods being that if absorbed by our tissue they are apt to leave behind an effect of deadening our spiritual impulses. The reason why the Torah actively promotes the eating of the fowl labeled טהור, is to contrast them with the vast majority of birds that are טמא, ritually impure, the flesh not being suitable to feed a pure soul. It is therefore a general rule to be remembered that everything the Torah has forbidden us, -although it had expressly permitted it for the rest of mankind in Genesis 9,3- is an abomination. The Torah does not need to repeat this again and again when referring to low life such as creeping reptiles large and small, -as most civilized persons, even gentiles refrain from eating these creeping creatures;-but by giving us the details of how to recognize animals that are “pure”, as well as forbidding consumption of the flesh of even such animals when they have died from natural causes, as opposed to ritual slaughter, it delineates clearly the creatures and their respective condition before death, that do not fall under the heading of תועבה, abomination. The consumption of animals that are suffering from a terminal disease or injury is not specifically mentioned as forbidden under the same heading, as the reason is not that they confer negative spiritual influences when eaten, but that they infect the person eating them with something physically poisonous but not spiritually poisonous.
   Our sages (<i>Kiddushin</i> 57<i>)</i> derive from the wording כל צפור טהורה תאכלו, “you may to eat every ritually pure bird,” (verse 11) [and the apparent repetition, slightly amended in verse 20 of כל עוף טהור תאכל, Ed.] that the live bird which served as part of the offering of the person healed from the dreaded <i>tzoraat</i> skin disease (compare Leviticus 14,8) has not been infected and is therefore potentially fit for consumption by Jews (if caught without injury after having been released) The emphasis by the Torah on the word טהורה in verse 11 is to tell us that the ritual impurity from which the person afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> is infected does not transfer to the bird, as no living creatures other than man is susceptible to that kind of disease. None of G’ds creatures other than man, is susceptible to transmittable ritual impurity before it dies.
   14,12. וזה אשר לא תאכלו, “this is the type of bird you may not eat;” this includes birds which have undergone ritual slaughter. The following had to be stated explicitly, as once no longer alive, such birds are susceptible to ritual impurity. One might have thought since the ritual impurity that had left the person stricken with <i>tzoraat</i> had been transferred to his offering, that offering had become contaminated. The Torah therefore indicates that this is not the case.
   14,21. כי עם קדוש אתה, “for you are a holy nation.” Nachmanides writes that Moses deliberately wrote the prohibition of mixing milk and meat right next to the reminder that we are a holy nation, to remind us that although milk and meat cannot be considered abominable foods, else how could each by itself be perfectly acceptable, but in order to remind us that we are not merely not abominable, not despicable, but on a much higher spiritual level, one that needs to concern itself also with more refinement in matters physical and material. A holy nation does not display signs of inhumanity, ruthlessness, and insensitivity, even when relating to its domestic animals. Milking a mother animal in order to boil its young in that milk is considered an act of extreme insensitivity towards both of the animals involved. Even though mixing any kind of milk with any kind of meat is included in the prohibition listed here, so that in the vast majority of situations the element of insensitivity <i>vis a vis</i> specific animals is not involved, seeing that basically any nursing woman or animal is considered as a “mother,” first and foremost, and every suckling is considered as a גדי, “kid,” observing this law brings home the underlying motive contained in it to each one of us. 
   14,22. היוצא השדה, “that emerges from the field, etc.” The Torah took it for granted that the reader mentally adds the word מן, “from,” after the word היוצא.
   Some commentators understand the words היוצא השדה as referring back to the word תבואת “yield of, harvest of,” in the earlier part of our verse. The message- i.e. what additional information does the expression היוצא השדה yield for us, would be that even the seed used in planting is also subject to the laws of tithing.
   Even though we read in the text the words כל תבואת זרעך “all the produce of your seeds,” this is not meant literally, as there are crops that do not require tithing, except for the categories of crop spelled out by the Torah in verse 23, i.e. grain, wine, and oil. The word דגנך, loosely translated as “your grain,” comprises five species of grain, the kinds subject to becoming fermented, i.e. wheat, barley, oats, spelt and rye. The meaning of the word תירוש is new wine that has not yet fermented. The word יצהר refers to the oil from olives. The meaning of the line עשר תעשר את כל תבואת זרעך therefore is: “make certain that you properly tithe all the types of harvests that are subject to the laws of tithing.” The words היוצא השדה are a warning not to be overly eager and give tithes of grain still in the ground or fruit still on the tree, seeing that the tithe is subject to being measured and even a generous “over”-tithing (giving by estimate but definitely more than the required 10%) would invalidate the whole procedure and leave the crop as טבל, untithed, and therefore forbidden food.
   The plain meaning of the text is designed to teach us that even grapes and olives do not become subject to the laws of tithing (from a Biblical perspective) until after the olives have been converted into oil, and the grapes into wine. The expression שנה, שנה, usually translated as “annually,” means [<i>halachically</i> speaking, Ed.] that the duty to tithe in the manner described applies during two successive years at the beginning of the <i>shemittah</i> cycle. At the end of the third year of that cycle any remaining tithes from the previous two crops plus the new crop’s tithes have to be distributed to the poor, the second tithe during the third and sixth year of the cycle is not consumed by the owner in Jerusalem, but instead is shared out among the poor, as distinct from the first tithe which is given to a Levite.
   15,1. מקץ שבע שנים תעשה שמיטה, “At the conclusion of seven years you shall institute a remission.” Nachmanides writes that in his view the Torah here refers to the whole year being made into a “remission,” i.e. no pursuit of agriculture either at planting time or at harvest time, precisely as implied by the words (Exodus 23,11)—והשביעית, תשמטנה ונטשתה “and in the seventh year, leave it untended and abandon it.” The words תעשה שמטה in our verse are a variation of the words quoted from Exodus. You are to relate to your agricultural duties in the seventh year just as you relate to your business or vocational concerns on the seventh day of the week, the Sabbath. What Moses adds here is that in addition to being a year of “vacation,” from hard labour in exchange for devoting that time to spiritual matters, i.e. devoting your time directly to matters of G’d, is that you are also to take a “vacation” from collecting bad debts, overdue loans. In Jewish law this is known as שמטת כספים, a year of remitting, i.e. forgiving, of outstanding debts. Any outstanding debts that you could not collect by the end of that year, the Torah asks you to forgive.
   Ibn Ezra understands the word מקץ as meaning “at the beginning.” He argues that the beginning and the end of something are called מקץ, i.e. every line has two ends, or two beginnings, both extremities at either end are called קץ. Nachmanides disagrees, seeing that the beginning of a cycle of seven years is known as השנה הראשונה, with the emphasis in the cardinal number “the first.” Had the Torah spoken of מקץ השנה השביעית , Ibn Ezra’s commentary would have been acceptable.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, it seems obvious that the word מקץ here means “at the end,” as everything has a beginning and an end. Similarly, any string of numbers has a beginning and an end, Number 1 is considered the ראש, head, beginning of the sequence, and number 10 is deemed to be the end, סוף of such a sequence of 10 numbers. Seeing that, as I explained, the verse speaks about the remission of work on the land, the description מקץ clearly denotes the end of the year, harvest time. The meaning of מקץ is the same as the word בקץ, or בסוף, both meaning “at the end.” We encounter the word in connection with the lid of the Holy Ark upon which were mounted two cherubs, described as כרוב אחד מקצה מזה וכרוב אחד מקצה מזה, “one cherub at the one end, and another cherub at the other end.” (Exodus 25,22) Nachmanides continues at length, but I have decided to condense his commentary.
   It follows that the words מקץ שבע שנים refer to the beginning of the eighth year, seeing that the end of the seven years had just occurred.
   15,3. את הנכרי תגוש, “You may “dun” the gentile (who owes you money) for repayment.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> based on<i> Sifri</i> 113 this is a positive commandment, i. e this positive commandment applies only in your dealing with the gentiles, not in your dealings with fellow Jews who are considered as your brothers. This is an example [i.e. not to dun fellow Jews, Ed.] of a negative commandment not spelled out but arrived at by deductive reasoning from a positive commandment that has been spelled out. It means that if you “dun” a fellow Jew you have violated both a positive and a negative commandment simultaneously. 
   According to Maimonides (positive commandment #142) both commandments are viewed as positive commandments, i.e. remitting loans that are past due to fellow Jews, and insisting on repayment on loans made to gentiles, just as it is a positive commandment to charge a gentile interest on loans extended to him. 
   15,11. כי לא יחדל אביון מקרב הארץ, “for destitute people will not cease to exist within the land.” Nachmanides writes that some commentators (notably Ibn Ezra, whom he does not name in this context) write that Moses means that there never will be a time when no one is destitute in the land of Israel, seeing that Moses in his prophetic vision foresaw that the Jewish people would never observe Torah law in their entirety, without exception, so that the presence of a destitute person would be unimaginable. The law not to dun creditors at the end of the seventh year of the <i>shemittah</i> cycle therefore envisages such situations.
   Nachmanides finds this approach difficult, as it is not the custom of the Torah to engage in the kind of prophesy that accuses the Jewish people ahead of time of disloyalty to G’d without qualifying such a prophesy with a conditional phrase such as “if in the course of time, etc.” introducing such a prophecy. It is uncharacteristic for the Torah to legislate one of the basic commandments as something to be applicable to people who have been labeled beforehand by the Torah as deliberate sinners. He therefore prefers to explain our verse as follows: seeing that in spite of the blessings that accrue to you when you do observe the laws of the Torah, and the resultant affluence in the land it is practically impossible that sometime in the future there will be not be an instance of a destitute person, unable to repay his loan on time, one must not dun such a fellow Jew at the end of the <i>shemittah</i> year to repay his loan, but must forgive it. The reason Moses adds the words: בקרב הארץ, is to include not only the narrowly defined borders of the seven Canaanite tribes, but to include other regions in which the Jews are settled at the time in question. This somehow expands what Moses had defined in verse 7 as specifically “your land that <i>Hashem</i> gives you.” Now he envisages the possibility of exile and wants us to practice the law of remitting overdue debts even in exile, where the whole <i>shemittah</i> legislation does not apply, seeing we have no land to practice it on, and even if we did, the land is not a “holy land.”
   @ולאביונך בארצך, “and to your destitute in your land.” The word בארצך, “in your land,” is problematic seeing that supporting the needy is not a commandment dependent on residence in the land of Israel. The same question can be raised against the phrasing of verse 7, where Moses mentions the law as applying “in one of your gates, in your land, etc.” Perhaps the intention in both instances is to teach that as long as the poor in the land of Israel and the poor in the Diaspora both appeal for help, the poor in the land of Israel are to be given precedence.
   16,1. שמור את חודש האביב, “You shall observe the month of spring, etc.” The Torah in Leviticus, chapter 23 has already provided us with a list of these festivals and details regarding their observance as well as the communal offerings to be offered by the priests on those occasions. [Also, more specifically, in Numbers chapter 28. Ed.] This is why Moses does not repeat the legislation concerning these offerings. The emphasis in this chapter is on the duty for the male adults to make the three pilgrimages to the Temple each year in order to pay one’s respects to the <i>Shechinah,</i> the benevolent presence of <i>Hashem</i> in the Temple. Although certain of G’d’s blessings may only be consumed within the boundaries of the holy city of Jerusalem, notably the second tithe, (at anytime of the year), there are three fixed dates when such appearances are mandatory. Whereas Moses does not repeat the precise dates of these festivals, the Torah having done so twice already, he does repeat the months in which these festivals occur.
   16,2. וזבחת פסח לה' אלוקיך, צאן ובקר, “you are to slaughter the <i>Pessach</i> offering for the Lord your G’d consisting of the flock and the cattle;” Nachmanides writes that from the plain text, as compared with 14,4, the meaning of such words as צאן, בקר is illustrated as respectively שור and שה, oxen and sheep. This would lead us to believe that Moses includes an ox or calf as a possible candidate for the <i>Pessach</i> offering. Seeing that elsewhere (Exodus 12,3-4) the Torah had restricted the animals fit to serve as the <i>Pessach</i> offering to being a male sheep or goat both below the age of I year, the term בקר, cattle used by Moses here must refer to the unspecified offering called חגיגה, festival offering, which may consist of any of the domestic mammals normally offered on the altar as a שלמים, peace-offering. Each individual will bring the type of animal he can afford to discharge the commandment not to appear before the Lord empty handed. (Verse 16) The fact that the formula used by Moses here, i.e. וזבחת פסח...צאן ובקר is similar though not identical with such formulas elsewhere where it says מן הצאן ומן הבקר תקריבו את קרבנכם, (Leviticus 1,2) makes it clear that what is discussed here is not the Paschal lamb but the accompanying <i>chagigah</i> offerings.
   16,4. ולא ילין מן הבשר אשר תזבח בערב ביום הראשון לבוקר, “no flesh that you offer on the previous evening shall remain overnight until morning.” Nachmanides writes that the reference is to the offering presented on the first night of this seven-day holiday. Neither the calendar date of the first day of Passover nor the evening ushering it in, had been mentioned by Moses in this paragraph. Seeing that the consumption of the Paschal lamb and when and how it is to be eaten and consumed has been described repeatedly, Moses only repeats a ruling here that applies beyond the time of its being offered, namely not to allow it to become נותר, left over offering, something basically an affront to the sanctity of consecrated meat, and to G’d.
   16,7. ובשלת ואכלת, “you are to roast it and eat it.” Actually, ובשלת means to prepare it so it is fit to be eaten; seeing that the Torah had forbidden for it to be boiled in water, etc., already in Exodus 12, Moses refers to the known manner of its preparation, i.e. roasting on the spit.
   16,8. וביום השביעי עצרת לה' אלוקיך לא תעשה מלאכה, “and on the seventh day you will observe an assembly for <i>Hashem</i>; on that day no work is to be performed.” Nachmanides draws to our attention that Moses here has not referred to the prohibition to carry out work on the first day of Passover, neither did he refer to the work prohibition on <i>Shavuot</i> or <i>Sukkot</i>, just as he did not refer to the commandment of the four species to be used on the <i>Sukkot</i> festival. The New Year holiday and the Day of Atonement are similarly omitted altogether in this chapter. The reason is that Moses’ main concern in this chapter is to emphasise the commandment to make the pilgrimages to the Temple on the three festivals on which they are mandatory. The reason why the work-prohibition on the seventh day of Passover is highlighted, is that on that day <i>matzah</i> does not have to be eaten, it is eaten voluntarily only because leavened bread is prohibited, a law that had as yet not been sufficiently defined. The wording וביום השביעי, וגו' is a hint that though we might have thought that by eating <i>matazh</i> for 6 days, as mentioned in our verse, that this concludes the Passover festival, it is not so, but the seventh day is special, including a work prohibition. We might have thought it is special only in that we continue to eat מצה, but the fact is that it is a full-scale festival, no work is to be performed. It is distinguished as such by the presentation of another fire offering of a communal character in honour of the day. [It is, of course, the anniversary of the splitting of the Sea of Reeds, and the drowning of the Egyptian army in its waves and, being so, concludes the celebration of the Exodus. Ed.]
   16,9. מהחל חרמש בקמה, “when the sickle is first out to the standing grain.” The precise date when this occurs has already been spelled out in Leviticus 23,15 as being the 16th of <i>Nissan</i>.
   16,11. במקום אשר יבחר ה' אלוקיך לשכן שמו שם, “in the place that the Lord your G’d will choose to rest His name there.” Nachmanides explains that the message of our verse is that once the Temple will be erected, the communal sacrifices on the festivals will not again be presented in any other location. This has already been hinted at once before in verse 5 where the Torah (Moses) stated that once in the Holy Land, the Israelites would not be allowed to sacrifice the Paschal lamb (an individual offering) in any of the towns that they dwelled in. It is also possible that the meaning of our verse is that the previously legislated pilgrimages on these festivals will not become applicable until the permanent Temple has been built in that location.
   16,12. ושמרת ועשית את כל החוקים האלה, “You shall observe and perform all these decrees.” Nachmanides says that the reason why Moses applied the term חוקה, decree, to these festivals, is because the Torah did not offer a rationale for the observance of the festival of <i>Shavuot,</i> and it did not offer a rationale why this festival is to be observed 50 days after the offering of the Paschal lamb. Some commentators answer the question simply by saying that seeing this is the anniversary of the giving of the Torah, and its observance does not depend on G’d offering His reasons for the legislation, it deserves to be described as a חוקה, legislation by decree.
   16,15. שבעת ימים תחוג לה' אלוקיך, For seven consecutive days you shall celebrate to the Lord, your G’d;” this imperative is directed at the entire community, or Moses exhorts every individual to offer up his burnt offerings and his peace offerings.
	
   @כי יברכך ה' אלוקיך, “for the Lord your G’d has bestowed blessings on you;” the seven days of jubilation are in respect of all the blessings <i>Hashem</i> has bestowed upon you.
   Some commentators hold that the blessings referred to are in the future [just as the word יברכך is in the future tense Ed.] At that time, instead of rejoicing for only seven days, your life will be one of ongoing joy.
   It is noteworthy that the expression שמחה does not appear in conjunction with the holiday of Passover, seeing that the stalks of the crop are still in the ground and it is premature to rejoice in a harvest that has not yet been brought in. By <i>Shavuot,</i> when part of the crops of the field and orchards have been reaped, but have not yet been stored, the rejoicing is for one day only. By the time <i>Sukkot</i> has rolled around it is time to rejoice in thanksgiving for a full week. The Torah therefore, repeats the word שמחה, joy, in that connection
   @ובכל מעשה ידיך, “and in all your handiwork.”.
   Parshat Shoftim
   16,18. שופטים ושוטרים, “Judges and enforcement officers,” Moses appended this portion immediately after that dealing with the festivals involving pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to tell us that although he commanded us to make the pilgrimages to the place where the priests perform their service and you have an opportunity to consult with them on any matter that is of concern to you, be it of a legal or ritual nature, this is not sufficient, and you must appoint the appropriate mechanism in every city, i.e. judges and enforcement officers.
   Nachmanides writes that actually, already in Exodus 21,6 and 22,7 the Torah clearly presumed the existence of a judiciary, i.e. אלהים, as well as פלילים; the addition here is the command to appoint enforcers of the judgments handed down. Here we also learn that such institutions must be established in all towns in the land of Israel. When someone feels that he has been wronged, it is up to him to cry out, i.e. to demand that the judges meet to hear his complaint. (Compare Ezekiel 44,24) According to what is written here, Jewish communities in the Diaspora do not require permanent courts, etc., but these are convened on an <i>ad hoc</i> basis. This is also the view of Maimonides (<i>hilchot Sanhedrin</i> 1,2).
   @לשבטיך, “according to your tribes.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this to mean that every tribe must establish such courts in each of its cities. This means that a city populated by members of different tribes has to establish at least two separate courts.
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible to understand our verse to mean that there should be a tribal high court for each tribe. The members of that high court, as one of their tasks, have to oversee the appointment of lower courts in each city under their authority. Litigants are not free to choose a court other than that in the city where they live. This applies even if two litigants resident in the same city agree to take their case to a court in another city, this is also forbidden. The local court can force any litigant belonging to that tribe to appear before it, even if the litigants themselves prefer to appear before that tribe’s supreme court instead. The tribal high court, however, can demand that certain litigants have their case dealt with by that court (instead of the local court). If the need arises to rectify some impropriety or deficiency in the tribal courts’ set up, the problem must be dealt with by the <i>Sanhedrin,</i> the Supreme Court. Details about the functions of this Supreme Court are discussed in tractate <i>Horyot.</i> The local courts are obligated to operate on the basis of the instructions they receive from the Supreme Court.
   The plain meaning of our verse is “you have to appoint judges that are members of your respective tribes, so that members of a certain tribe will be judged by judges belonging to that tribe, in the various cities.”
   16,20. צדק, צדק תרדוף, “Righteousness, righteousness, you shall pursue!” According to Nachmanides the reason why Moses repeated the word צדק here is to exhort not only the judges to pursue righteousness but also the ordinary citizen to pursue every avenue to ensure that public affairs are run on a basis of righteousness. Judges appointed to a court must be people possessed of a blameless reputation. [Sodom also had judges, but what judges! Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason the word appears twice is to teach that righteousness must be pursued regardless of whether it results in one’s advantage or even if it is liable to result in one’s disadvantage. Alternately, Moses repeated the word to encourage you to make this pursuit something that is not restricted to a one-time effort, but to urge to keep striving for righteousness.
   16,21. לא תטע לך אשרה, “Do not plant for yourself a tree that symbolises idolatry.” Nachmanides writes that any tree planted at the entrance of the Temple is described as אשרה, suggesting that a reason for this might be the fact that in Psalms 50,23 the words ושם דרך אראנו, instead of using the conventional translation, could be read with the letter ש having the dot on the right, so that it would mean “and there I will show him the way.” When Bileam (Numbers 24,17) speaks about visions he has, he describes them also as אשורנו, the same as אראנו, “I will see it.” If in the popular parlance of the gentiles, such trees are spiritually symbolic, the Torah does not want us to employ idolaters’ symbols in connection with our spiritual Center. [Moreover, we must not confuse the holiness of beauty (in nature) with the beauty of holiness. [My version of the concept. Ed.]
   16,22. ולא תקים לך מצבה, “neither are you to erect a pillar for yourself;” <I>R</I>ashi explains that even if that pillar is not in honour of idolatry but in honour of <i>Hashem</i>, this is not an acceptable venue for honouring <i>Hashem</i>.
   Nachmanides writes that if <i>Rashi</i> were correct then Moses should also have prohibited the erecting of altars, seeing that this is also a cultural symbol of all idolaters and we are commanded not to copy their cultural mores (Leviticus 18,3). Moreover, the Torah expressly commanded us to destroy all such altars, not only not to erect them. (Compare Deut. 12,3) Perhaps we need to understand what is written here in light of historical facts. The Canaanites, i.e. every one of them, owned a pillar used for idolatrous purposes, whereas only a minority of them actually built altars to offer sacrifices to their deities. Hence, Moses draws a distinction between the two types of idolatrous symbols.
   Personally, (Nachmanides continuing) I believe that the Canaanites erected altars in each one of their temples for the purpose of offering sacrifices thereon; at the entrance to each temple they had erected a tall pillar on which their priests stood. Beyond that, at the entrance they had planted decorative trees in order to serve as landmarks for the people approaching the temple. The local Christian population in that country does so even in our time. <i>Hashem</i> hates all their “cultural” displays and He outlawed every pillar and every tree located in an entrance of a temple, house of worship. He did not outlaw altars altogether, as they are needed for facilitating the Jewish way of presenting sacrifices to <i>Hashem</i>. In Yaakov’s time this prohibition was not yet in force, as the general principle of ובחוקותיהם לא תלכו, “do not adopt any of their religious or cultural mores,” had not yet been legislated. This is why Yaakov had been free to anoint pillars, erect altars, and the like in order to worship <i>Hashem</i> Nowadays, after the revelation, all of this has been outlawed as it would create the impression that we are not so different from other religions. Or, we would even stoop as low as to bow down to a אבן משכית, a flooring stone. (Leviticus 26,1) [Mosaic flooring with or without images as part of the pattern]
   17,1. לא תזבח לה' אלוקיך צאן ובקר, “You shall not slaughter for the Lord your G’d an ox or lamb (that is blemished);” after having told the people that erecting an <i>asherah</i> or pillar, even in honour of <i>Hashem</i> is prohibited, Moses warns now that when offering animal sacrifices on the altar designated for this, the animals used must be free from any kind of blemish.
   17,2. כי ימצא בקרבך, “if there will be found in your midst,” Nachmanides comments that it is commonplace for the Torah, whenever addressing the laws known as משפטים, laws dealing with inter-personal relations, that the first item on the list that follows always deals with idolatry or with those practicing it.
   @איש או אשה, “a man or a woman, etc.” Seeing that it is part of the psyche of women to tend to inadvertently commit idolatrous acts by consulting soothsayers, or generally turning to people who claim to know the future, they tend to be impressed by people performing acts that demonstrate their extra-sensory capabilities. We find Biblical proof of this in Jeremiah, chapter 44.15 and onwards
   In the <i>Sifri</i> the reason for the separate mention of man and woman in this verse is explained as due to the fact that when speaking about the עיר הנדחת, Deut. 13,14, the Torah had described the guilty persons as אנשים, men, to indicate that if the instigator had been a woman the whole legislation of a city that had allowed itself to be seduced does not apply, the Torah had to emphasise that in the case of individual idolaters no difference is made between the punishment for men and women.
   17,4. והוגד לך ושמעת, “and you have been informed, and you will hear, etc.” The apparent repetition of the same thought means that whenever and wherever this accusation is brought to your attention you must immediately commence an investigation. As soon as you establish that the rumours you have heard are factual, you have to lead the guilty party to his or her place of execution where you will stone the guilty party to death.
   @נעשתה התועבה הזאת בישראל, “this abominable thing has indeed been carried out in (the land of) Israel;” the wording suggests that this legislation also applies in the Diaspora, seeing the word בקרבך which is used in the legislation of עיר הנדחת in conjunction with the word תועבה has been omitted here. The word בישראל at the end of this verse makes it clear that such conduct cannot be ignored in any Jewish community wherever it is located.
   17,6. על פי שנים עדים, “based on the testimony of not fewer than two eye-witnesses;” Ibn Ezra explains that seeing the words והוגד לך ושמעת in verse 4 sound as if the first verse speaks about information obtained clandestinely, whereas the word ושמעת refers to openly received information, but not information by eye-witnesses, etc., I might have concluded from the wording in verse 5 וסקלתם באבנים ומת, “you shall stone the party in question to death,” that this is sufficient to convict such people. The Torah had to state that no matter what, without two reliable eye-witnesses against the accused no conviction, and certainly no execution can take place.
   Rav Saadyah gaon explains the words על פי שנים עדים או על פי שלשה עדים to mean that the testimony of the two witnesses must be submitted to no fewer than three judges. [This has not been found in Rav Saadyah gaon’s writings, and in my edition of Ibn Ezra, he does not attribute it to him, but to some unnamed scholars. Ed.]
   Nachmanides questions the validity of such an interpretation seeing that the text does not remotely refer to the people who are supposed to accept this testimony and to act upon it. Besides, seeing that the Torah discusses capital offences, we have a rule that no court composed of fewer than 23 judges may deal with cases involving capital punishment. The plain meaning of the text, according to Nachmanides, is that if there are no more than 2 eye witnesses to the offence mentioned, this suffices to hand down a death penalty, provided the testimony of the two witnesses is above reproach. Some commentators say that the meaning of the verse is that if one set of two witnesses contradicts what a set of three witnesses testifies, two of the testimonies cancel each other out and the remaining witness is decisive. This works either in favour of the accused or against him or her..
   17,8. דברי ריבות בשעריך, “matters of dispute in your respective cities;” <i>Rashi</i> understands this verse not as referring to strife of a secular nature, but to disagreements amongst Torah scholars on how to rule in a matter brought to them for a binding decision. One group of sages tends to declare the object under discussion as ritually pure, whereas the other group disagrees.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the words בין דם לדם, refer to murder that has been committed, and there is a disagreement as to who is guilty of committing it. The words בין דין לדין refer to disputes involving money, or money due as compensation. The words בין נגע לנגע refer to injuries of different kinds caused to people or to the status of houses afflicted with what appears to be <i>tzoraat.</i> Finally, the words דברי ריבות בשעריך refer to any kind of disagreement between scholars or laymen. The phraseology, i.e. the examples, quoted in the text, has been chosen on the basis of what occurs most frequently. Disputes involving human relations and their belongings are much more frequent than disputes involving finer points of religious ritual. This is why Moses concludes with reminding the people that all of these disputes must be resolved, even by the highest tribunal, on the basis of the revealed law of <i>Hashem,</i> the Torah, and the judges must show that they have ruled on the basis of Torah law.
   17,11. ימין או שמאל, “to the right or to the left.” <i>Rashi</i> says that even if the ruling is such that it appears what the man in the street knows to be right as being left, and vice versa, i.e. that you are convinced that the decision is flawed, you must accept their decision and conduct yourself in accordance with it. You cannot, because of your conscience, say that you refuse to eat a piece of חלב, fat tissue forbidden on pain of the <i>Karet</i> penalty, that you are certain is such in spite of the Supreme Court’s decision to the contrary. The following is how Nachmanides elaborates on the words of <i>Rashi.</i>
   It was necessary for Moses to spell this out, seeing that the Torah was given to the people as a written document, and it is common knowledge that not a single letter in that document will ever be changed or tampered with. If it were possible to do that, we would soon have numerous such books, each claiming to be the original Torah. This is why in that same written Torah we needed to have a verse explaining the absolute authority of the leading scholars of the nation to interpret the Torah according to approved guidelines. It is not necessary for these Torah scholars to have received that particular piece of legislation, or interpretation, from Moses directly. Basically, Moses teaches that the Torah that will be taught to us after his death, will be taught to us on the basis of how these scholars understood and interpreted it. It is irrelevant if minor scholars, or learned individuals are convinced that the Supreme Court had erred in a specific ruling.
   17,14. ואמרת אשימה עלי מלך, “and you will say: “I will appoint a king as ruler over myself;” Nachmanides writes that according to the opinion of our sages (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 20<i>)</i> what sounds here as optional, depending on <i>vox populi,</i> is in fact one of the basic 613 commandments. It is one of the three commandments that would not become operational until after the people were firmly established in the land. In that respect it is similar to the legislation about making a railing on top of the roof of your house, (Deut. 22,80) a commandment that can also not be fulfilled until the conditions are ripe. The reason why Moses prefaces this commandment with the words: ואמרת, “when you will say,” is that the request to appoint a king must originate with the people, and they in turn have to submit it to the ruling authority at that time, the High Court. Nachmanides sees in this verse an allusion to future developments, when the people came to the prophet Samuel and requested that he appoint a king over them. (Samuel I chapter 8) 
   [The fact that such a request for central government did not surface for well over 400 years after Joshua’s conquest of the land, says something about the traditional disinclination of the Jewish people to be governed. Ed.]
   17,15. אשר יבחר ה' אלוקיך בו, “whom the Lord your G’d will choose.” According to numerous commentators the meaning is that G’d will indicate His choice of whom He favours as king, through one of His prophets, or, in the absence of such, through the response received by the High Priest when enquiring from <i>Hashem</i> through the <i>urim vetumim</i> in his breastplate.
   Nachmanides questions this approach, asking that if it were correct, why did Moses specifically warn against the appointment of a gentile as king, when clearly, such an appointment would be thwarted by Divine interference? He answers that our sages discovered in this verse also a hidden clause. The words שום תשים עליך מלך, “you shall surely set a king over yourself,” imply that it is within your power, politically speaking, to make that choice without external interference. When such conditions exist G’d needs to approve the appointment of such a king before he begins his reign. Such a king must have been born as a Jew. The word יבחר is an allusion to the people whom G’d has “chosen,” as opposed to the people whom G’d “hates.” [The word “hates,” used by Nachmanides must be understood in the same sense as Leah used it when she described herself as “hated” by her husband Yaakov. (Genesis 29,33) Ed.] Under no circumstances, however, must you appoint a gentile as king over you.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, seeing that any king ruling over any nation does so only as long as I, <i>Hashem,</i> approve, you may appoint a king over yourselves as this is part of the fate of the Jewish people as it has been decreed by heaven. [If I understand correctly, the inference is from the indirect אשר יבחר, “that He will choose,” instead of the direct speech אשר תבחר, “that you will choose.” Ed.] Even when we think we do the choosing, in the final analysis, G’d has done the choosing in His capacity as “King of Kings.” However, there is also included here a warning not to crown gentile king, ever.
   17,16. רק לא ירבה לו סוסים, “only he shall not acquire for himself too many horses, etc.” The meaning of the restrictive word רק is inserted to teach that although by adopting the monarchy as your mode of government, something which makes you more like the nations of the world, and I have given My approval, there are certain tools used by monarchs the world over to reinforce their power that such a Jewish king must not use. They are: 1) not to amass too many horses. It is a boast of gentile kings to view their military strength in the number of horses and chariots they own.
   Nachmanides questions this rationale, basing himself on the Jerusalem Talmud (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 10,9) in which possible return by Jews to Egypt is discussed and the prevailing view is that whereas it is forbidden for Jews to settle in Egypt, if they visit there as part of their business dealings this is quite in order. Therefore, if the king sends a delegation to Egypt to acquire horses, this is viewed as a commercial activity, and is permitted. He adds further, it is possible to explain our verse as a warning for the king not to amass too many horses even if they have been born and bred in the land of Israel. The definition of the words דרך סחורה, “a commercial transaction,” in Nachmanides’ view, means that the king must not acquire these horses because he considers himself armed superbly by owning a cavalry, but that the purpose in acquiring them is not for war but for peaceful commercial pursuits. The king’s actions must reflect that he places his trust in <i>Hashem</i>, not in man-made defensive or offensive weaponry. Moses follows the warning about the amassing of horses by the king, by a warning not to lead his people back to Egypt (already mentioned in Exodus 14,13), i.e. he is not to employ Egyptian servants at his court, in his army. The thrust of the whole paragraph is that Jews, who when first in Egypt were discouraged by Joseph to serve as officers in Pharaoh’s army, should retain their primary vocations, just as then they had been cattle-herders, now they would become farmers on their own land.
   @למען הרבות סוס, “in order to amass quantities of horses.” In Kings I 9,19 the prophet Jeremiah already records that even a wise king such as Solomon ignored this warning of the Torah. He had Egyptian trainers living in the cities specially built for training cavalry horses and did not draft Jews for the military, although he employed them as “forced labour” to work in the quarries in Lebanon to hew and transport the stones needed for building the Temple.
   @וה' אמר לכם, “seeing that <i>Hashem</i> has already told you., etc.,” the word אמר, though written in the past tense here, must be understood as if it had been written in the present tense. Until permission had been given by G’d to appoint a king, the Israelites could not possibly have been led back to Egypt by such a king.
   Another way of understanding our verse is that Moses now reveals what G’d had already told him a long time ago, but seeing that it had not been relevant, Moses had not yet told the people about that.
   According to our sages (Jerusalem Talmud, <i>Sukkah</i> 5,1) the reason for this prohibition is that both the Egyptians and the Canaanites were extremely anti G’d the Creator, in their whole religious mores, as well as in their sexually perverted values. (Compare Leviticus 18,2) There was little fear that the Israelites would copy the Canaanites, seeing they were about to wipe out those tribes. This left the Egyptians as a potentially very bad cultural influence. G’d therefore prohibited close relations between our two nations, something that would be bound to develop if Jews were allowed to settle there.
   17,19. והיתה עמו, “It shall be with him, constantly;” the subject is the Torah scroll just mentioned.”
   17,20. לבלתי רום לבבו, “so that his heart does not become haughty;” here the Torah zeroes in on the negative virtue called pride, arrogance, haughtiness. By warning the King not to fall victim to such feelings, we commoners must surely learn that we are included in that warning, as we have far less to tempt us to display or harbour such feelings of superiority.
   18,2. ונחלה לא יהיה לו, “He shall not have an inheritance.” <i>Rashi,</i> taking his cue from the <i>Sifri,</i> commenting on Exodus 13,5 where only the names of five Canaanite tribes are mentioned, says that all seven tribes were meant.
   Nachmanides writes that in that verse the reason that only five Canaanite tribes were mentioned is that the territory of those five fell under the heading of “a land flowing with milk and honey,” whereas the territory of the <i>P’rizi</i> and <i>Girgashi</i>, omitted on that occasion, was less fruitful. This is the reason why produce grown on land that used to belong to those two tribes was not subject to the <i>bikkurim</i> legislation, i.e. that the farmer in those lands did not have to bring the first ripe fruit to Jerusalem. If the basic legislation that the priests and Levites had no ancestral share in the land of Israel is repeated here, it was in order to make the point that these Levites also did not have an ancestral share in the lands formerly owned by the <i>P’rizi</i> and <i>Girgashi.</i>
   18,3. וזה יהיה משפט הכהנים, “and this shall be the allotted share of the priests;” Nachmanides writes that this is a commandment which does not again appear in the Torah. In <i>Parshat Korach</i> (Numbers 18,8-20) where the allotments to the priests are enumerated; what follows now has not been mentioned, as in the desert every animal that had been slaughtered had first been consecrated as an offering. Only after בשר תאוה, meat of a secular character, will be permissible, after settlement in the land of Israel, will gifts from such animals be mandatory even though the animal from which they were taken had never been consecrated. This is the reason that the Torah describes the owners of such non-consecrated animals as זובחי הזבח, “the ones who perform a slaughter.” In other words, whenever Israelites have occasion to slaughter one of their animals, the parts described in this chapter are to be given to one of the priests. In chapter 18 of Numbers the gifts to the priests revolve around the concept of חרם, matters segregated from the community at large on pain of various penalties. This is also why the topic of גזל הגר, restitution of property stolen from a convert who died before he could have left behind natural heirs, is not included in Numbers chapter 18. There is an <i>aggadah</i> in <i>Chulin</i> 134 in which the origin of these gifts is traced to the valiant deed of Pinchas, son of the High Priest Eleazar, and symbolic meaning is attached to each of these animal parts listed here. According to Maimonides the jaw given to the priests symbolizes a portion of the head of the animal’s body, whereas the front leg symbolizes the first limb that is partially detached from the rump. Gifts to the priests always symbolize the “first” or “best” of something.
   18,9. לא תלמד לעשות כתועבות הגוים האלה, “you must not learn to copy the abominations performed by these nations. According to Nachmanides, seeing that in Leviticus 18, we already have been warned not to practice any of the abominations of the Canaanites or Egyptians, Moses now illustrates examples of some of the abominations the Torah had in mind. There are divergent opinions as to the meaning of מעביר בנו או בתו באש. Some authorities believe that this is the same as the infamous <i>moloch</i> cult, whereas others believe it was some sort of magic designed to ward off negative vibes by powerful forces. The expression מכשף is an umbrella term for any number of different sorcerers’ tricks. Expressions such as חובר חבר, שואל אוב וידעוני, are examples of such sorcery. They are different forms of necromancy. קוסם קסמים, are people trying to divine future events, such as palm readings, tea leaf readings, etc. So-called prophets such as Bileam used such tools as their stock-in-trade in order to impress their clients. These, as well as נחשים, are outlawed by the Torah for use by the Jewish people although they do not fall under the heading of abomination, תועבה. When Moses speaks of מעוננים, he refers to people who claim to be able to foretell the future by examining cloud patterns. מנחשים are people claiming to be able to get messages revealing some future events form the twittering of birds or by looking at their wings. The idea is derived from Kohelet 10,20 ובעל הכנפים יגיד דבר, “that winged matter may reveal something.”
   18,12. כי תועבת ה' כל עושה אלה; “for anyone who has done such things has committed an abomination in the eyes of <i>Hashem.”</i> The word כל here is not to be understood literally as “everyone,” for the people guilty of מעוננן or מנחש, though they have transgressed have not committed a תועבה. The Torah does make allowance for the natural desire of a person to be able to know the future. The reason why G’d forbade us, the Jewish people, even to engage מעוננים and מנחשים to help us unravel the future is because we have been provided by <i>Hashem</i> with prophets who have had revealed to us as much of the future as G’d deems it for necessary to make known to us, so that it would reflect ingratitude to bypass these prophets and turn to other most unreliable sources to gain that kind of knowledge.
   18,13. תמים תהיה עם ה' אלוקיך, “You are to be wholehearted with the Lord your G’d.” Our hearts need to be trained exclusively on Him, and we must believe that He is the ultimate source of all that happens and that therefore reliable knowledge of future events can be obtained only from Him. If we have justified reason to try and obtain knowledge of some future events, especially as it relates to the people as a whole, the venue is through the prophet or the breastplate of the High Priest in which is contained the <i>urim vetumim,</i> a device that can be activated by the High Priest to get responses to his enquiries from heavenly sources. [During the period of the second Temple there no longer was such a device. Ed.] Astrology as a means to divine the future is strictly forbidden, and has been so since chapter 15 in Genesis when G’d showed Avram that he was mistaken in relying on that venue as to his fathering children.
   18,15. נביא מקרבך, “a prophet from your midst, etc.” According to Nachmanides the superfluous word מקרבך, “from your midst,” [seeing that the word מאחיך “from your brethren,” already tells us that he will be Jewish. Ed.] is a hint that prophets will only arise in the land of Israel. Similarly, the addition of the word
    
   @מאחיך, that He will not endow gentiles with His holy spirit.
   @כמוני, ”just like I;” <i>Rashi</i> understands the comparison Moses drew as not applying to the level of his prophetic insights but to the previous word מאחיך, i.e. “such a prophet will be of Jewish origin just as I am.”
   Ibn Ezra understands the word כמוני as Moses contrasting his prophecy, divinely inspired, with that of מעוננים and מנחשים that the Torah had just told us not to make use of.
   Nachmanides suggests that it is possible to explain the word מקרבך as meaning that such a prophet will be trustworthy, dependable, seeing that he is one of your own, just as you have learned to rely on what I have told you.
   18,16. ככל אשר שאלת, “according to all that you have asked for.” Nachmanides writes that at this point Moses did not spell out in detail what it was that the Israelites had asked for. It could not refer to their request not to have to listen to the overwhelming voice of <i>Hashem</i> at the revelation, as no new prophet had been endowed by <i>Hashem</i> in response to that request. Only when the Torah reports later that the people spoke to Moses and authorised him to be their intermediary between them and <i>Hashem</i>, and they include a promise to carry out what Moses would tell them, did they express the wish that Moses here refers to as ככל אשר שאלת “in accordance with all that you asked for.” (Compare Deut. 5,24)
   18,17. היטיבו אשר דברו, “they have done well in what they have said.” They did well to believe in the prophet, and therefore I will continue to relate to them by means of prophets in the future, also.
   It is possible to interpret that when the Israelites undertook to accept Moses as an intermediary and they promised obedience to what he would instruct them to do in the name of <i>Hashem,</i> that Moses here implies that he viewed this as a commitment which would remain in effect for their relationship with future prophets, also.
   18,20. ואשר ידבר בשם אלוהים אחרים, “or who shall speak in the name of other deities, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> -searching for a reason why Moses needed to state the obvious,- writes that even if the false prophet tells the people only matters which conform to traditional <i>halachah,</i> he is still subject to the death penalty. (Based on <i>Sifri</i>)
   Nachmanides explains that what is meant (by the <i>Sifri</i>) is not that the “prophet” announces that in his dream the deity Pe-or had appeared to him and had told him that it was important to observe the commandment of the four species, as anyone who does not do so is guilty of the death penalty. There is no death penalty for such a statement by such a “would-be prophet.” What is meant is that the “would-be prophet” announces: “I have seen in my dream, <i>Pe-or,</i> who is the deity, and he commanded not to eat pig’s meat; or that such an impostor announces that he had been foretold in his dream certain events, such an impostor is guilty of the death penalty because he had made a point of describing the source of his information as being a deity whom he recognizes as such.
   18,21. וכי תאמר בלבבך, “If you were to say in your heart, etc.” [Our author quotes Nachmanides although he does not say so. Ed.] Our sages (<i>Sifri</i>) do not view the word וכי in our verse as a conditional “if,” but as a prediction by Moses of what will happen in the future, a prediction that has been documented as having occurred in Jeremiah chapter 28. (About the false prophet Chananyah, and how Jeremiah dealt with him.) What prompted the sages to interpret the word וכי in this manner is that Moses did not say “ואם,” which would have clearly been something conditional. If you were to ask: “since when does the Torah make it a practice to allude to events in the future?” The reason the Torah does so at this stage is to remind future readers of the Torah that when such a man as Chananyah appears, the people, remembering what they had read here, should ask for verification of the prophet’s legitimacy. 
   [Unbelievably, in Jeremiahs time, when true to his prediction the holy vessels of the Temple had already been plundered by Nevuchadnezzar, the people did not question the rosy predictions of Chananyah, but tended to disbelieve the established and proven prophet Jeremiah, presumably because they were thirsty for “good” prophecies rather than becoming penitents and to regain favour in the eyes of <i>Hashem.</i> Ed.]
   Why did the Torah not also portray the people as asking: “how do we know that the word that comes out of the mouth of the prophet is that which <i>Hashem</i> had told him to convey to us?” Seeing that it is the Torah’s principal purpose here to instruct us to execute false prophets, there was no need to spell this out, seeing that the predictions of a true prophet come true. When they do, the prophet enjoys such a high degree of trust by the people that even when he orders violation of a Torah commandment on a temporary basis, he does not become disqualified. A prominent example is Elijah rebuilding an altar that had long been in disuse and disrepair and forbidden as a “private altar” once the Temple had been erected. The word כמוך in verse 18 already contained the authority for the people to remain loyal to an established prophet, even if he commanded something that appears to conflict with the Torah’s law, provided he does not try to abrogate this law but demands temporarily ignoring such a law due to an emergency. When the prophet does predict a future event, after specifying the when and where, and it comes true, this legitimizes him, just as it legitimized Moses in the eyes of Pharaoh when the Nile turned into blood, and the frogs swarmed all over the country, all at the time predicted.
   <i>Rashi</i> felt that our verse was not needed to spell out the penalty for a false prophet as the Torah had already done so in 13,2 where the Torah legislated the death penalty even though the prediction of that “prophet” had come true, because the man in question had tried to get his listeners to violate Torah law. He felt that regardless of the stature of the “prophet,” he has to legitimize himself not only by his piety but also by a miracle that comes true. If, after both these conditions have been met, he once asks you to violate or tolerate violation of Torah law, such as Elijah did at Mount Carmel, this is no reason for you to disown that prophet. We do no less when we convict someone to death on the strength of the testimony of two witnesses whose lifestyle entitles them to be considered trustworthy as Torah observant. Maimonides considers the latter argument as a גזרת הכתוב, Divine decree, not capable of being upheld by human reasoning. Such matters all belong to what Moses described in Deut. 29,28 as הנסתרות לה' אלוקינו, “matters which are concealed form our eyes, are revealed to <i>Hashem,”</i> (Who will take care of them in His own way.)
   19,1. כי יכרית, “When He will cut down, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the basic legislation (Exodus 21,13) following had already been made public, Moses now elaborates on it.
   @וישבת בעריהם, “and you will settle in their cities;” establishment of cities of refuge does not become obligatory until after the people have settled on the land. There are additional <i>midrashim</i> based on the wording of this paragraph.
   19,8. ואם ירחיב ה' אלוקיך את גבולך, “and if the Lord your G’d will expand your boundaries, etc.;” (condensed version of Nachmanides) At the beginning of the paragraph Moses spoke of the nations that G’d would dispossess, i.e. the seven well known Canaanite nations, and he commanded that after these cities had been resettled with Israelites, three cities of refuge in addition to the ones Moses himself had already set aside as such on the east bank of the Jordan were to be designated as such. (Compare Deut. 4,41) With the addition of the cities mentioned here the commandment of setting aside such cities would have been fulfilled in its entirety. All the commandments that were legislated with a view to being observed after conquest of the land are understood to become effective after the people had received their share of the land and had settled thereon.
   It is interesting that at this point, though Moses is apparently speaking about a law already formulated when the people had just received the Ten Commandments, that he does not add the words כאשר דבר לך, “as He (<i>Hashem</i>) had said to you” [40 years ago. Moses had used this formula no fewer than 5 times when elaborating on laws in the first 4 Books of the Torah. Ed.] The reason may be that what Moses refers to as the “broadening of the borders of the land of Israel” is the inclusion of the land of the three tribes promised at the covenant between the pieces to Avraham, but soft-pedaled since that time. (Compare Genesis, 15,19-21). This may be the reason why he adds the words כאשר נשבע לאבותיך, “as He has sworn to your patriarchs,” and again in verse 9 אשר דבר לתת לאבותיך, “which He has spoken about to give to your forefathers.” This is in sharp contrast to when he informed the people that after they would settle in the land, meat that has not been consecrated first would be allowed in their respective dwellings. On that occasion, although a broadening of the borders is clearly spelled out, (Deut. 12,20) Moses failed to mention that this had anything to do with promises <i>Hashem</i> had made to the patriarchs. He offered as a rationale for this new law only the fact that the journey to the Temple each time might be tedious.
   It is fairly obvious, that just as tenure in the land is dependent on the observance of the Torah’s command-ments, so <i>Hashem’s</i> fulfilling the unfulfilled portion of His promise to Avraham would have to await the time when the people‘s claim to the part of the land they had already inherited would prove to be deserved by their loyalty to the Torah. We may conjecture that it had always been <i>Hashem’s</i> intention to let the people inherit the lands of the seven tribes during the lifetime of Moses and Joshua, and that in order to qualify for the balance He gave them all the commandments in the Torah to test them if they were worthy of the remainder of the lands promised to the first of the patriarchs, Avraham.
   19,9. כי תשמור את כל המצוה וגו'...לאהבה את ה' וללכת בדרכיו, “When you observe this entire commandment….to love the Lord your G’d and to walk in His ways, etc.” This means that the people collectively observe the laws of the Torah in all its aspects. According to Ibn Ezra the word מצוה in the singular mode does not refer to a specific commandment other than the three cities of refuge to the existing ones no additional legislation could be expected in the future.
   @כי תשמור...כל הימים, “when you will observe for all times etc.” Nachmanides raises the question that seeing that no one (human being) knows the future, how is anyone to know when this time is ripe? He rejects Ibn Ezra (without saying why) who understands the words כל הימים to mean “without interruption,” i.e. that there will not be intervals during which not all the people keep all the commandments. Instead, Nachmanides understands the whole verse as an outline of a historical development of the Jewish people who will culminate in all of them observing all of the commandments from a feeling of love for <i>Hashem.</i> When this idyllic state will have been reached so that there is no longer any fear that the people will backslide from the lofty spiritual <i>niveau,</i> the setting aside of the additional three cities of refuge will become operative because then the territories of the last three Canaanite tribes mentioned in the prophecy to Avraham in Genesis chapter 15 will become part of the Jewish state. Only <i>Hashem</i> knows when that stage of development of the Jewish people will be reached, so that He will be able to fulfill that stage of expanding the boundaries of the Jewish state.
   19,13. לא תחוס עינך, “Your eye shall not pity him.” <i>Rashi</i>, (basing himself on <i>Sifri</i>) understands the psychology of such “pity” as the argument that it suffices that one person has been killed, how can the situation be improved by killing another person?
   Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation here is that the principal message of the verse is the positive commandment to eliminate perpetrators of evil (compare Nachmanides’ comments on rule 14 of Maimonides’ tractate ספר המצוות, describing why he included what in his list of 613 commandments.) A secondary consideration, added to reinforce the urgency with which observance of the positive commandment is to be pursued, is this negative commandment to refrain from finding excuses for the killer. Moses already offered a similar consideration when he warned the people not to have pity on people who try to seduce others to worship idols. [A crime committed in the privacy of one’s home. Ed] (Deut. 13,9) When the Torah, in Exodus 22,17 legislates bluntly, without further ado, מכשפה לא תחיה, “you must not allow a sorceress to live,” apparently addressing the commandment only to the female gender, this is misleading. Seeing that women are more involved than men when it comes to sorcery, the wording of the commandment reflects the fact that the lawgiver is aware of this. Men sorcerers are equally liable to execution. (Compare Ezekiel 22,5 and Nachum 3,4) [One tends to have more pity with women, even if they committed crimes, trying to excuse their crimes because of valid motives that might have prompted them. By singling out the women as the standard perpetrators of certain crimes, the Torah tries to counter such tendencies. 
   Another example, even more easily understandable, is found in Deut. 25, 11-12 where the wife who came to the assistance of her husband who was in a life and death struggle with another man, is subject to a severe penalty for the manner in which she intervened. Most people would have sided with the wife, whose motive was simply to save the life of her husband. [The Torah teaches that <i>Hashem’s</i> psychology operates on a different wavelength. Ed.] Humans tend to overlook wrongs done when the wronged party did not suffer tangible loss, money, loss of property, loss of limb, etc., but if “only” pride, dignity, embarrassment were at stake there is a tendency to go easy on the guilty party. “Witnesses” who claim to have witnessed a crime who have been found as having lied before their intended victim has suffered retribution for the supposed crime he had committed, are convicted of precisely the harm they meant to inflict on their victim. Once the damage had been done, and their chicanery did not come to light until it was too late to save their victim, their crime is left to <i>Hashem</i> to deal with, seeing that He is the ultimate arbiter of what is just and what is not
   @וטוב לך, “and it shall be good for you.” The removal of sources of spilling the blood of innocents is a great <i>mitzvah</i> and in turn will prove to be of great benefit to you, as it will save your own lives, as wasting one’s mercy and pity on murderers will only spawn more deaths by violence not only by the murderers whose lives have been spared, but by others who will be encouraged to achieve their ends by violent means
   19,14. לא תסיג גבול רעך אשר גבלו הראשונים, “You must not move the boundary of your fellow which earlier ones have marked as such.” The “earlier ones” referred to are the generation of Israelites entering the land with Joshua. 
   Nachmanides writes that the reason behind this commandment, is that later generations, observing that though they have a large family they only have a small piece of land, whereas their neighbours who have only one or two children have a much larger piece of land, will claim that the original clerks doing the measuring had erred at that time. Some people may even challenge the whole system of distributing the land by lottery that had been the basis of the distribution in the time of Joshua. Changing borders is not only forbidden when done at night without anyone seeing it, but also when done in daylight in plain view of everyone. The message Moses leaves the people is that if they wish to live in peace with one another they will never challenge the method of the original parceling out of the land during the years Joshua was their leader. The phrasing of the verse is in the present tense, as only present borders are easily recognizable, not any changes that might or might not have occurred before the problem surfaces. Present boundaries are sacrosanct.
   19,15. על פי שני עדים, “on the basis of testimony of to witnesses, etc.” The Torah here uses the number “two” in the construct mode, שני עדים, whereas the last time we had a similar verse the Torah wrote the word שנים עדים. This serves our sages as a hint that sometimes (monetary disputes) even a lone witness is not altogether ineffective but can evoke the need for the accused to swear an oath that he is not guilty of the charge brought by the litigant who only backs it up with a single acceptable witness. (<i>Sifri</i>)
   19,18. והנה עד שקר העד, “and behold, the testimony was false testimony!” Nachmanides draws our attention to the fact that the Torah did not mention anything concerning how the court knew that the testimony of these witnesses was false. Even when two witnesses contradict a group of twenty, this is not proof that the two have been lying. Unless the person supposedly killed would appear before us alive, we have no definitive proof that the testimony was false. Clearly, when the Torah speaks about the investigations the judges have to carry out, it does not have in mind such incontrovertible evidence to the contrary as the “dead” appearing in front of us alive. This is why we have a reliable tradition which tells us that the nature of the “false” testimony in our verse does not relate to the substance of the testimony but to the alibi of the witnesses, who, though they claim to have been at one location at a certain time, are confronted by other witnesses claiming they had seen them elsewhere at that time. Seeing that the testimony of the second set of witnesses relates to the actual bodies of the first set of witnesses it is relevant. They do not contradict the substance of the first witnesses’ testimony, but to their ability to testify to something they could not have seen at that time. The first set of witnesses, by wanting to deny the claim of the second set of witnesses are not qualified to testify concerning their own selves. Ergo, unless they can produce independent testimony that had been at the location they had claimed to be in the first place, they are declared as “false” witnesses, and will be dealt with accordingly, provided that their testimony has not yet resulted in the judicial murder they had had in mind.
   19,19. כאשר זמם. “as he has conspired.” Our sages emphasise (<i>Makkot</i> 5) that the Torah decrees this retribution by a human court only if the false witnesses’ testimony had not achieved its purpose. Nachmanides writes that the reason is that the whole subject of עדים זוממים, scheming witnesses, is in the nature of גזרת הכתוב, heavenly decree, intervention in the judicial process by super-human forces. After all, the judges are faced with two diametrically opposed statements concerning location and time, and it is beyond our ability to be certain who is telling the truth. We look at this in the following manner. If two witnesses accuse Reuven of having committed murder, and Reuven had been an upstanding citizen up until then, nothing negative having been known about him, and out of the blue two other witnesses appear throwing serious doubt on the believability of the first two witnesses, we are inclined to think that if Reuven were not innocent of this accusation G’d would not have gone out of His way to send the second set of witnesses to save him from the death penalty. Based on such a consideration we can understand the tendency of the sages to believe the second set of witnesses, and to leave the accused to G’d’s judgment if they erred and he was indeed guilty. If the second set of witnesses appears too late to save the accused, we again assume that G’d would not have allowed the accused to be executed unless he had been guilty of death on account of another crime that he committed, where there had not been any witnesses either.
   [On the one hand, in spite of the <i>urim vetumim,</i> which the priest could invoke in order to ask <i>Hashem</i> if the accused is guilty, the Torah does not encourage our using supernatural channels except where we are expressly bidden to do so, such as in obtaining G’d’s sanction for expansionary wars. Ed.] Nachmanides also adds that if the accused had been judicially murdered by the testimony of a set of witnesses the family of the innocent victim will move heaven and earth to see that he is exonerated posthumously.
   20,1. כי תצא למלחמה, ”When you engage in an expansionary war, etc.” Nachmanides writes that Moses reveals something totally new to the people in this paragraph, because the Israelites were approaching the day when they would have to engage in warfare.. 
   20,3. אל תיראו, “do not be afraid” in your heart;
   @ואל תחפזו, “and do not panic;” causing you to flee. 
   @ואל תערצו, do not display your fear.
   20,4. כי ה' אלוקיכם ההולך עמכם, “for the Lord your G’d is the One going with you.” The details about who is subject to the draft are meant to remind us that in spite of our feeling physically superior to our enemies, success in war, as in other enterprises that are facing opposition, depends on G’d’s being on our side. If He is, we will win, if not, our numerical superiority or our superior weaponry will not secure us victory either.
   @להושיע אתכם, “to save you.” Moses adds these words even though he had already told the people that G’d would participate as a Warrior on their side. The reason is that even victory in war does not mean that the winning side does not sustain casualties, sometimes very heavy casualties. Moses assures the people that in justified wars G’d would ensure that they would not sustain such casualties.
   A priest, who is a servant of <i>Hashem</i>, warns the assembled soldiers to be G’d-fearing, and to be confident of His help. The שוטרים, the enforcers of the law, are concerned with the more mundane aspects of warfare, the fact that people worry about their lives when exposed to abnormal dangers. He concentrates on three major concerns of such young soldiers, the betrothed, the ones engaged in building a house, and the ones who just began to establish an economic base for themselves, by planting a vineyard, but not having tasted any of its fruit. These three groups of young men are sent home before the battle is joined.
   20,6. ולא חללו, “and he has not yet redeemed it.” Nachmanides writes that this means that the fourth year of that vineyard has not yet reached harvest time. The word חלל is derived here from מחולות, dancing. When the harvest of the fourth year is completed, the people owning the vineyard are happy and express their gratitude to G’d by dancing, although that year’s harvest is still קודש הלולים, “sanctified to laud” (Leviticus 19,24) It is not secular yet, that is why it has to be consumed in Jerusalem. It is also possible to interpret the word לא חללו, to mean that the owner had not yet redeemed that crop so that it was not yet חולין, secular produce.
   20,8. מי האיש הירא, “who is the man who is fearful;” he does not trust the assurance by the priest.”
   @ורך הלבב, “and he is of faint heart;” he is constitutionally unable to face swords and blood.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the approach by Rabbi Yossi Hag’lili who interprets the word הירא as not applying to physical fear but to fear of retribution for the sins he is aware of having committed, the words פן ימות must be understood that he is afraid of dying as punishment for his sins. He may therefore plan to desert his comrades, rationalizing his action by the priest having promised his compatriots that they will remain unharmed, i.e. his absence does not weaken the army. They, his compatriots, will not be at risk on account of his sins.
   According to Rabbi Akiva, who interprets the words in our verse as one reads them, at face value, simply says that if someone even after being reassured by the priest, G’d’s interpreter, still feels afraid that G’d would not perform a miracle on his account and save him, he is sent home so that he does not undermine the morale of his fellow soldiers.
   The Jerusalem Talmud <i>Sotah</i> 8,9 quotes a view according to which all those claiming release from the army must furnish proof of their “excuses,” and that according to the view of Rabbi Yossi Hag’lili the person afraid of retribution for his sins must furnish proof that he is indeed guilty of such a sin, except the person who claims to be afraid and all can see from his demeanour that he is a coward.
   @ולא ימס את לבב אחיו , “so he will not melt the heart of his buddies.” According to the author of <i>halachot gedolot</i> (Rabbi Yehudah ben Rabbi Shemuel of the ancient academy in Sura) the above words are a negative commandment, applicable to the שוטרים not to deny that “coward’s” application to go home.
   20,9. ופקדו שרי צבאות בראש העם, “the leaders of the people shall take command at the head of the people.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah’s instructions here run parallel to what the nations of the world are doing in similar circumstances. G’d’s intervention on behalf of the Jewish soldiers is in the nature of “hidden miracles,” the types that resulted in the collapse of Haman and the rise to power of Mordechai. [People are saved or killed by being in the right place, or the wrong place at the right time or at the wrong time, as required in order for His will to be done. Ed.] G’d does not interfere with natural law overtly unless unavoidable in order to achieve His ends without depriving man of his free will in the process.
   20,10. כי תקרב אל עיר, <i>Rashi</i> understands this paragraph as speaking of a מלחמת רשות, a war sanctioned by <i>Hashem,</i> but not conducted for reasons of self defense. Nachmanides, elaborating on this, adds that <i>Rashi</i> was forced to offer this interpretation on account of what is written a few verses later, i.e. that if in spite of peaceful overtures the inhabitants of the city described insist of conducting a war against the Israelites, then the males are to be killed, whereas the women and even the male children are to be kept alive, which is different from the rules of the Torah when the seven Canaanite nations will be attacked. There, all the inhabitants of such cities are to be killed regardless of sex or age. What is noteworthy is that even when confronting cities of the seven Canaanite nations about to be driven out from their country or to be killed, the Torah commands the people to offer surrender first. These Canaanites, if willing, will even be accepted as converts and thus escape death or forced exile. This is what Moses had done with the people under the rule of Sichon, King of the Emorite, one of the seven Canaanite nations. 
   [This editor does not see evidence that any of Sichon’s subjects had converted to Judaism, although Rachav, who had hidden the two spies in Jericho, was saved and not enslaved or exiled, although judging from her own words she may have been close to conversion to Judaism long before Joshua crossed the Jordan. Ed.]
   It appears that there was a difference between the offer of peace to the cities of the seven nations on the one hand, and those in more distant countries, not Canaanites. The latter were informed that if they wanted to survive they could accept subservient status to the Israelites, work for them, etc, but lose their independence, whereas a similar offer to the Canaanite cities contained an additional rider, namely that they had to abandon idolatry and accept the seven Noachide laws. This had to be a minimum as the Torah had expressly forbidden sparing the lives of any idolatrous population in what was going to be the land of Israel. Once they would have become enslaved to the Jewish people, they would find out that their idols and any remnants of their religious symbols would be destroyed, in accordance with Torah law, which does not tolerate the existence of such relics of idolatry in the Holy Land.
   <i>Rashi</i>, on the other hand, states that no compromise of any kind was permitted with the seven Canaanite nations and they either were killed or had to emigrate to escape such a fate. According to his view, even total conversion to Judaism was not an option for them. Nachmanides does not concur, as he interprets the warning by the Torah in verse 18 that the presence of these people in the Holy Land represents a danger that they will influence the Israelites culturally and morally, as clearly demanding that these people must leave or be killed. The Jerusalem Talmud states that Joshua offered to such people that they become labourers for the Israel performing menial tasks, such as hewing wood and carrying water. Exodus 23,33 makes it plain that these people are considered as a cultural hazard “if they continue to practice their religion.” In Nachmanides’ view this means that if they abandon idolatry they may live in the land of Israel, but as slaves or serfs. We are familiar with the story of Gibeonites, who pretended to have come from outside the land of Canaan in order to qualify for conversion of sorts. When Joshua found out too late (after having made a solemn deal with them) that he had become the victim of a fraud, he did not kill these people but made labourers of them, a status that continued down to the time of Solomon over 400 years later. (Joshua chapter 9) If these Gibeonites had not first misrepresented themselves causing the Israelites to make a pact with them reinforced by an oath, Joshua would not have punished them by denying them all the rights that normal converts are entitled to. Under the unusual circumstances at that time Joshua saw himself forced to apply what is written in 20,11. 
   Some commentators interpret the line והיה אם שלום תענך, as applying only at the time when the offer is first made. If the offer is not accepted immediately, there is no second opportunity to save one’s life by means of converting to Judaism, so that Joshua would have acted illegally by granting them a second opportunity, and he should not have accepted them. [The fact is that there were bloody repercussions later on both in the time of King Sha-ul and King David. (Compare <i>Bamidbar Rabbah, 8</i>)
   20,18. למען אשר לא ילמדו אתכם לעשות, וגו', “so that they will not teach you to act, etc.” so that they will not teach you how to worship <i>Hashem</i> by burning your children in His honour, as they do to their respective deities. Actually, the Torah had already warned the people not to allow these former inhabitants of the land of Canaan to remain in their land, as <i>Hashem</i> was afraid they would lead the Israelites to sin by adopting part of the religious mores that had prevailed in that land. (Exodus 23,33) This was part of the prohibition not to enter into any pact or alliance with those people, because, if they felt secure, they would remain behind in large numbers. Moses reinforces that original command by adding that the Israelites must not allow any of those former inhabitants of the land of Canaan to survive, without ifs or buts. Even individuals allowed to survive pose a spiritual danger to his environment. Observing such a person performing his cult arouses curiosity among the onlookers.
   20,19. כי האדם עץ השדה, “is then the tree of the field a man?” Ibn Ezra claiming that there is no need to add additional letters to make this verse intelligible, writes that the life of man can be compared to that of a tree in the field, therefore you must not destroy the fruit-bearing trees. The words: ואותו לא תכרותו, “you shall not cut it down,” belong together with the words לבא מפניך במצור, “that it should enter the siege before you.” Phrased differently, “seeing that the fruit-bearing tree is a lifeline for man how could you consider destroying it?”
   Nachmanides writes that according to the approach of our sages (<i>Baba Kamma</i> 91) it is permissible to destroy such trees during the siege and to use the timber to erect structures to enable the troops to bring the war to a speedy end. As to the meaning of the subsequent line that only trees that are not fruit-bearing may be cut down, the meaning is that if you have the choice to cut down fruit-bearing trees, or others that you know not to be of the fruit-baring variety, you must first cut down the trees that cannot furnish fruit. Fruit bearing trees are not to be cut down when such cutting down is not performed in order to fulfill a commandment of the Torah. The reason for this entire legislation, and specifically for its being mentioned at this point, is, that in war soldiers are in the habit of wreaking havoc all over, without regard to the ecological damage they cause by doing so. The Torah, therefore, goes on record that even in war, one must be concerned with what will be needed after the war has ended. The Jewish soldier, fighting a just war, must have confidence in G’d’s help so that he does not have to resort to wholesale destruction.
   20,20. אותו תשחית וכרת, “it you may destroy by cutting it down.” You are free to cut down such a tree without restriction whether in order to build platforms to shoot arrows from, or for whatever reasons, such as to build a fire at night to keep warm.
   21,4.אל נחל איתן, “to a harsh valley.” Our translation is based on <i>Rashi,</i> who translates the word איתן as קשה, hard, tough, unyielding.
   Nachmanides writes that our sages say that the word signifies that this piece of earth may henceforth never be sown or ploughed to grow anything thereon. If so, the Torah here reveals a new negative commandment that a person using such earth agriculturally would have transgressed by doing so. (<i>Sotah 46</i>)
   21,5. ונגשו הכהנים, “The priests will draw near, etc.” they do so in order to intone the prayer asking for atonement, written down in verse 8. The meaning of the whole verse is as follows: the priests, and all the elders of the nation, as well as all the people residing within a narrow radius from where this murder had occurred, will wash their hands and intone the prescribed formula, i.e. some of the assembled will wash the hands of the others.
   Concerning the procedure of killing that heifer, Ibn Ezra writes that G’d imposed the duty to perform these rites on the city closest to where the murdered person had been found, for if people in that city had been free from all other sins as well, G’d would not have embarrassed them by a murder having been committed in their vicinity.
   Maimonides writes in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim 3,40</i> that the reason for the procedure is to assist in apprehending the killer, who most likely resides in that vicinity. The publicity that the killing of the heifer in such circumstances attracts, as well as the fact that the reputation of the city near which it occurs suffers a decline of its good image, is hoped to involve more people in the active search for the perpetrator of this crime. Anyone who can make a contribution to finding out who the guilty party was will be liable to do so. Once the guilty party has been found out and located and convicted of whatever penalty is appropriate, exile or death, this will serve as a deterrent to others who had planned to commit a similar crime. The event will long be remembered as the piece of earth on which the heifer has been killed is no longer allowed to be farmed and people will want to know the reason why this is so.
   Nachmanides writes that while it is true that the procedure prescribed by the Torah will help to find this murderer and will possibly frighten off future murderers, but what did it do to reconcile G’d with the fact that innocent blood was spilled in the Holy Land? In order to achieve maximum effect this procedure should have been performed on a field that is under cultivation, not one that had never been under cultivation, and therefore is not often visited by people. Nachmanides therefore feels that this procedure has more in common with that of the scapegoat and the burning of the red heifer for the sake of getting its ash, which when mixed with spring water, purifies people who had become ritually impure through contact with a dead body or being under the same roof with such a body. These three procedures have one thing in common; neither one of them is performed on sacred ground. They therefore fall under the heading of חוק, decree, legislation the reason for which G’d has not seen fit to share with us.
   21,8. אשר פדית, “whom You have redeemed.” This is a reference to the Exodus from Egypt. The reminder of this event may be in place, Moses reassuring the people that just as G’d had redeemed them from Egypt, although they had been burdened with many sins, so He will, in His loving kindness, forgive them for any negligence on their part which might have facilitated this foul deed by a person unknown.
   21,9. ואתה תבער הדם הנקי, “You are to remove innocent blood;” Ibn Ezra adds the word עונש, “guilt,” which Moses did nor spell out here. Such guilt existed as in the Holy Land, especially, innocent blood is not to be shed, G’d does not tolerate this for long. By participating in the procedure of <i>eglah arufah</i> one fulfils a positive commandment wiping out the guilt of murder.
   Parshat Ki Teytze
   21,10. כי תצא למלחמה, “When you will go out to war;” according to the plain meaning of the text, Moses advises the people that instead of waiting till the enemy invades their land that they should pre-empt him and meet him beyond their borders to avoid part of their land becoming destroyed.
   21,11. אשת יפת תואר, “a woman of beautiful form;” the Torah mentions an example that is likely, but an ugly woman is subject to the same legislation.
   Ibn Ezra understands the term יפת תואר as a subjective term, i.e. she looks attractive in that particular soldier’s eyes. The term יפת תואר, accordingly, refers to וראית i.e. what this particular soldier saw.
   @וחשקת בה, “and you desire her;” the reason why the Torah adds these words is that the Torah’s concession for this soldier to marry such a woman is premised on the fact that he is unable to withstand the urge to marry her. If he only wants to indulge his libido and does not want to marry her, the following rules do not apply, and he must control himself.
   21,12. וגלחה את ראשה, “he shall shave her head.” This may cool his ardor if he had been especially attracted by her hair. Other commentators consider this a ritual similar to the purification rites performed by someone purifying himself from the <i>tzoraat</i> disease when all body hair must be removed as part of the process. (Leviticus 14,8)
   21,13. ובכגתה, “she shall weep, etc.;” all this is designed to cool her suitor’s ardor and make her look physically unattractive.
   Nachmanides writes that all the regulations listed in our paragraph stem from the fact that she undergoes a reluctant conversion on her part. It is quite possible that the local religious authorities forced her to undergo ritual immersion, and that the period of thirty days before the marriage and true conversion can be performed give her time to become reconciled to her new situation.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the Torah granted her all this time to mourn properly for her parents, who may be presumed to have died during the war. Alternatively, she weeps in mourning for her parents who because they did not convert are no longer considered her kin.
   Maimonides writes in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim</i> section 3, chapter 41 that the Torah decrees the weeping as an emotional outlet for her enforced situation. It is a psychologically recognized fact that an extended period of weeping brings about a catharsis enabling her to come to terms with unwelcome new facts of life. During that month she is not required to address the duties that her marriage now imposes on her <i>vis a vis</i> her husband.
   Personally, (Nachmanides writing) the weeping has nothing to do with the Torah expressing compassion for this woman, but it provides a period during which she shall be weaned form the idolatrous practices and convictions that she grew up with. She must learn to refrain from using the names of her deities in her daily conversation, etc., as our sages have said in connection with <i>mamzerim,</i> bastards, as it is most unseemly for even a “husband” to engage in sexual relations with his wife when she is forced to submit to this, or when she is in a state of mourning That time is set aside for her to come to terms with the loss she has experienced. This period of thirty days enables her to make the emotional transition, to adjust to her new husband, who has presumably saved her life by taking her under his protection during that war that preceded these various rites. This is why the Torah describes what follows as her new husband sleeping with her as an act of marrying her, and bringing her into his house. If she wanted to convert sooner and dissociate herself from her past completely, she is at liberty to do so.
   @ואחר כן תבא אליה ובעלתה, “and after this period has elapsed you may come to her and sleep with her.” Nachmanides writes that the plain meaning of this verse is that her “husband, captor,” had been forbidden to have marital relations with her until all the procedures listed have been completed. Although with natural born Jewish women a binding marriage ceremony can be by means of a written contract or by the woman excepting some money or equivalent, according to <i>Sifri</i> these methods do not apply in the case of a prisoner of war of pagan background. Even sexual intercourse for a purpose other than to seal a marriage contract would not achieve this, as she was a gentile, and there is no such thing as marriage to gentiles, seeing the wedding includes a sacred, holy element, something that as long as she is not Jewish, this woman could not be capable of. The Torah had consented to the soldier sleeping with a prisoner with whom he was infatuated, but that does not make her his wife, not even to the exclusion of other suitors. Once she has converted, however, she is subject to Jewish law in all respects, and marital infidelity, for instance would be punishable by strangulation.
   21,14. ושלחתה לנפשה, “you will send her away on her own, etc.” Nachmanides views this instruction as indicating that the husband does not have to give that woman a formal decree of divorce. This is why the Torah has to warn him not to sell her as a slave, nor treat her as one treats a maidservant. As long as she is his wife she enjoys all the privileges a wife is entitled to. If he has started to hate her, he must release her to fend on her own as if he had raped her, [the victim of a rape cannot be forced to live with her rapist unless she consents as his wife, who is then protected by her husband not being allowed to divorce her, ever. Deut. 22. 28-29 Ed.]
   It is possible that the message of this verse is that if, when this captor sleeps with this woman as an expression of his wanting to marry her, all well and good. However, if he sleeps with her without commitment and she is no longer desirable for him, he must release her unconditionally. Her future relationship to her captor depends entirely on the nature of his sleeping with her once this had been permitted according to Torah law. If the relationship turns sour after she had become his wife, she is entitled to a decree of divorce just like any married woman.
   @לא תתעמר בה, “you must not enslave her;” Nachmanides writes, referring to Onkelos on 24,7 where he understands the letter ו in the word ומכרו as ”and,” not ”or,” that the term תתעמר does not mean that the former husband now keeps her in his household as a slave, but that he sells her in the slave market for money, treats her as chattel.
   Our sages (<i>Sifri</i> on 24<i>,7</i>) state that selling is not culpable until the new owner has made personal use of the newly acquired slave. They see in the word התעמר a reference to ingathering of a harvest, for instance, converting a potential into an actual.
   Nachmanides, personally, feels that the word corres-ponds to its plain meaning, as if it had been written with the letter א instead of ע, as it appears in Psalms 94,4 where it portrays arrogant, haughty conduct that characterizes those that not only sin but boast about it. Nachmanides quotes instances when the letters א and ע are used interchangeably.
   21,15. כי תהיין לאיש שתי נשים, האחת אהובה, “When a man has two wives, one of whom he loves, etc.” This does not mean that he actually hates one of his wives, but it is inevitable that when one has two wives that one must love one better that the other, and the other is described as the one that “he hates.” Each of the two wives (in any marriage) employs devious means including sorcery to become her husband’s favourite.
   21,16. לא יוכל לבכר, “he is not legally able to declare as firstborn, etc.” if the father of the preferred wife declares her son as the firstborn with the privileges the Torah accords the firstborn, although he is in fact not the firstborn, then he has also violated a negative commandment.
   @על פני בן השנואה, הבכור, “ahead of the son of the hated one, the firstborn, etc.” Nachmanides, paying attention to minute grammatical nuances in our verse, concludes from the apparently superfluous words על פני in “the presence of,” that if the true firstborn has already died before his father, i.e. before the question of distributing an estate even became imminent, the father’s dispositions are legally effective, in spite of the general rule that a firstborn is entitled to his share of the inheritance even if he died before his father, if he left behind natural heirs. In every instance where the expression על פני occurs as referring to people, it means “during the lifetime of, etc.” (Compare Genesis 11,28, Numbers 3,4)
   21,18. סורר ומורה, “wayward and rebellious;” Nachmanides points out that there are two culpable deeds here for which punishment is called for. !) Treating one’s parents with disdain, disrespect. 2) He drinks alcohol to excess and he is a glutton, something forbidden to Jews who have been commanded to be a holy nation, not one guilty of debauchery. Even so, neither one of these sins is one that carries a death penalty. This penalty can be justified only because it heads off the likelihood that the son in question when fully adult will become guilty of the death penalty after committing sins which may cost other people’s lives before he is brought to justice.
   Naturally, many people ask how someone can be convicted of the death penalty, or of any penalty for that matter, at a time when is not guilty of an indictable offence. We have a rule that no one is convicted except on the basis of the sins he has carried out, not for the ones he contemplated committing in the future. (Compare <i>Sanhedrin</i> 72) This rule was based on the words באשר הוא שם, which the Torah writes in connection with Ishmael who was about to perish from thirst just out of earshot of his mother Hagar, (Genesis 21,16-21). Ishmael’s survival at the time does not necessarily contradict the principle we quoted, as we do not know of any crime committed by Ishmael afterwards that would have made him guilty of the death penalty. [Who knows if his miraculous survival did not inspire him to observe a lifestyle more in accordance with what he had seen in his father Avraham’s house. Ed.] Although we have a rule that all is under the control of heaven except whether man will be G’d-fearing and observe a lifestyle which reflects this, i.e. he is not interfered with in his decisions by G’d, the wayward son raised under ideal circumstances by parents who both were models of piety, is judged by the Torah, by superhuman psychology, as growing up to be thoroughly depraved. The Torah, [i.e. also his parents who bring him to court, Ed.] are therefore doing him a favour by enabling the court which decrees his execution to preserve such a son’s share in the hereafter for him through his execution at this stage of his life
   21,21. וכל ישראל ישמעו וייראו, “and the whole people of Israel will hear about this execution, and they will become more G’d-fearing.” According to Nachmanides this is the Torah’s way of making clear to the people that G’d’s objective with this legislation is even more aimed at the people on the whole than at the victim, as it is hoped to make the carrying out of this legislation totally unnecessary in the future. Execution of the recalcitrant Torah scholar, זקן ממרא, who may even have been objectively correct in his interpretation of Torah law, is also based on the fact that the authority of legally appointed judges must be respected, even if until the final handing down of the judgment there is freedom to argue the merits of the verdict. Public interest as interpreted by the lawgiver, the Torah, sometimes overrides what we in our limited vision consider the infringement of the right of the individual. Stamping out the roots of religious disputes by nipping such dissent involving civil disobedience in the bud, prevents the forming of schisms and different groups ultimately each upholding a version of the Torah of their own. [Some of the wording is my own, though not the thrust of the message. Ed.]
   21,23. כי קללת אלוקים תלוי. ”for a hanging person is a curse of G’d.” Some sages learn from this verse that all people who were executed by stoning are to have their bodies hung publicly during the balance of the day of their execution. The expression קללת אלוקים does not refer to the act of hanging and displaying the body of the sinner in question, but it refers only to the person who was executed for blaspheming. In practice, this hanging is applied only to the body of the blasphemer who, more than anyone else, had cheapened the whole concept of a human being, whom G’d had created in His image, and he had the unforgivable nerve to curse his Creator. His body, by his own admission then, is not worth treating with the dignity accorded to other dead bodies.
   Nachmanides writes that when viewing the text at its face value, the meaning is that whenever a person commits a sin deserving of the death penalty by public hanging, his corpse will not be hung from a tree as there is no greater curse that can be applied to a human being than to publicly hang him. It is therefore not appropriate that such a stain on human dignity, akin to ritual contamination, should ever be seen in the Holy Land.
   Our sages interpret the words קללת אלוקים as referring to the person executed, saying that the message is that although this person deserves the debasement of being hung, but that seeing that this would reflect negatively on his Creator, the Torah spared him this indignity. They also say that we learn from the words קללת אלוקים that anyone hanging a dead corpse thereby inflicting an indignity on that body, is guilty of transgressing a negative commandment (compare <i>Sanhedrin</i> 15) 
   @ולא תטמא את אדמתך, “so that you do not contaminate your land.” Nachmanides writes that this cannot be the only consideration for having to bring the corpse of the judicially executed sinner to burial before nightfall, as if it were, it would be permissible to let such a corpse remain unburied overnight in the Diaspora. The true interpretation is that it is forbidden to leave a corpse unburied [or untended Ed.] overnight, whereas when this happens in the Holy Land one transgresses an additional commandment by doing so.
   22,1. לא תראה את שור אחיך, “You shall not see (without helping) the ox of your brother, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this verse is necessary, seeing that elsewhere the Torah had written that: “you must restore the ox or donkey of your enemy when it is lost, you must restore it to him.” (Exodus 23,4) Moses now adds the expression נדחים, a different kind of dilemma that these animals find themselves in. You could have thought by reading Exodus 23,4 that all you have to do is point the erring animal in the right direction towards its owner. Here Moses goes beyond this, demanding that you ensure that the animal gets back safely to its master. This may, on occasion, involve far more time and effort on your part.
   22,2. ואם לא קרוב אחיך אליך, “And if your brother is not near you, etc.” you are to keep his belongings safe by bringing them to your own house.
   22,3. וכן תעשה לחמורו, ...לשמלתו...ולכל אבדת אחיך, “you are to deal in a similar manner with an ass, a garment, or any other object your brother has apparently lost.” The Torah lists different categories of possessions, some that need feeding, others that are relatively inexpensive and do not represent a great loss if the loser does not recover them. Our sages also derive from the words עד דרוש אחיך, “until your brother request said object,” that in order to claim such “lost” property the claimant must furnish proof that these objects are really his.
   22,4. לא תראה את חמור אחיך או שורו נופלים בדרך, “You must not idly look on while the donkey or ox of your brother collapse under their load;” Nachmanides writes that here Moses adds an additional dimension to what the Torah had already written in Exodus 23,5 where the animal was described as רובץ תחת משאו, ”lying down (impotently) under its load” (overload). Whereas in Exodus only a donkey, an animal that is used to carry heavy loads is mentioned, and the owner is your enemy, so that the Torah’s concern appears to be only the suffering of the beast, here Moses speaks about אחיך, “your brother,” to show that another consideration for offering assistance must be the desire to keep alive the concept that all Jews are to relate to fellow Jews as if they were brothers. The hate relationship must be set aside when even only an animal’s suffering is involved.
   22,6. לא תקח האם על הבנים, “do not take the mother bird with the young birds.” Nachmanides writes that the rationale behind this commandment is the same as the one behind the prohibition to slaughter both a calf and its mother on the same day. The purpose of the legislation in both instances is to ensure that our hearts will not become insensitive to animal’s feelings, as once they have become such, the next step is insensitivity to our fellow humans’ feelings.
   Alternately, the legislation is a reminder by the Torah that we must not do something, which, if duplicated many times would lead to the extinction of the species in question.
   Maimonides in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim</i> section 3,48 writes that the reason for both the above-mentioned pieces of legislation is to avoid a mother animal watch its young being slaughtered before its own eyes, as the sensitivity to such a happening is as great among animals as it is among humans. Nachmanides, questioning Maimonides’ approach, writes that if it were correct the legislation of לא תשחטו אותו ואת בנו, “do not slaughter mother animal and its young,” should apply only when the younger animal is slaughtered first. Once the mother animal has been slaughtered there is no reason not to proceed with the slaughter of its young. <i>Halachah</i> forbids the slaughtering of both generations on the same day regardless of the order in which these animals are slaughtered. [Compare Maimonides’ own ruling in chapter 12 of <i>hilchot shechitah</i>, that if someone first slaughters the cow, and then two of her calves on the same day, he has committed 2 transgressions and is punished separately for each. Ed.] It is therefore more likely that the point of these two items of legislation in the Torah is to prevent Jews from becoming cruel.
   22,9. לא תזרע כרמך כלאים, “Do not sow your field (vineyard) with a mixture of grapes and other plants.” The Torah had already written a similar verse where instead of כרמך, the word שדך, “your field,” a more inclusive term had been used. (Leviticus 19,19) Basically, what is new and additional here is what follows, i.e.
   @פן תקדש, “lest it become forbidden (like sacred products, to non priests). It would not only be forbidden to eat, but also for any secondary form of enjoyment, selling it, using its wood to make fires, etc. The expression פן, just as in other instances whenever it appears, is a word “forbidding something on pain of.” 
   It is also possible that the meaning is as in פן ינכרו צרימו, in Deut. 32,27 where it means lest its oppressor misunderstand, i.e. In our verse the meaning is: “lest not only the one crop but also the second crop would be forbidden at different stages of their respective growth processes and you would err in knowing when the product becomes forbidden.” [This interpretation presumes that the farmer, keeping in mind that the grapes will mature much later than the other crop of, say barley, thinks that there is really no mingling going on at all. Ed.]
   22,11. לא תלבש שעטנז, “you must not dress in a mixture of wool and linen threads.” Moses explains in this verse that this prohibition applies only to mixing wool and linen fibers. He mentions the word לבש to wear, to indicate that only when such mixtures are worn as a single garment is this probation applicable. Wearing a linen shirt and a woolen suit is perfectly in order. Also, even if such a mixture is used, say protectively, but not in the manner one wears clothing, one has not transgressed this commandment.
   22,14. כי יקח איש אשה, “When a man marries a wife, etc.” According to Nachmanides the expression כי יקח here does not refer to the final stage of the wedding, but the initial stage, the betrothal, such a when the man hands the woman a piece of jewelry or other trinket and she accepts it as a promise of marriage. Consummation of the marriage was usually delayed by 12 months. When that has occurred, the groom claims that she had not been a virgin at that point. He intends to cause her loss of her life as he claims that at the time of her betrothal she had still been a virgin, becomes guilty of death by stoning, for if she had lost her virginity prior to becoming betrothed she would not be culpable at all. The Torah here hints strongly how it disapproves of a girl losing her virginity voluntarily before her betrothal by writing (verse 21) כי עשתה נבלה בישראל לזנות בית אביה “that (at any rate, even if completely unattached) it would be an outrage if she demeaned herself while still in the home of her parents.” In Biblical usage, a girl, woman who was unattached at the time when she engaged in sexual intercourse is not considered a זונה, harlot.
   22,15. ולקח אבי הנערה ואמה, “then the father and the mother of the girl will take (proof).” Nachmanides points out that at this stage both her father and her mother are mentioned as standing up publicly in defense of their daughter, although only her father speaks up in her defense. When submitting their evidence to the elders, father and mother are both involved. The reason why only the father voices his opinions in the forum of the elders is that seeing the indemnification for having slandered his daughter is payable to him, it is he who must submit the claim. On the other hand, all matters connected to שמלה, in this instance a simile for bedclothes, are a woman’s business, a mother’s concern. They are the experts capable of judging what colour blood originates in which part of the body. Normally, the sensitivity of the matter would have required that only the mother concern herself with this, but, seeing that the father had stated that he, as a father, had given this daughter to the man who now has slandered her reputation, and by inference the father’s inability to have brought up his daughter properly, he is invited by the Torah to be present throughout the proceedings.
   22,17. ופרשו השמלה, ”they will spread out the sheet, etc.” This verse needs to be understood as a simile, i.e. just as a sheet bears clear testimony to what went on while people slept on it, so the facts of the case are made crystal clear by the presentation of the accused girl’s parents. Nachmanides adds that this interpretation is appropriate according to the sages who claim that the slanderer will be found guilty even though he had not even had marital relations with his bride. According to the sage who holds that the slanderer cannot be convicted unless both parties agree that the marriage had been consummated, the verse has to be understood at its face value, i.e. that the שמלה our verse speaks of is the sheet on which the young couple consummated their marriage.
   22,19.וענשו אותו מאה כסף, “they will fine him one hundred pieces of silver;” Nachmanides writes that since it had been the accepted custom to pay a dowry of 50 pieces of silver when marrying a virgin to the father of the bride, or to her if she was of age, and this “groom” wanted to cheat the father out of that amount, the Torah imposes the kind of penalty that reflects the one paid by a thief, i.e. double the amount stolen.
   22,22. ומתו גם שניהם, and they will both die. <i>Rashi</i> explains that the apparently superfluous word גם, “also,” refers to unborn children that these people could have looked forward to having had they remained alive.
   Nachmanides writes that he does not understand <i>Rashi’s</i> comment [As his comments appear to be based on an erroneous text in a <i>Rashi</i> manuscript, and resolving it is lengthy, I’ll skip this. Ed.]
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the word גם is not superfluous, but it refers to two separate instances of grossly sinful behaviour, 1) the slanderer in verses 14-20 as well as 2) the seducer in our verse here. According to <i>Sifri</i> the additional dimension derived here is based on the superfluous words האיש השוכב and והאשה, indicating that sometimes only one of the participating parties are executed, such as when one of the parties was a minor. Even though the minor may have been the one that initiated the sin, only the adult pays the penalty. 
   22,24. על דבר שלא צעקה בעיר, “because she did not even cry out in the city;” Nachmanides writes that the example quoted here by the Torah is the scenario that usually occurs. Normally, when the girl about to be raped cries out, there will be someone in the city that responds to her outcry. Failure to cry out may therefore be interpreted as consent by her. Similarly, seeing that there is only a remote chance that one’s outcry is heard in the field, her failure to cry for help does not incriminate her. If it can be proven that there were people passing by in the field while all this was taking place, she is considered as having consented because she had not tried to attract attention. If the woman did not know how to attract attention by crying out, but she is found weeping bitterly, this is also considered a behaviour that exonerates her from being labeled a harlot. Alternately, any attempt on her part to escape her attacker by struggling with him in silence also is interpreted as conduct that exonerates her.
   @על דבר אשר ענה את אשת רעהו, “for his having raped the wife of his fellow;” Nachmanides writes that although, generally, the expression עינוי, affliction, is used only when actual rape takes place, as in Genesis 34,2 with Dinah daughter of Yaakov, whereas here the woman in question was a willing partner in the act, why else would the Torah declare her guilty? However the situation described here is one where the man in question has been seen taking hold of her, and was lying down with her and she made no attempt to be rescued or to rescue herself; she is guilty while the man, at the same time, is considered as having raped her, since he initiated the crime without her consent being expressed, and he had made no attempt to seduce her, i.e. to secure her freely given consent.
   23,3. ממזר, “bastard,” according to Nachmanides the term is derived from מוזר, something or somebody strange, not fitting into an accepted mould and therefore excluded, rejected. When a man fathers the child of his father’s wife, he is so ashamed that he will not acknowledge the child, will shun it, ostracise it; he will try to minimize his own shame by not being associated with the product of his unbridled lust. Similarly, the mother of such a child will try and rid herself of it in the dark of the night. The child will wind up being a “foundling.”
   23,5. על דבר אשר לא קדמו אתכם, “on account of their not having greeted you, etc.;” the last few words refer to the nation Ammon.
   @ואשר שכר עליך וגו., “and because it hired against you, etc.” a reference to the people of Moav who hired Bileam to curse the Israelites. On the other hand, the Moabites, as distinct from their cousins the Ammonites, did offer food and drink to the Israelites as we know from Moses’ own testimony in Deut. 2,28 אכל בכסף תשבירני כאשר עשו בני עשו ..והמואבים, “sell me food against payment in cash, as the Edomites and the Moabites have done for me.” I have explained this whole scenario on Deut. 2,29.
   23,7. לא תדרוש שלומם, “do not seek their peace, etc.” The choice of the word דורש in above verse, is understood by <i>Sifri</i> as based on Deut. 20,10 where prior to attacking a city the Israelite commander in chief makes peaceful overtures in order to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. On the face of it, I might have thought that what is written in our verse refers also to the nations of Ammon and Moav; the Torah therefore adds, that we must not actively promote those nations’ welfare though we are forbidden to provoke war with them or to harass them. What then is the message of our verse? If, per chance, Israel has occasion to go to war against a city that had been conquered by the Ammonites or Moabites, who themselves had no business to expand their borders, the presence of the Ammonites and Moabites does not need to deter us from invading such a town forthwith, without peaceful overtures beforehand. Not only that; if either of these nations conducts war against us by invading the land of Israel, we are at liberty not only to drive them out, but to pursue them and annihilate their armies on foreign soil. We may even conquer lands that they have occupied for long periods. Basically, this is what Yiftach did in Judges, chapter 11. It is permitted in such situations to kill also the women and children of the invading enemy even if it is Ammon or Moav.
   Looking at it from the plain meaning of the text when read without looking for deeper meanings, Moses stresses that although both the Moabites and the Ammonites, being descendants of Lot, Avraham’s nephew, are “family” in a manner of speaking, we are not to promote their welfare as they have forfeited any special claims upon us, not having acted as blood relations should. They have long ago severed the bond with Avraham’s heirs and have broken faith with Avraham who had been responsible for their survival more than once.
   In fact, <i>Hashem</i> had treated them with especial concern because they were related to Avraham, and the latter had even risked his life for Lot, rescuing him from the four mightiest kings on earth at that time. He did this in recognition that at one time, Lot, by joining Avraham in emigrating to a strange country, Canaan, had behaved properly and had even not revealed to Pharaoh that Sarah was in fact Avraham’s wife and not his sister. Nonetheless, they had long spent the reward that they had received for that. Similarly, there had been a time when the Egyptians had welcomed Yaakov and his family and had treated them very generously. Nonetheless, the merit they had acquired at that time, at no real cost to themselves seeing that Joseph had saved them from the famine, they had long ago frittered away when they turned on the Israelites with unmatched cruelty only because the Israelites had dared to have large families. This is why, if Egyptians wanted to convert to Judaism and join our nation, three generations had to pass before they could become fully equal members of the Jewish people. Similar restrictions apply to descendants from Esau/Edom. In spite of all our suffering at the hands of these people and their hatred for us, the Torah does not permit us to reject them and to treat them as an abomination. [After all, their descendants did not harm us, they were not even born at that time. Ed.]
   23,10. ונשמרת מכל דבר רע, “you shall be on guard against anything evil.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this line as a warning that Satan works “overtime” whenever the Israelites find themselves in danger, so that even minor misdemeanours will be exploited by him as the perennial prosecutor of the Jews at the throne of <i>Hashem</i>.
   Nachmanides writes that in his eyes the true explanation of this line at this particular juncture is that when at war due to the difficult conditions, one tends to become less stringent in one’s ritual observances. Moses therefore warns the people that at that time more than at any other, because one’s life is in danger and one depends on <i>Hashem’s</i> special protection, one must be careful not to become lax in one’s Torah observance.
   From the vantage point of the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, Moses warns someone who experienced a seminal emission to leave the boundaries of the camp (the subject discussed in the verses following), the reason being that seeing G’d is present in the camp, it is not befitting that someone who is ritually contaminated share that domain with the presence of G’d until he has purified himself. Consciousness of His presence in order to ensure our success in war, will also make the soldier concerned reflect that in the last analysis it is not his prowess as a soldier that ensures success but the help we receive from above. Similar considerations also made our sages decree that a synagogue, or even a private place where prayers are offered must be at least 4 cubits (2.5 meters) removed from a toilet or other place where garbage is dumped. The reason why the Torah decrees that excrement must be covered, although it is not ritually contaminating, is that if visible to the person offering up prayers to his Creator, it will distract from his concentration. Seeing that prayer, unless offered when the heart is “in gear,” is not only ineffective but almost insulting to <i>Hashem,</i> we must take steps to remove from our vision anything that will detract from our concentration. 
   23,16. לא תסגיר עבד לאדוניו, “Do not turn over a slave (who has escaped from his master) to his owner.” According to Nachmanides the reason why this verse is appropriately written at this point, is that that during the confusion which reigns during a siege or battle, many slaves use the opportunity to escape from their masters. A soldier who leaves his own camp in order to relieve himself, is liable to encounter such fleeing slaves in the no-man’s land where he answers a call of a nature. The Torah, especially has in mind, that the soldier in question not turn over the escaping slave by collecting a fee for this from his master, and thereby engage in slave-trading.
   @עמך ישב במקום אשר יבחר, “he shall dwell with you in a location of his choice;” it is a positive commandment that this slave live as a free human being. The reason why this law has been given, and especially has been mentioned at this point, is that the former slave is to be encouraged to join us Jews in serving <i>Hashem,</i> instead of our turning him over to his former master and thereby increasing the number of pagans serving idols. Furthermore, by turning him over to his former master, there is a chance that this slave has become privy to information that might help the enemy to invade our country or to infiltrate the encampment of the Israelite army. History is full of stories of such “slaves” having been used as spies by their masters.
   Our sages interpret this verse as applying primarily to a Canaanite slave who has fled his master seeking refuge within Israel. Even though, basically, the Torah decreed that we must kill these people, here where the initiative comes from the Canaanite who is aware that he will likely be treated far more humanely by Jews, the Torah encourages us to bring him closer to <i>Hashem</i> by allowing him to embrace Judaism.
   23,18. לא תהיה קדשה מבני ישראל, “There shall not be a promiscuous woman among the daughters of Israel.” <i>Rashi</i> interprets the reason for Moses choosing the word קדשה, related to קדוש, holy, for such a woman as being that among the Israelites there must not be people who dedicate, “sanctify” their lives by practicing promiscuity. 
   @ולא יהיה קדש, “neither shall their be a male dedicating his life to promiscuity, making sexuality his aim in life.” This is a warning against practicing homosexuality. Nachmanides writes that if that were so, i.e. forbidding public promiscuity as a negative commandment were meant to apply only to married women who had sinned by indulging in illicit sex, not to devote their lives to harlotry, one would conclude that an unmarried woman indulging in such activity in the privacy of her home had not transgressed the commandment legislated in verse 18. One would arrive at a similar conclusion concerning the males of whom the Torah speaks in verse 19. He cannot understand what made <i>Rashi</i> use the expression מזומן, dedicated to, oriented in that direction, seeing that even an occasional indulgence in homosexual relations is punishable by the harsh penalty <i>karet</i> or execution, as we know from Leviticus 20,13. Furthermore, turning to the text itself, why does the Torah (Moses) not write: “there shall not be amongst you, etc.,” and writes instead בבנות ישראל, “among the daughters of Israel.”
   Nachmanides continues writing that in view of the points he raised he believes that the entire legislation in these two verses is addressed to the court dealing with such offenders. The courts must not allow any Jewish woman/girl to publicly offer her services as a prostitute, or for such a person to rent or own a dwelling devoted to the pursuit of such activities. The court is similarly warned to enforce parallel legislation making it difficult for males to do something similar.
   Looking at the plain meaning of the text, the Torah appears to prohibit even normal sexual relations between a man and a woman married to one another if such activity takes place in a house that is known to serve as a brothel. The court must see to it that women offering their services as sex objects are apprehended and prevented from doing so in public.
   23,19. לא תביא אתנן זונה ...בית ה', “You must not bring to the Temple the proceeds from your activity as a harlot.” Nachmanides writes that these harlots would use some of the gifts they received from their customers to make donations and offer sacrifices in the Temple, to expiate for the wrongs they had done. The Torah legislates, while it cannot prevent such harlots to use some of their ill gotten gains to give charity with such money, that such proceeds from sinful activities cannot be accepted as something sacred. [In our parlance, this would be an early example of money laundering. Ed.] Instead of cleansing themselves from sin, they would sink deeper into the moral morass that they were already in.
   The Torah legislates something similar concerning the proceeds from selling a dog. The Torah singles out dogs seeing that people who hunt by using dogs, or people training dogs to attack potential intruders, contribute to many innocent people being harmed by such dogs. Nachmanides also quotes instances from his own experience in which people hang the images of dogs near the idols that they worship, so that a dog, in many cultures, is identified with something idolatrous. The proceeds from the sale of such dogs are equally unwelcome in the Temple.
   @גם שניהם, “both of them.” Seeing that the first example, the price paid for a harlot’s services, or the animal paid is a greater abomination than the proceeds of the sale of the dog, Moses wants to make sure that we do not consider the latter as in a completely different class, i.e. as a far less offensive sin. Alternatively, seeing that up until now the Torah had disqualified potential use of certain animals as sacrificial offerings forbidden only if the animal had certain physical blemishes, here we hear for the first time that the animal may have a moral blemish due to the lifestyle of its owner. In the case of animals having a physical blemish the Torah had introduced the legislation with the words: לא תזבח לה' אלוקיך שור או שה..אשר יהיה בו מום וגו', “you shall not slaughter for the Lord your G’d an ox or lamb that has a blemish, etc.” (Deut 17,1) The reason given is that such a blemish is considered an abomination. Here too, the reason given for the legislation is that it would be considered an abomination to offer an animal to <i>Hashem</i> that was acquired in payment for committing a sin.
   23,20. לא תשיך, ”do not let the lender, your brother, take interest.” We have been taught already (Leviticus 25,36-37) that we must not lend money at interest to fellow Jews, but here Moses warns the borrower not to allow his brother, the Jew to become guilty by accepting such interest from him. This is a dimension not found in other aspects dealing with laws involving money, etc. The Torah, ordinarily, does not use preventive legislation to stop people from causing themselves financial harm. Seeing, however, that the incidence of paying and accepting interest on loans is so widespread, the Torah made an exception in this instance. It went further in the definition of what is interest, writing:
   @נשך כסף, נשך אוכל, וגו', “regardless of whether such interest consists of actual money, or its equivalent such as food, etc.” The Torah is at pains to warn us that the concept of “interest” is not limited to the payment of cash, but includes any consideration that normally would not have been shown by the borrower to the lender had he not been in a position of owing money to the lender. Charging interest is not by itself something reprehensible, as one receives a compensation for services rendered. However, charging interest to a fellow Jew is denying that he is family, is one’s brother, and that is why the Torah keeps stressing the element אחיך, “who is your brother.” The Torah stresses that charging or paying interest when dealing with a gentile is in order, to tell us that this is a normal commercial transaction. It is not even remotely related to stealing or robbing, as it is freely given.
   @כל דבר אשר ישך, “anything that he may take as interest.” This includes any kinds of vessels, and other items that most people would never consider as representing interest when someone gives it to them. The Torah added these words to make sure we would not think that unless paid in hard cash it does not fall under the heading of “interest.” Cash, after all, is only a means to acquiring items that we need or want to possess. Hence it is not the actual cash that is the interest, but what this cash enables you to do with it.
   23,21. למען יברכך ה' אלוקיך, “in order that the Lord your G’d will bless you;” by doing a deed of loving kindness with one’s brother, such as helping him with an interest-free loan, one acquires the merit that qualifies one to receive a special blessing by <i>Hashem.</i> It is considered צדקה, i.e. the same as if one had actually handed over money as alms, as a contribution to a charitable institution. Foregoing repayment of overdue loans at the end of the last year of the <i>sh’mittah</i> cycle is also an act of charity a requirement that only applies to one’s fellow Jew, because he is to be treated as one’s brother. This is why Moses follows this legislation up with the specific permission, or even commandment, according to many authorities, to charge interest on loans to gentiles, and, of course, permission to pay interest if we need to get a loan from gentiles. It is interesting that the Torah promises special blessings from <i>Hashem</i> only in connection with abstaining from charging interest, not when refraining from stealing, robbing, or overcharging unwary customers.
   23,23. וכי תחדל לנדור, “And when you refrain from making gifts in the form of a vow,” you would, in the first place, only phrase a gift you want to make (mostly to the Temple treasury) in the form of a vow, as the vow reminds you not to tarry with discharging the duties you imposed upon yourself. Seeing that your intention in making such a vow was honourable, laudatory, if you are prevented by circumstances beyond your control to keep to the terms of your vow, the Torah tells you that this will not be held against you. 
   However, if you simply refrain from honouring a vow made, without the excuse that circumstances beyond your control had prevented you from honouring it, or honouring it on time, then you have violated the law that whatever you undertake, be it in the form of a vow or a simple statement, you are obligated by the Torah to keep such undertakings. The Torah views such commitments as not only undertakings to your fellow, but as undertakings toward <i>Hashem.</i> In light of all that has been said, the Torah counsels that you would be better off if you were not to make a vow at all.
   24,4. אחרי אשר הוטמאה, “seeing she had already become defiled;” <i>Rashi</i> understands this verse as also applying to the <i>Sotah,</i> the wife suspected by her husband of marital infidelity. He means a woman whose infidelity had not been proven, but whose conduct by secluding herself with a man other than her husband, had led to such suspicions. As long as her infidelity had not been proven she would not be forbidden to her husband. The critical word here is הוטמאה, that her infidelity had been proven.
   Nachmanides writes that when looking at the text without seeking hidden meanings, what the verse tells us is that the original husband cannot remarry her, as she had become defiled (not legally) in his eyes, he being aware that she had in the interval been sleeping with another man.
   The rationale behind this legislation is to prevent legalized sleeping around by husbands, each divorcing their wives in order to enable “wife swapping” to become a legalized habit. The divorce would be written in the evening and in the morning the original husband would remarry his erstwhile wife, assuming that she had meanwhile been divorced by her latest “husband.” This is the meaning of the additional words ולא תחטיא את הארץ, “so that you do not bring sin upon the Land.” In the <i>Sifri,</i> these words are understood as having been addressed by Moses to the courts, which are warned not to tolerate such practices if they develop in parts of the society.
   24,5. ולא יעבור עליו לכל דבר, “nor shall he be obligated to anything.” Ibn Ezra understands the letter ל in the word לכל as extraneous. Nachmanides reads together the line לא יצא בצבא ולא יעבור עליו, as meaning that “not only will he not be recruited for duty on the battlefield, but during that year he will not be drafted for auxiliary duties,” such as bringing up the supplies. During that year, the newly wed husband is to devote himself exclusively to making his bride happy.
   24,6. לא יחבול רחים ורכב, “he must not take an upper or lower millstone as a pledge;” the Torah abbreviated, failing to tell us who the subject is. He is the creditor, who after the loan is overdue, wants to secure his loan with some collateral.
   If one wants to view this from an <i>aggadic</i> standpoint, the words as they are fit in with the Torah’s directive for the newly wed husband to devote himself to entertaining his bride; a warning to the groom when performing his marital duties not to behave to his wife as if he were grinding mustard seeds.
   24,7. גונב גפש מאחיו, “kidnapping a person from among his brethren;” The reason why the Torah added the words מבני ישראל, is that Esau, and his descendants are also “brethren,” and would have been included in this legislation unless specifically excluded.
   24,9. זכור את אשר עשה ה' אלוקיך למרים, “keep remembering what the Lord your G’d had done to Miriam, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this as a veiled warning that if we do not want to be struck with the affliction of <i>tzoraat,</i> we must remember how Miriam was punished for badmouthing her brother Moses.
   Nachmanides writes that in his opinion this verse is a positive commandment ranking parallel to the fourth Commandment in the Ten Commandments זכור את יום השבת לקדשו, “keep remembering the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.” There are other such verses, such as to remember the day we left Egypt as a free nation, (Exodus 13,3) or, at the end of this portion, ”remember what Amalek did to you, etc.” (Deut. 25,17) This is the Torah’s way of underlining the grave sin of badmouthing people by adding a positive commandment to the negative commandment. The positive commandment is to constantly remember how even the illustrious Miriam, Moses’ lifesaver in a certain manner, was punished for saying a few words criticizing him unjustly. She had not done so publicly, and yet all her numerous merits did not protect her against being punished, and that punishment being very public, the whole nation having to wait a whole week before they could move on. It is not enough to remember what happened to Miriam only in one’s heart, but we are required to read the relevant verses with our lips to impress the importance of the problem of badmouthing people. In the last verse the Torah warned us to be extremely careful in matters of the affliction called <i>tzoraat,</i> i.e. in that verse we were warned to remember what that affliction is for in our hearts and minds. Now the Torah reinforces this commandment by ordering us to voice the fact that we have committed this lesson to memory. Seeing that in the eyes of our sages the sin of לשון הרע, badmouthing people is equated with the spilling of innocent blood, (compare <i>Erchin</i> 15) it is not surprising therefore that the Torah reinforces it. It is quite inconceivable that such a grievous sin should not have been spelled out in the Torah. We therefore regard what is written in verse 8 and verse 9 as a severe warning not to become guilty of such a sin either in public or even in private. The sin is not lessened if the intent of the criticism was not to harm the good reputation of the party discussed. [Miriam’s criticism was in defense of her sister-in-law Tzipporah whom Moses had divorced for no good cause, as she had thought. Ed.] לשון הרע is part of the roster of the 613 commandments, no less so than not to violate the Sabbath.
   24,12. ואם איש עני הוא, “but if he is a poor man, etc.” Moses calls that man poor, as he has no substitute for the item he had to give the creditor as security. If he had possessed two of the same kind of vessel, he would exchange them for the first one regardless of being poor or wealthy.
   24,14. לא תעשוק שכר עני ואביון, “You must not oppress a poor or destitute hired hand by withholding his wages unduly;” the legislation, of course, also applies to labourers who are comfortably off, but the Torah chooses as its examples the ones most likely as being the victims of such practices. Poor men and proselytes are the ones most likely hiring themselves out. <i>Rashi</i> explains that when advantage is taken of a poor man, then the employer has transgressed two prohibitions, hence the words עני as well as אביון, different degrees of poverty and need.
   24,15. ביומו תתן שכרו, “you are to pay his wages on the day that he performed the labour.” Nachmanides explains that the wording suggests that a labourer who has worked at night must be paid during the following day, whereas a day labourer must be paid before the night is over.
   The plain meaning of the verse is that the wages of a labourer must not remain with the employer overnight, seeing that the Torah usually chooses the most common examples, and most labourers are hired to work by day. The thrust of the verse is to tell the employer to pay the laborer when he goes home in the evening to eat his supper, and not to require him to come back once more in order to collect his wages. If he were a poor man, what would he use to pay for his supper if he had not yet been paid?
   @כי עני הוא, “for he is poor;” most people hiring themselves out for a day at a time are poor, and depend on every penny they have earned with their labour on that day. By trusting that particular employer to pay them on time, they are, metaphorically speaking, entrusting the employer with their lives, as they depend on that prompt payment to satisfy their most basic requirements. He might die from hunger during that night if he had not been paid and become able to buy food with that money.
   25,1. כי יהיה ריב בין אנשים, “if an argument between two men results in their taking their case to the court;” Nachmanides writes, basing himself on a long standing tradition, that the penalty of 39 lashes is administered for deliberate transgressions of negative commandments when no specific penalty has been decreed by the Torah. Why would the Torah expand on this penalty when speaking about a fight between two people, when the same penalty is applied for people who eat meat that has not been slaughtered, or who indulge in a number of other forbidden activities? Furthermore, what law did these two people break when they engaged in a fight? The whole structure of our verse, which speaks about exonerating someone after judgment had been given and labeling the second party as “wicked” is problematic. Why do we need a verse telling us that the person found “justified” be so declared as such by the judges?
   Such considerations prompted our sages to understand the whole paragraph as dealing with a scenario involving a second set of witnesses appearing after initial judgment having been given. This second set of witnesses challenges the witnesses on the basis of whose testimony the guilty party has been convicted by claiming that those witnesses had been with them in a different location at the time the fight was supposed to have occurred, so that they could not have witnessed that fight at all. 
   Normally, in such a case the first set of witnesses would be given the penalty that they had intended to be applied to their victim. (Deut. 19,19) When this is impossible, such as when they claimed that seeing the accused party was the son of a legally forbidden union and could not partake of certain privileges reserved for children of legitimate unions, then the court will impose the penalty of 39 lashes, as it is impossible to change those witnesses’ legal status in the community. The judges, when reversing the conviction, will have to make a public statement that the party originally convicted of the crime in question had in fact been righteous and had remained righteous throughout. According to a homiletic approach the reason why the number of lashes is described as being “40,” (excluding the 40th), is that the guilty party had violated a commandment that Moses had been given during the 40 days he had been on Mt Sinai without food and drink. Moreover, by sinning, the guilty party had condemned himself to death as it takes 40 days in the womb of its mother for the embryo to begin to evolve into a living human being. The 40 lashes are intended to absolve the sinner from further guilt. 
   25,6. והיה הבכור אשר תלד יקום על שם אחיו, “and the firstborn male child whom she will give birth to will replace his deceased brother (the widow’s new husband).” Nachmanides writes that this verse cannot be taken at face value, as there is no requirement to give the newly born the same name as that of his deceased uncle.
   The reason the verse was written in this manner is that <i>Hashem</i> gives His assurance that if the levirate marriage is performed according to law and the lawgiver’s intention, the newly born will become a replacement on earth for his father’s deceased brother.
   25,13. לא יהיה בכיסך אבן ואבן, “You must not have in your pocket two stones purporting to weigh the same but designed to deceive the customer.” Ibn Ezra explains that the word בכיסך is a reference to the pouch in which weights are kept. The word is derived from כסס, and is used in the sense of uniform weights in Proverbs 1,14 כיס אחד יהיה לכולנו, “let us all have a common purse.” It also appears in a slightly different form in Exodus 12,4 where it refers to the number of people arranging to receive equal shares of a Paschal lamb.
   25,17. זכור את אשר עשה לך עמלק, “keep on remembering what Amalek has done to you.”
   Nachmanides writes, quoting our sages (<i>Sifri</i>) on our verse that the word זכור is to be understood as remembering by mouth, i.e. reading the appropriate verses in the Torah, whereas the words לא תשכח, at the end of the paragraph refer to remembering in one’s heart. 
   Nachmanides continues that he does not understand what <i>Sifri</i> has in mind when he says that זכור refers to “remembering” by mouth. If it referred to the reading of the paragraphs in the Torah dealing with Amalek’s attack in a public reading, this is a long established custom on the Sabbath before <i>Purim</i>, (as well as the reading of the actual report in <i>Beshalach</i> which is read on the morning of <i>Purim.</i>)
   He therefore concludes that what is meant is that we (subsequent generations) must not forget what Amalek has done to us until the time comes when the memory of his erstwhile existence has been expunged from history. While Anmalek or his descendants still exist on earth, we must make sure that in educating our children we impress upon them who he was and what he hoped to accomplish, namely the extinction of the Jewish people by any means possible. The same holds true for what happened to Miriam. In spite of the fact that we normally gloss over shortcomings of our righteous forbears, in this case the moral ethical advantage to be derived from remembering that episode outweighs the danger of thereby detracting from Miriam’s many merits. The sin of badmouthing people is such that we must be on our guard against it at all times, and demonstrate by the example of Miriam that even the greatest people are liable to trip up. We, who cannot measure up to such people must therefore be especially on guard against becoming guilty of that sin.
   Parshat Ki Tavo
   26,1-2. והיה כי תבא אל הארץ וגו'...ולקחת מראשית כל פרי האדמה אשר תביא מארצך , “It will be when you enter the Land …..and you will take from the first of every fruit of the ground that you bring in, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that the last paragraph had concluded with the statement that the commandment to wipe out Amalek would not become operative until we were no longer surrounded by and threatened by enemies, the Torah now had to stress that there are commandments which become operative as soon as we had established ourselves on our ancestral heritage in the Land of Israel, formerly the Land of Canaan. Such laws include the bringing of the first ripe fruit to the Temple, observing the laws of tithing, and a host of others.
   Nachmanides explains that the wording of the commandment here indicates that the first ripe fruit is designated as such while still in the field or on the tree it grew on, and that it becomes sacred in accordance with such a designation. The owner then places the fruit in an appropriate container takes it home and keeps it until he makes the next pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
   @והלכת אל המקום, “you will go to the place, etc.” Nachmanides writes that taking the verse at face value, the meaning is that once the Temple has been built we are not to take the <i>bikkurim</i> to any city of our liking. Just as the Torah has legislated in connection with the permission to eat non consecrated meat once the people were settled on their land, that any consecrated animal could be offered up only at a central location, i.e. in the Temple in Jerusalem, [once that city had been captured. Ed.], similarly, the consecrated <i>bikkurim</i> have to be brought to that same central location. [During the first 390 years, that location proved to be <i>Shiloh</i> during most of those years. Ed.]
   In the <i>Sifri</i> we are told that what is meant is <i>Shiloh</i> and the permanent Temple, which may lead one to believe that neither <i>Nov</i> nor<i> Giveon</i> ever served as a place where <i>bikkurim</i> were offered up. In other words, those two towns, though the Tabernacle stood there for a number of years, had not been chosen by G’d especially for that purpose, but were considered <i>ad hoc</i> solutions to the problems of “altars,” במות. Nachmanides does not think that this would be the correct interpretation, but thinks that the words: אשר יבחר וגו', were intended only to prohibit the offering of <i>bikkurim</i> on private altars. On the other hand, the words תביא בית ה' אלוקיך is meant to exclude offering these gifts in a temporary, collapsible, portable structure, such as the Tabernacle. 
   26,3. אל הכהן אשר יהיה בימים ההם, “to the priest who is on duty during the years in question.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the verse as a reminder that only the officially ordained religious authority in each generation is authorized to hand down rulings, -on the basis of Torah laws, of course- and that one must not rely on rulings made at different times in different circumstances. (Compare <i>Rosh Hashanah</i> 25.)
   Nachmanides questions that if the Torah had written that “you shall come to the elder who is the wisest in his time,” this would be easy to understand, as the message would be that seeing that not every generation produces brilliant men, there is no choice but to turn to the relatively most learned man, instead of relying on decisions by sages who had lived in different countries, in different conditions. But, when it comes to performing duties in the Temple, why would the Torah have to mention that the first ripe fruit have to be brought to the priest performing his duties at that time, surely the fruit could not be presented to priests who had already died? If the Torah were speaking of חוקים, statutes, not given to interpretation, a reminder that one must go to the priest of one’s own generation would also make sense, the Torah agreeing that we must abide by the present authority’s decision even if these priests, sages, are known to be less learned than their predecessors. So what is the true meaning of what Moses has said here? It means that they have to be given to the roster of priests on duty at the time when the farmer arrives with his gifts, he cannot wait to hand it over until the roster changes in the week following. Neither is the farmer allowed to bring a local priest from his neighborhood with him to Jerusalem in order to ensure that that particular priest is the recipient of his gifts.
   According to <i>Kiddushin</i> 66, the meaning is that even if it turns out in retrospect that the presiding priest at the time was disqualified from receiving these gifts, as he was the son of a forbidden marriage, the ritual is not declared invalid retroactively.
   26,5. ארמי אובד אבי, “An Aramean tried to destroy my father;” the reference is to Lavan who chased after Yaakov and his family intending to kill them all.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the ארמי described here was Yaakov himself, so that the meaning of the verse would be: “when my forefather Yaakov arrived in Aram he was penniless, on the brink of death.” The word אובד only appears in an intransitive mode, so that it cannot mean that Lavan tries to kill him. Furthermore, the word appears in the context of someone being close to death Proverbs 31,6: תנו שכר לאובד ויין למרי נפש, “give liquor to the one who is about to perish or wine to the embittered.” Verse 7 in that same chapter of Proverbs is proof of that meaning, as Solomon continues with: ישתה וישכח רישו ועמלו לא יזכר עוד, “so that he may forget his poverty, and will no longer remember his suffering.” The meaning of the whole recital by the farmer is: “I did not inherit my wealth from my father who was extremely poor when he came to Aram, and subsequently my forbears were strangers and slaves in Egypt, few in numbers; afterwards my fortunes improved when <i>Hashem</i> redeemed us from slavery and brought us to this wonderful land from the produce of which I bring the first ripe fruit as a symbol of my gratitude.” Do not try to argue that an Israelite cannot be called a “Aramean;” we know both from Samuel II 17,25, and Chronicles I 2,17 that Avraham, Ishmael, who were refugees from Aram at one time are still referred to as Arameans on occasion.
   26,14. לא אכלתי באוני ממנו, “I have not eaten from it while in a state of intense pre-mourning;” Nachmanides comments on this that although the confession applies to all the different kinds of tithes, some of which are secular in terms of religious law, here the words apply only to the kinds of gifts that have a sacred character. Produce that has been labeled מעשר שני or נטע רבעי, the second tithe, or the grapes grown in the fourth year after the vineyard has been planted, do possess such a degree of sanctity, and may not be consumed while in a state of impurity or intense mourning, immediately before the burial of the next of kin.
   @ולא נתתי ממנו למת, “neither did I give from any of it to the dead.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the letter<i> ל</i> in the word למת, as meaning “for,” i.e. to be used to purchase either a coffin or the garments the dead are buried in.
   Nachmanides questions this, as produce having a sacred character such as the ones mentioned, may not be traded to purchase coffins or ordinary clothing for use by the living either. The second tithe may not be redeemed to become secular outside the city of Jerusalem, for instance, except for coin of the realm. The proceeds must be used to purchase food and drink and other items but these are to be consumed inside Jerusalem by the owner and his family.
   Maimonides (<i>Sefer hamitzvot</i> 152) understands the term למת as a simile for something of no benefit to a living human being, the farmer stating that he has spent the proceeds only for items of benefit to the living.
   Some commentators interpret this “confessional” to mean that the farmer has not used the proceeds even to fulfill a commandment such as burying and providing the wherewithal to a dead person who had no family that would assume the burden of burying him in a dignified manner.
   26,15. אשר נתת לנו כאשר נשבעת לאבותינו, “that You have given to us as You had sworn to our forefathers.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this as if the Torah had written: “as You have sworn to our forefathers to give to us, and you thus kept Your promise.” It also includes the acknowledgment that the land in question does indeed flow with milk and honey.
   Nachmanides writes that if we were to accept <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, the words ואת האדמה אשר נתתה לנו ארץ זבת חלב ודבש וקיימת, would mean: “that the land that You have given us is a land flowing with milk and honey, and You kept Your promise.” [<i>Rashi</i> wanted to avoid the impression that the promise of giving us the land was the substance of G’d’s blessing for which the farmer prays in this verse. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra writes that the thrust of the farmer’s prayer is that G’d should bless the land to continue to give its generous yield also in the future, just as it had done up until that year. There is no need for all of these explanations as G’d’s oath included the realization of it, i.e. the giving of the land to the generation G’d had selected for this. He had promised to Moses in Exodus 3,8 that the land of the Canaanites, which would be given to the Jewish people, was at that time a land flowing with milk and honey. [It could hardly have been less, as the Torah had described it in Genesis 13,10 already as comparable to “the garden-like nature of the land of Egypt.” Ed.]
   26,6. היום הזה, “on this day, etc.” Nachmanides writes that this verse completes the review of the Torah by Moses and the revealing by him to the people of commandments not revealed to them thus far. This is why he concludes the verse with the exhortation to the people to observe all the commandments.
   26,17. את ה' האמרת, “You have exalted <i>Hashem,”</i> by accepting the entire Torah in all its details you have exalted <i>Hashem</i> this day; <i>y</i>ou have adopted Him as your exclusive G’d, eschewing all others.
   @וללכת בדרכיו, “and to walk in His ways.” To not only perform His commandments to the letter, but also to model yourself according to what He has revealed about Himself, i.e. to go beyond the letter of the law and to honour the spirit upon which the law has been based.
   @ולשמוע בקולו, “and to hearken to His voice.” Any other matters He will command you through me, even if they are not part of the basic 613 commandments.
   26,18. וה' האמירך היום, “and <i>Hashem</i> on His part has distinguished you today, etc.” Moses tells the new generation that this day on which he concludes the review of the Torah for them is for them as if they themselves had participated in the revelation at Mt Sinai almost 40 years previously. G’d granted them an opportunity to consider themselves as having been present at that time when their parents had become <i>Hashem’s</i> “special” people.
   26,19. ולתתך עליון וגו', “and to make you supreme, etc.;” to set you up as an example that all the other nations praise and wish to emulate. They do so because they realize that you evoke immediate responses when you call upon <i>Hashem</i>. 
   @ולשם, “and for renown,” to enhance your reputation all over the world.
   @ולתפארת, “and for splendour;” you will be able to boast that whatever enterprise you are embarking on will be crowned with success.
   @ולהיותך עם קדוש, “and for you to be a holy nation.” You will have attained the דבקות, close attachment, a state of relationship with your G’d which is the ultimate level of closeness to <i>Hashem</i> that man is capable of attaining. Rabbi Yehudah the Spaniard explains that the word האמרת in verse 17 is derived from the word ויאמר, “he said,” and its meaning in that verse is that you have done what is good in His eyes to such a degree that it is said about you or of you that He is surely your G’d, and He in turn will do for you in accordance with what you say (request) so that you can truly say that you will be His special people.
   27,1. ויצו משה וזקני ישראל, “Moses and the elders commanded the Israelites, etc.;” After Moses had concluded his review of the Torah he commanded the elders to also address the people and to caution them to observe all the commandments of the Torah, because he knew that such a warning would be effective as all the people willingly obeyed their respective elders.
   @שמור את כל המצוה, “Observe the entire commandment, etc.” According to Ibn Ezra the “commandment” referred to here is the one to erect the huge stones upon which, after these stones had been properly whitewashed, a copy of the Torah would be engraved.
   Nachmanides writes that this is not correct, but that Moses referred to the entire Torah as a single “מצוה” at this point.
   @אשר אנכי מצוה אתכם, “which I am commanding you.” Moses did not say: “which we are commanding you,” seeing that basically G’d had addressed Moses, and the function of the elders was to raise their voices so that the whole people could hear what G’d had commanded Moses. Not only that, but the elders by being placed strategically among the people, could secure the people’s attention. A little while later (verse 9) the Torah writes that Moses, as well as the priests and the Levites, addressed the whole of Israel, calling upon them to pay attention, and to make a note of the fact that on that day they had truly become a nation.
   27,3. וכתבת עליהן את כל דברי התורה הזאת, “you shall inscribe upon them all the words of this Torah. Ibn Ezra writes, quoting Rav Saadyah gaon, that the list of the commandments was inscribed on these stones in a manner similar to the well known work <i>halachot g’dolot</i> where these commandments are recorded in the form of warnings of what to do and what not to do. (Babylon, by Rabbi Yehudai ben Sh’muel gaon, 9th century) The words באר היטב, normally understood as in clearly comprehensible language, mean in “clearly legible script”, and do not refer to interpretation.
   Our sages claim that the entire text of the Torah was inscribed on these stones with careful attention given to the crowns on all the letters, and in addition the text was translated and inscribed in 70 languages. (Compare <i>Rashi)</i> Either the stones were exceedingly large, or there was a miracle that enabled the scribes to accomplish this.
   @למען אשר תבא אל הארץ, “so that you may enter the land, etc.” Ibn Ezra understands these words to mean that the publication of the Torah on these stones will help the Israelites to acquire the merit to enter (and take possession of) the land of Canaan, as they have already fulfilled the first commandment tied to living in that land.
   Nachmanides adds, that according to the opinion of Ibn Ezra there is a hint in this commandment to constantly keep in front of our mental eye all the commandments, which in turn ensures that we will keep them and be worthy to keep the land that <i>Hashem</i> is giving us as an inheritance.
   Ibn Ezra further points out that the sons of Yaakov’s major wives stood on Mount Gerizim when the blessings were proclaimed, whereas the tribes descended from the minor wives stood on Mount Eyval, but seeing that there were not enough of them, two of Leah’s sons, the eldest, Reuven, and the youngest Zevulun, joined the sons of the minor wives on Mount Eyval.
   27,20. כי גלה כנף אביו, “for he has uncovered the robe of his father.” Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah did not write ערות אביו (as it usually does) in such verses is out of respect for the father’s dignity. Earlier (Leviticus 20,12) when the Torah wrote ערות אביו the sin committed carried a heavy penalty, administered in many instances by a human court of law. The wording therefore had to reflect the severity of the sin in order to serve as a deterrent. The offending party in our verse is guilty of a lesser sin. Similar considerations prompted the Torah to use the term גלה כנף in 23,1 where the prohibition to marry a woman who had been raped by one’s father, or is one’s stepmother is revealed, the sin is of a lower order than sleeping with one’s mother, who is also the wife of one’s father. 
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why Moses selected the people guilty of the above mentioned eleven sins as deserving public censure, i.e. the people mouthing a curse on anyone guilty of them, is that it is the norm for those sins to be committed in the privacy of one’s home, when there are no witnesses to the deed. The guilty party therefore cannot be convicted of his sin, as there had not been any witnesses. The curse pronounced here is to act as a deterrent not commit crimes when only G’d is the witness. The Torah begins the list with a sin committed <i>vis a vis</i> the Creator, i.e. idolatry, and switches to a sin committed <i>vis a vis</i> one’s parents, i.e. degrading them. Parents represent G’d the Creator, as He had a share in the child’s coming into this world. Bestiality is mentioned in the list, as opposed to rape performed on humans, the animals cannot protest what is being done to them, giving the sinner a distinct advantage.
   Similar considerations apply to proselytes, orphans, and widows, none of whom have easy access to someone who would defend them if they have been wronged.
   27,25. לוקח שוחד, “killing for pay.” Most people understand the verse metaphorically, i.e. a judge accepting a bribe to render a guilty verdict where it results in judicial murder. Our author understands it as addressed to the witnesses who perjure themselves for payment, causing the innocent party to be condemned to death by their testimony.
   27,26. אשר לא יקים את דברי התורה הזאת, “who will not uphold the words of this Torah;” <i>Rashi</i> understands the verse as Moses demanding from the people that they accept the entire Torah by calling down a curse upon themselves if they were to deliberately commit violations of it.
   Nachmanides writes that in his view the word קבלו “they accepted”, in <i>Rashi,</i> means that they mentally accepted, i.e. believed in the authenticity of all the Torah’s commandments as relayed to them by Moses. This includes the belief that people observing the laws of the Torah would, in due course, receive a reward from the Lawgiver, whereas those flouting the commandments deliberately, would receive their punishment from G’d. If a Jew disbelieved even a single one of these commandments, -even the ones one does not have a single opportunity in one’s life to be called upon to perform, such as the levirate marriage if one did not have a brother- he is still subject to the curse called down upon the sinners in this verse. However, if one transgressed one of the commandments, even knowingly, but because one’s evil urge was too strong, not because of a matter of principle, one is not subject to the curse pronounced here. 
   In the Jerusalem Talmud <i>Sotah 7,4</i> the verse is understood as being addressed primarily to the kings and the authorities within whose power it is to see to it that the common people, at least in public, live according to the laws of the Torah. This is derived from the word יקים in the causative mode, <i>hiphil,</i> as opposed to the active mode <i>kal</i> that would have been יקום, and would refer to oneself, intransitively. Anyone who is capable of promoting Torah observance by others and fails to use his talents in this direction is included in the curse pronounced in our verse.
   The Jerusalem Talmud also understands the verse as addressed to the reader of the Torah in public, who is called upon to show the scroll he has read from to the public at the end of the reading, and to invite the congregation to rise and give honour to the Torah. (<i>Sofrim</i> 14,14) The congregation is to respond with the line (Deut. 4,44) וזאת התורה אשר שם משה לפני בני ישראל (על פי ה' ביד משה).
   28,1. עליון על כל גויי הארץ, “supreme over all the nations of the earth.” This blessing includes that there will be no other nation that even matches you, equally.
   28,4. ברוך פרי בטנך, “The fruit of your womb will be blessed.” Moses listed the fruit of your womb before any other blessings, such as “your fruit-basket, and your kneading bowl,” because the fruit of one’s womb, i.e. having healthy well turned out children, is the supreme blessing parents can enjoy. When listing the various curses Moses enumerates this curse last, as G’d first inflicts punishments to our belongings before, if we do no respond to those warnings, He smites what is nearest and dearest to us. Similarly, when speaking about how our enemies will be smitten as part of our blessings, this is listed before mentioning our economic success, i.e. our storehouses filled with produce, seeing that as long as we are exposed to invasions by enemies we could not securely enjoy our good harvests. Dwelling securely amongst the nations is the ultimate blessing in our international relations, and enjoying internal peace is the ultimate blessing in our relations with other members of our people. (Compare Leviticus 26,5-6)
   28,7. הקמים עליך, “the ones that rise up against you.” Seeing that Moses had already blessed them by describing them as supreme among the nations, he now has to assure them that even if other nations should rear their heads trying to attack them, G’d will see to it that they are defeated in short order.
   28,11. והותירך, “He will grant you an excess, etc.” even if there should be famine on the earth, you will not be severely affected by it, always having sufficient and even more than that.
   28,13. לראש ולא לזנב, “as a head and not as a tail.” As a head of all the nations, and not as a tail of a nation more distinguished than you. It was possible, theoretically to rank as number one overall among the nations, and at the same time to trail some nation in a specific matter. Alternately, Moses might have meant that in a best case scenario, when you deserve it, you will be the number one among all the nations, but in a worst case scenario, even when you have endured chastisements by G’d, you will never be the tail, i.e. the lowest ranking of all the other nations.
   @רק למעלה, “only above;” a permanent state of affairs.
   @ולא תהיה למטה, “and not below;” “not,” in the sense of “never.”
   28,14. ולא תסור מכל הדברים, “if only you do not turn away from any of the words, etc.” According to Nachmanides these words are a continuation of what is written in verse 13 that these blessings are premised on your hearkening to G’d’s commandments. If you were to look right or left, i.e. consider indulging in any form of idolatry, you would already be considered as having turned away from the path G’d prescribed for you. [A warning that not only idolatrous actions bring disaster, but even contemplating such actions is culpable. Ed.] Nachmanides does not agree with the author of <i>halachot gedolot,</i> who considers this verse as one of the negative commandments.
   28,42. הצלצל, “the chirping locust.” According to Nachmanides, after Moses had completed with the spelling out of the covenant between Israel and <i>Hashem</i>, he proclaimed the קריאת שמע, the declaration of the Jewish faith, once more. He reminded them of their visual experience of <i>Hashem</i> in action. They had not yet departed from that assembly. [We might have thought that the words ויקרא משה אל כל ישראל introduce a new assembly. Ed.]
   29, 5. לחם לא אכלתם ויין ושכר לא שתיתם, “you ate neither bread nor drank wine or other alcoholic drink;” Nachmanides writes that Moses meant that the people, during the last forty years, had not subsisted on the food relied on by ordinary human beings, but they had subsisted exclusively on the manna, the “bread” that came down from heaven.
   @למען תדעו כי אני ה' אלוקיכם, “in order to convince you beyond any doubt that I am the Lord your G’d.” Moses means that <i>Hashem</i> had kept them alive by miraculous means during all these years. The word לחם in this paragraph is not to be understood in the same way as when Moses told the people that during the forty days he spent on Mount Sinai he had neither eaten לחם nor drunk מים. Moses meant that he had not eaten or drunk anything during his stay on the Mountain, had led an “angel-like” existence. The people of Israel, even while in the desert, had tasted bread on occasion, such as when they had bought flour from some surrounding nation, but they had not needed it for their survival. Moses himself is on record as reminding the people that the Edomites had sold them food and drink. (Deut. 2,28-29)
   Our sages (<i>Yuma</i> 75) have said that the merchants of the whole region were offering to sell food and drink to the Israelites in the desert. It is also possible that the period when the Israelites subsisted exclusively on a diet of manna began 30 days after the Exodus when the manna fell for the first time, and it continued into the fortieth year when the Edomites sold them food and drink, around the time when they made war against Sichon, after which they possessed normal lands, land on which crops were growing and on which cattle were grazing. At that time G’d had said to Moses: (Deut. 2,4) “command the people you are passing through the territory of your brethren the children of Esau you may buy food from them and you may dig for water in their soil, etc.” In that context the Torah had also written that G’d had blessed them during the forty years they traversed a fearsome desert, etc. From that point onwards the people had enjoyed access to normal food and drink, but presumably in very limited quantities. Whatever normal food they consumed, or the wealthy ones among them consumed, was in the nature of indulging themselves, not something they relied on for survival. Their basic food continued to be the manna until they crossed the river Jordan.
   Parshat Nitzavim
   29,9. אתם נצבים ....ראשיכם שבטיכם, “You are standing…. The heads of your tribes, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this verse as referring to ”the heads of your tribes,” as if the Torah had written לשבטיכם.
   Nachmanides interprets the grammatical anomaly differently. The word כלכם, “all of you,” is to be understood as a headline, whereas with the words ראשיכם Moses begins to enumerate the different groups of people that are made up by the term כלכם, “all of you.” He understands the words: זקניכם ושוטריכם as meaning that the elders and the law-enforcers are the ones who constitute the people’s heads. Moses had first referred to as ראשיכם, “your heads.” An elderly, white-haired person is normally considered as the “head” of the community in which he resides, [when there was such a thing as a patriarchal society. Ed.] Moreover, anyone who has been endowed by the people with a degree of administrative power is considered part of the “heads of the people.” Moses adds that the entire people were present down to the youngest members, the טף, and even recent proselytes. The latter were the surviving members of the ערב רב, the mixed multitude that had climbed on the Jewish bandwagon at the Exodus. Moses also divides the people into social strata, that is why he points out that even the lowest social strata, the choppers of wood and the carriers of water, were present on the occasion mentioned. Everyone present was included in the covenant, and, as we shall hear shortly, even the as yet unborn. Quite possibly, Moses considered that the very presence of even the infants ensured that they too received credit for wanting to be included in this covenant, similar to the interpretation by our sages that the reason why the mothers brought their small children was in order to hear the king or the High Priest read the Torah publicly once in seven years on the second day of the S<i>ukkot</i> festival, the occasion known as <i>Hakhel</i>. Our sages, (<i>Tanchuma</i> among others) some of whom feel that there were isolated cases of Canaanites wanting to convert to Judaism even while the Israelites were still in the desert, say that these are the ones described here as hewers of wood and carriers of water. Although Moses did not make a treaty with them, he accepted them as slaves and they had undertaken to observe the seven commandments applicable to all of mankind. The difference between those and the Gibeonites in the days of Joshua, was that the latter deceived the Israelites by misrepresenting their origin. The former simply wanted to make peace with the Jews, as they would have had an opportunity to do prior to an attack on them.
   29,11. לעברך בברית, “for you to enter the covenant;” Nachmanides writes that the word “covenant” here is another word for “oath.” 
   It is possible, however, (author speaking) that the people now entered a new reciprocal covenant. Such a covenant would have paralleled the one the Jewish people entered into at Mt Sinai. At that time the covenant was sealed by a total offering, sprinkling of its blood on the people, etc. There was no need to spell out these details here.
   29,14. ואת אשר איננו פה עמנו היום, “as well as those who are not here with us this day.” All these as yet unborn generations of the Jews participating in this assembly are included in this oath/covenant to be undertaken at this time.
   29,15. כי אתם וגו', “For you know, etc.” Moses reminds the people of the advantages of remaining true and loyal to <i>Hashem,</i> as in the event that some have a feeling of nostalgia for the abominations that they worshipped in Egypt, or the similar abominations that the Moabites and Ammonites worship, it would be appropriate that they recall how either of these attempts to backslide into idolatry ended, i.e. catastrophically for the participants.
   29,17. איש או אשה, “be it a man or a woman;” Moses does not wish to insult anyone; therefore he speaks of individuals possibly straying, something which might also result in peer-pressure by the other members of the family drawing in the ones who were not originally willing. He mentions the woman only after the man, precisely because women are more easily seduced by false philosophies. By suggesting that a man might be the first to fall into such a trap, Moses preserves the self-respect of the Jewish women.
   @פן יש בכם...אשר לבבו פונה היום, “lest there be amongst you anyone whose heart will turn away this day, etc.;” this refers to someone whose faith and belief in <i>Hashem</i> has already been undermined, but who has not acted upon it; or, 
   @פן יש בכם שורש פורה ראש ולענה, “lest there be amongst you a root flourishing with gall and wormwood.” This refers to a development in the more distant future, the party concerned not being alive yet and not having been seduced mentally, but belonging to the ones whom Moses described as “not being with us here this day.” When, or if, this occurs, it reflects on the “root”, i.e. forefather of such a person having carried within his seed some of his own spiritual weakness that he involuntarily transmitted to his offspring. He will, however, be under the obligations of this covenant and this curse applicable to non-compliance. [It is important to understand that seeing that membership of the Jewish nation brings with it a multiplicity of advantages, the small price to pay for this, even though this unborn Jew had not given his consent to membership of the Jewish people, still renders being born a Jew a “good deal” on the whole.” Ed.]
   29,18. למען ספות הרוה את הצמאה, “thereby adding the watered to the thirsty.” Nachmanides explains this turn of phrase as “adding that which is already satisfied to the list of the ones still unsatisfied,” i.e thirsty. The word רוה describes someone sated as in Jeremiah 31,11 והיתה נפשם כגן רוה, “their soul will be like a watered garden.” When applied to the soul, i.e. essence of a human being, it means that the human being is not aware of his lacking anything, desirous of something that has not been granted to him, hence not in need of G’d as the One Who could supply his non-existing needs. On the other hand, Moses describes any person who feels that some of his needs have not been fulfilled, as צמאה, “thirsting after something.” [Nachmanides qualifies the thirst as including a desire for something that, if granted, would prove harmful to him. Ed.] The person who had felt completely fulfilled is at a disadvantage compared to those who have learned to do without on occasion, as when such a person does feel the need for something, he is so eager to satisfy that need that he feels it a great imposition if the laws of the Torah impose restrictions on the manner in which he can satisfy his “need.” If, as a result of this supposed “need,” he forthwith proceeds to satisfy it without due regard to the Torah’s laws, he will henceforth experience more desires more frequently, in line with the psychological axiom of our sages that when one trains oneself to resist improper impulses one will experience ever fewer of them, whereas when one gives in to them easily, one will progressively experience such impulses becoming more and more powerful and frequent. Eventually, one will even experience a burning desire for things from which one had already weaned oneself. Moses describes this process as בשרירות לבי אלך, “I will follow the dictates of my heart.” The word למען in our context does not introduce a reason or purpose of what the “free-spirited” person is thinking, but means something similar to: “as a result of which such and such will occur.” [In this case a gradual but steady spiritual decline. Ed.]
   Rabbi Yehudah the Spaniard explains the word ספות, as the cutting off of something as in האף תספה, when Avraham asked G’d if He would also cut off the righteous in the process of punishing the Sodomites for their wickedness. (Compare Genesis 18,23) The sinner reasons to himself that he can get away with ignoring, and even make irrelevant the words of the righteous. The righteous, in the scenario painted by Rabbi Yehudah, is the רוה, “watered one”, in our verse. He is compared to the proverbial עץ שתול על מים, “tree planted alongside a steadily flowing well of water”, who, according to our sages is the symbol of the righteous that is unperturbed by the turbulence and poverty surrounding him, as he has the מים חיים, the waters of the living Torah to sustain him come rain or shine. (Compare the simile in Jeremiah 17,8) The wicked person is likened by the prophet to a tree that does not have sound roots and will be dried out by the slightest natural disaster, such as the first month of drought. Moses explains that such people will not experience any help from G’d in withstanding even temporary setbacks, as they have not only given in to the slightest temptation, but considered themselves as smart in riding on the coattails of the righteous expecting to participate in the reward G’d metes out to the vast majority who are Torah-observant.
   The grammarian Rabbi Yonah, also sees in the word ספות a reference to כריתה, being cut off; he attributes the sinner’s attitude to Torah to the fact that he observes in “real” life that both the righteous and the wicked die the same death of the essential life force, the נפש. He reasons that just as the body dies the same death as the animals, so does the spirit.
   29,19. יעשן אף ה', “<i>Hashem’s</i> anger will smoke, etc.” Ibn Ezra interprets this metaphor as meaning that G’d’s anger will become so hot that smoke will be observed. 
   @באיש ההוא, “against that man;” the word איש does not literally mean “man,” but “person;” the Torah tells us that G’d will deliberately single out that sinner for His personal attention, regardless of whether he is male or female.
   @ומחה ה' את שמו, “and <i>Hashem</i> will erase his name, etc.” This is a reference to the sinner’s family, seeing that all family members bear the same name.
   29,20. והבדילו ה' לרעה, “<i>Hashem</i> will single him out for evil;” a reference to the whole tribe.
   @מכל שבטי ישראל, “from among all the tribes of Israel.” The remaining ones.
   29,21. ואמר הדור האחרון וגו', “and the later generation will say, etc.” these words already refer to what follows, i.e. “why has <i>Hashem</i> dealt in such a fashion, etc.?”
   29,23. ואמרו כל הגויים, “and all the nations will say, etc.” their attention is drawn to the extraordinarily long time that the blight of that land will continue.
   29,25. אלוהים אשר לא ידעום, “a deity that had been unfamiliar to them.” Nachmanides explains that what is meant is that the people had not had any evidence that this so-called deity possessed and exercised powers that would be helpful for its worshippers.
   @ולא חלק להם, “and that <i>Hashem</i> had not assigned to Israel as a protective power.” This is a reminder that whereas the fates of nations of the world are guided by angels, assigned by <i>Hashem</i> to each nation, the Jewish people are under His direct supervision so that there is no protective angel assigned to them.
   29,28. הנסתרות לה' אלוקינו, “The hidden [sins] are for <i>Hashem</i> our G’d, etc.“ Nachmanides writes that all the commentators understand the verse to mean that sins committed in private, unobserved, will be taken care of by <i>Hashem</i>, instead of by a human tribunal, whereas sins committed in public and witnessed, must not be simply left to His discretion to deal with.
   He adds, that from the plain meaning of the text it would seem that the sins described as הנסתרות, are the ones concealed even from the sinner, i.e. he was not aware of having committed them. Our sages have composed prayers in which we constantly ask G’d to protect us against committing such sins inadvertently committed. (Compare Psalms 19,13) In appreciation of not being made responsible for such sins, Moses says that we will take care of knowingly committed sins, do penance, etc., and ask G’d’s forgiveness and undertake not to be negligent again. The curses Moses has called down on sinners do not apply to people who have sinned unintentionally.
   30,2. ושבת עד ה' אלוקיך, “and you will return unto <i>Hashem</i> your G’d;” the meaning of the term “return” is that you will henceforth hearken to His commandments in accordance with what Moses commands the people on that day. It also means that you will commit both yourself and the people for whose education you are responsible, i.e. your children as long as they are minors, to walk in the path of Torah.
   Alternately, the word ובניך, “and your children” in our verse may mean the same as it means when the Torah speaks of לך ולבניך, ”for you and your children,” that when G’d dispenses His blessing this automatically includes your children. (Compare Deut. 12,40; 12,25; 12,28) [As if the Torah had written ולבניך instead of ובניך. Such grammatical anomalies occur sometimes. Ed.]
   30,6. ומל ה' אלוקיך את לבבך, “the Lord your G’d will circumcise your heart, etc.;” we have a principle that if someone takes the first step in the direction of purifying himself he will experience a Divine assist during his continuing efforts in that direction. Moses assures the repentant sinner that <i>Hashem</i> will assist by removing hindrances, metaphorically described as a foreskin that are strewn on the path to one’s rehabilitation.
   Nachmanides writes that from the wording of the text it would appear that starting with the creation of man, he was free to act as he saw fit; [in the sense of “without interference on the part of the Creator”. Ed.] As long as the Torah that we received at Mount Sinai will be in force, this situation will continue, the reason being that G’d wants to have a reason to reward us for having chosen freely to obey Him, as opposed to the angels who do not possess such a choice. However, in the days after the Messiah will have arrived it will become natural for man to make the right choices, the heart no longer pining away for things that are not appropriate for man. This is what Moses meant when he spoke about a “circumcision” of the heart occurring. The urge for things forbidden is considered as a ערלה, a foreskin. At the time of the Messiah man will recapture the innocence possessed by the first man, Adam, before he had eaten from the tree of knowledge. [By the way, Adam had been created without a foreskin, so that the foreskin with which most of his descendants are born are a reminder of some impediment to purity having becoming a “normal” condition in man. Ed.] Man will revert to being a “parve” being, in the sense that there is no greater tendency to do good than to do evil or vice versa. From that time and on, everything will depend on man’s will. He will only need to will himself to be good in order to succeed. There will be no Satan trying to block his way.
   30,11. כי המצוה הזאת אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “for this commandment that I command you on this day, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the proper interpretation of our verse is that Moses here does not refer to the entire Torah, as if he did he should have spoken about כל המצות or a similar expression. Moses refers to the commandment to repent of one’s sins that was the last commandment discussed. The reason why this commandment had not been couched as such, i.e. Moses using the imperative mode שוב instead of ושבת, for instance, is that he wants to assure the people by means of this allusion that repentance in the near or even distant future, will be a natural when it does finally occur, and it cannot be hastened by being draconically commanded. If it were, it would not be the real thing, would only be lip service.
   The reason that Moses uses exaggerations such asאם יהיה נדחך בקצה השמים, “if you were to find yourselves cast out at the edge of heaven, etc.,” seeing that actually you will find yourselves among other nations that are your unwilling hosts, is that he makes the point that however physically distant you may be from your homeland, and however mentally absurd you would consider the chances of regaining your former stature, repentance is welcome, and will be able to overcome otherwise insurmountable obstacles. This is also why Moses adds the words בפיך ובלבבך לעשותו, If you commence your repentance with your lips, and proceed to internalize it in your heart, you will be able to carry it out absolutely.
   30,19. העידותי בכם היום את השמים ואת הארץ, “I call upon heaven and earth this day to bear witness against you;” although Moses had called on heaven and earth as witnesses against the people already once before, here he adds “life” and “death” as an additional dimension to encourage the people to make the right choice when they have to make a decision. “Life” and “Death” are only different words for the concepts of “Blessing” and “Curse.” Moses urges the people to choose wisely, i.e. to choose Life.
   Parshat Vayelech
   31,1. וילך משה, “Moses went, etc.” According to Nachmanides, after the people had accepted the new covenant and had gone to their respective tents, Moses left the encampment of the Levites, where the assembly had taken place, and went to the encampment of the Israelites, to show them respect and to take his final leave of them as on that very day he was to die on Mount Nebo. It is good manners not to take one’s leave without asking his host for permission to absent oneself, and Moses adhered to this time-honoured custom. His parting words commenced with his telling the people that on that day he had attained the age of 120 years. He informed them of this in order to lessen their grief over his passing, suggesting that now that he had attained that age he would no longer be a suitable leader for them. Moreover, seeing that G’d had forbidden him to cross the river Jordan, even if he felt capable and so inclined, he could not continue to lead them.
   Our sages said that the fountains of wisdom from which Moses had drunk during the last forty years had already dried up for him, and he could no longer draw inspiration from them. (Compare <i>Sotah</i> 13) This was actually a miracle G’d performed for him so that he would not grieve over Joshua taking over from him at a time when he still felt perfectly competent to continue.
   31,9. ויכתוב משה את התורה הזאת, “Moses wrote down this whole Torah, etc.” The whole Torah from Genesis to the last word in <i>vezot hab’rachah</i>. This is so, in spite of the fact that when the Torah reports that he read it all out באזניהם, as G’d had commanded him, “before their ears,” this suggests that they heard him report about his death and about his funeral, etc. 
   [I do not know what verse the author refers to. I have not found a verse which states that Moses read out the entire Torah before the people. Verses 11-12, refer to <i>hakhel</i>, and about a location that G’d has chosen for that event, certainly not to the wilderness of Moav. According to verse 24 the priests placed this Torah scroll into the Holy Ark as soon as Moses had completed writing it. Ed.]
   31,13. ובניהם אשר לא ידעו ישמעו ולמדו ליראה, “and their children who do not know of this will learn and be in awe, etc.;” when they will hear about it and ask their parents who will instruct them in all aspects of Judaism and Jewish history. The word טף, frequently used to describes babies, in this case speaks of children that are already older and that can be taught. In the previous verse the Torah wrote:ילמדו ויראו, ”they will learn and be in awe,” instead of “they will learn to be in awe.” Our sages do not understand the word טף here as referring to children of school-going age, but to infants, and they explain that the reasons that the mothers were to bring them along was to receive a reward for their efforts.
   31,14. ואצונו, “and I shall instruct him.” <i>Rashi</i> under-stands the word as “I will urge him to act promptly.” Nachmanides writes that there is no need to change the meaning of the word from what it means ordinarily, seeing that when G’d told Joshua ”you will bring,“ this is by itself a commandment. (Numbers 27,19) If Joshua had been deliberately slow in carrying out that command he would have been guilty of a capital offence. It is possible that the word ואצונו means: “I will inaugurate him as the leader of the Jewish nation.” 
   31,15. ויעמוד עמוד הענן על פתח האהל, “the pillar of cloud stood by the entrance to the Tent.” Nachmanides writes that the reason for this was that G’d wanted to speak to Moses in such a way that Joshua would be able to hear the voice of G’d. G’d wanted Joshua to hear, but He also wanted him to know that he had not attained the stature of Moses. Only Moses had ever been told (Exodus 25,22) ונועדתי לך שם ואדבר אתך מעל הכפורת, “I will set My meetings with you there, and I will speak with you from above the lid of the Holy Ark.” Joshua did not have permission to enter the Tabernacle. This is why the Torah writes that on this occasion, in order for Joshua to hear G’d’s voice, the pillar of cloud, signifying the cover within which G’d’s glory was situated, moved from the inner Sanctum where the Holy Ark was located, to the eastern entrance of the Tabernacle.
   31,16. אלוהי נכר הארץ, “after the gods of the strangers of the land.” According to <i>Rashi</i> these words are a reference to the local deities. Nachmanides writes, that of course, the Torah does not suggest that these gods have any legitimacy in any other country either, but the Torah stresses that in that land they have even less claim to legitimacy, seeing that only the G’d of Israel has any claim to that, especially in the Israelites’ land. These so-called gods are not even familiar with the customs and mores that govern human conduct in that land. (Compare Kings II 7,26)
   31,17. ואמר ביום ההוא הלא על כי אין אלוקי בקרבי, “the nation will say on that day: ‘is it not because my G’d is not in my midst, etc.?’” Nachmanides writes that this is an incomplete confession, as compared to Leviticus 26,40. However, it is a partial awareness of remorse being called for. They have finally become aware that they must somehow be at fault.
   31,18. ואנכי הסתר אסתיר פני, “but I will increasingly hide My presence, etc.” G’d will hide His face once more, as He had done in verse 17. This is remarkable, as we would have thought that now that the people had attributed their misfortunes to G’d withdrawing from them, G’d should respond by showering them with His loving kindness seeing that they had at least acknowledged the impotence of any other deities. The Torah explains why this is not the next scenario by writing:
   @על כל הרעה אשר עשה, ”on account of all the evil this people have committed.” By having put their faith in idols, G’d had withdrawn His face from them in the first place, as a result of which many misfortunes had befallen them. Now, He must still withdraw His face from them, but not as absolutely as He had done the first, time; this time the withdrawal is only to the extent that the redeemer does not yet come and they will return to their homeland. However, in the meantime, until they confess their guilt completely and show remorse, they will still continue their existence in the Diaspora, without, however, being hounded from one place to another and being exposed to all manner of demeaning insults and degradations. The redemption will not come until the repentance described in 30,2 has become reality.
   31,19. ועתה כתבו לכם את השירה הזאת, “and now write down for yourselves this song;” Nachmanides writes that the plain meaning is that G’d commanded this to Moses while Joshua heard G’d’s instructions, and read what Moses wrote down. This is the meaning of verse 22 where Moses is reported as writing all this down and teaching the people the contents of that ”song.” Joshua joined in teaching the people, as we know from 32,44. The “song” that is referred to is the first section of <i>Parshat Haazinu</i>. The reason that this portion is called שירה, song, or poem, is that since time immemorial the Jewish people recite it as such.
   31,21. כי ידעתי את יצרו, “for I am familiar with its basic inclination;” even if I did not possess knowledge of future events, I could draw valid conclusions of how they would behave, based on the past performance of this people.
   31,24. ויהי ככלות משה לכתוב, “When Moses had finished writing, etc.;” according to Nachmanides, Moses first wrote a Torah scroll which he handed to the priests as mentioned earlier, (verse 9) at which time he had not yet told them where to deposit that scroll. Following that, he had been commanded to commit the “song” to parchment, and he wrote it down and taught it to the Children of Israel on that very same day. He then added that section to the Torah scroll he had written previously. Having completed this, he issued the order to the priests to deposit the whole Torah scroll inside the Holy Ark next two the two Tablets with the Ten Commandments. From that moment on, neither the Tablets nor that Torah scroll were touched again, so as to preserve the text inviolate, no one being able to claim that anything had either been added or erased. This is why Ibn Ezra says that the last portion in our scrolls of the Torah, the portion known as וזאת הברכה, must have been written before the song portion in האזינו, immediately after the verse in our portion in which Moses announces that G’d had told him that the period of his leadership of the people was drawing to an end. When he took his leave from the people he also blessed them after announcing that he was about to die.
   Alternatively, it is possible that he went around to the people after he had completed writing the song in <i>haazinu</i> and took that opportunity to familiarize the people with it, each tribe separately. In that event, this song too would have been placed inside the Holy Ark, next to the original Torah scroll and the two Tablets. The “song” would serve as the witness that Moses had spoken about in 30,19. This would correspond to 32,44 where Moses is reported as reading out the song before the assembled people, flanked by Joshua. The priests had assembled the people for that purpose. Immediately after that ceremony G’d told Moses (32,49) to ascend Mount Nebo in preparation for his departure from this world. Moses immediately complied with that order and began to dispense his final blessings to the various tribes. Having done so, he also committed these blessings to writing as an appendix to the Torah that he had already given to the priests in order for them to deposit it as a complete book next to the Tablets in the Holy Ark. If this had indeed been the procedure, it would correspond to the order in which matters are recorded in our version of the Torah.
   Parshat Ha’azinu
   32,1. האזינו השמים ואדברה, ותשמע הארץ, “Give ear o heaven so that the earth will listen when I speak.” [You, the reader, will no doubt observe that the author inverted the headline, to already incorporate his interpretation of what is written here. Ed.]
   Some commentators feel that when Moses addressed “heaven,” he was in fact addressing the angels who reside in heaven. Similarly, when he called out to the “earth” to listen to his words, he meant the inhabitants of the earth.
   Other commentators feel that Moses addressed as witnesses the “rain” which comes from the sky, and the yield of the fields and vineyards that is provided by the earth’s input. He called upon both to be generous with their contributions when the people deserved it.
   I believe that the correct interpretation is that Moses addressed heaven and earth’s essence, as it is customary for verses in the Bible that describe someone as being called as witness to appoint enduring phenomena such as heaven and earth as witnesses, as one can be sure that when needed these witnesses will always be at hand. This is why we have שמעו הרים את ריב ה', the prophet Micah 6,2 calling as witness the mountains; when he relays G’d’s message to the people. Moses used the term האזנה when addressing the heavens, whereas he used the term שמע when addressing the earth. The prophet Isaiah, (Isaiah 1,2) in a similar appeal reversed what Moses did, using the term שמע when addressing the heavens, and the term האזנה when addressing the earth. The reason is that when the recipient of the sound of one’s voice is nearby, the term האזנה is appropriate, whereas for recipients further away the term שמע is appropriate. Moses was feeling closer to heaven than to earth at that time, hence he used the term appropriate for addressing someone nearby when speaking to heaven. Isaiah, not being on the same spiritual level as Moses reversed the procedure, as he was closer to earth than to heaven.
   32,2. יערף כמטר לקחי, “May my teaching descend like the rain, etc.” Ibn Ezra explains the term לקחי as meaning “teaching,” comparing it to Proverbs 4,2כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם תורתי אל תעזובו, “for I have given you good instruction, do not abandon My Torah.”
   @תזל כטל אמרתי, “may my words flow like dew.” Moses repeats what he says, though in poetic form, in order to reinforce his words. When the prophets prayed they usually employed this mode of speech, repeating the same or almost the same thought in different words. [This may be the reason why, when offering a תפלה של רשות, a prayer that is not part of the prescribed prayers, one is allowed to do so only if one can add words of one’s own, a slight variation of the prescribed prayer. Ed.] Moses feels that words thus reinforced will not be sent back by the addressee without at least a partial response, acceptance by the listeners. The choice of simile suggests that Moses hopes that his words will act in the hearts of his listeners as the rain does when it hits the earth.
   32,4. הצור תמים פעו, “The Rock, perfect is His work;” Ibn Ezra writes that the reason Moses commences with this praise of <i>Hashem,</i> is to make plain to the Israelites to begin with, that if they will experience disasters of whatever kind in the future, the cause must not be attributed to the Creator but they must search for it in their own shortcomings, seeing that there are no shortcomings in anything G’d has created.
   @פעלו, “His work;” Ibn Ezra writes that whatever work or masterpiece is performed on earth by any of G’d’s creatures, is by definition deficient, as it was dependent on input by the Creator, whether direct or indirect, and it requires at least the passive tolerance of the Creator in order to function and not to collapse. This is the basic difference between His work and our work, even the most perfect.
   @כי כל דרכיו משפט, “for all His ways are justice.” They are not subject to change, i.e. never need to “improve,” as they have always been correct and perfect. Seeing that His creatures experience different needs at different times, as opposed to their Creator, their works must change from time to time in order to meet changing requirements. G’d’s actions always correspond to His wisdom and glory, both of which are constants.
   @א-ל אמונה, “a G’d of Faith,” He alone possesses the virtue of Truth in an absolute degree, able to keep faith, as opposed to His creatures, however well intentioned, as their power was on “loan” from a higher source, and they can be deprived of it at a moment’s notice.
   @ואין עול, “without iniquity;” seeing that He is a G’d of perfect loyalty, keeping faith, how could there be any iniquity associated with Him?
   32,5. שחת לו לא בניו מומם, ”Corruption is not His, the blemish is His children’s.” Nachmanides explains that the verse can best be understood if we read it as if it had been written in the sequence: מומם שחת אותם לו, ”His children’s blemishes have made them corrupt for Him, so much so that He no longer refers to them as His children.”
   @דור עקש ופתלתול, “a perverse and twisted generation.” Moses explains the reason why none of this has a negative effect on the Creator as being that since He is perfect, He can –metaphorically speaking- be compared to a Rock that was constructed to be perfect forever. It will not develop weaknesses, faults, etc. However, the Israelites’ blemishes will expose themselves to their enemies with dire consequences.
   32,6. עם נבל ולא חכם, “a vile people, one devoid of wisdom.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this to refer to their having forgotten all the Good <i>Hashem</i> had done for them.
   Nachmanides, refers to Onkelos’ translation “a nation that had received the Torah and had not become wise by observing it but had treated it as if it tired them out, had exhausted them instead of uplifting them.” They failed to benefit from what was designed to ensure their enduring success. Ibn Ezra says that the word נבל refers to their deed, whereas the words ולא חכם refers to their heart.
   Personally, (Nachmanides continuing) I believe that when someone does good without expecting or wanting compensation by the recipient, he is described as נדיב, generous. If someone repays favours done to him with ingratitude, or worse, instead, he is described as נבל. This is the meaning of Isaiah 32,5 לא יקרא עוד לנבל נדיב , “no more shall the villain be called noble;” This is why it was said about נבל of Mount Carmel, [first husband of Avigail, a notoriously bombastic and tightfisted individual, compare Samuel I chapter 25. Ed.] ונבלה עמו, (Samuel I 25,25) that his name aptly expressed his vile character. David had protected his property at a time when he was hunted and had to survive as best he could. Instead of being grateful, Naval repaid him with animosity and disdain.
   Not only were the Israelites ingrates, they were also foolish by putting their trust instead of in <i>Hashem</i> in all kinds of impotent idols, the ones worshipped by the neighbouring peoples. Did they not even realise that by sinning they could not harm the G’d against Whom they sinned?
   32,8. בהפרידו בני אדם, “when He separated the various children of man from one another.” Some commentators feel that Moses was speaking about the generation that built the Tower, and that dispersed after their languages had been confused.
   @יצב גבולות עמים, “He established the boundaries of the seven Canaanite nations;” these corresponded in number roughly to the number of the Israelites.
   32,15. וישמן ישורון ויבעט, “Yeshurun grew fat and kicked.” The name “Yeshurun” is a complimentary name for Israel who are considered (when at their best) to be a nation of ישרים, loyal upright self-confident and G’d-fearing people.
   @וינבל צור ישועתו, “acting villainously against the Rock of its salvation.” Nachmanides refers to Ibn Ezra’s interpretation that the villainy of Israel consisted in that it accused <i>Hashem</i> as not continuing to be able to act as its Saviour, views the whole “kicking” as an act of blasphemy both in word and in deed. He disagrees with Ibn Ezra, The reason that he does so, is that Moses is still reciting the people’s sins and has not yet begun to speak about the punishment they would have to suffer on account of their sins. This part only commences with verse 20 when G’d is quoted as withdrawing His Presence from the people, אסתירה פני מהם.
   The correct interpretation, according to Nachmanides, is that Moses continues with the theme discussed by me earlier, that the most serious aspect of Israel’s sins is that they repay good with evil. They abandoned a G’d who not only had created them as a nation, but had redeemed them from slavery. He had saved them from the pursuit of Pharaoh and for forty years kept them alive in the desert in spite of being provoked by them. He kept His promise to Avraham to bring them to a land flowing with milk and honey. They had repaid all this by failing to serve this G’d, although He did not demand anything difficult from them. They blasphemed by mouth and deed, transferring their allegiance to useless idols.
   32,19. מכעס בניו ובנותיו, “by the anger aroused in Him by His sons and daughters.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why we suddenly find the Jewish women mentioned separately, is that in the last generation, the one during which the destruction of the Temple would occur, the Jewish women would be exceptionally wicked in their deeds. Their deeds (misdeeds) would greatly inflame G’d’s anger. As a result of their devotion to cults, they would seduce their husbands, something documented in the Book of Jeremiah, chapter 44.
   32,20. ויאמר אסתירה פני מהם, “so that He said: ‘I will hide My face from them.” Ibn Ezra refers to commentators who understand this line as being addressed by one attribute of <i>Hashem</i> to another attribute of His. Alternately, <i>Hashem</i> said this to the angels, adding: “let us see how they will fare in the end?” G’d meant that what He was going to do was in order that what He had foreseen as their eventual future could materialize. Ibn Ezra himself feels that the correct interpretation is to understand it at face value, i.e. “let us find out how they will react when they find themselves in serious trouble.”
   32,24. מזי רעב, “bloating of famine;” Ibn Ezra understands the expression as “burned by the pangs of hunger,” as in Daniel 3,19 למזא לאתונה, “to heat up the kiln.”
   @ולחומי רשף, “battling flaming demons.” A reference to a species of birds. We find them mentioned in Job 5,7 The correct interpretation (quoting Ibn Ezra) is that the Israelites will be subjected to four different kinds of judgments, penalties, In this verse famine and its impact is described by Moses. The others will follow.רשף, קטף מרירי, חיה רעה and חרב. רשף appears to be sickness caused by microbes in the air.קטב מרירי is a kind of pestilence brought on by polluted air.
   32,26. אמרתי אפאיהם, “I had said: ‘I will disperse them;’” Nachmaides first quotes the grammarians who derive the word אפאיהם as a derivative of פאה , i.e. I will disperse them to the four corners of the globe.” He adds, that he personally, thinks that the word is a combination of two words, as suggested in the <i>Sifri,</i> i.e. אף אי הם, “I said in My anger that I would treat them as if they did not exist.” (אי הם?) “Where are they?” They would become so assimilated in such small groups that they would cease to exist as an identifiable remnant of the once great Jewish nation. This is an allusion to the exile of the ten tribes of the Northern Kingdom during the conquest of most of the land of Israel by the Assyrians [722 B.C.E.] when these tribes were relocated among other nations far to the north, most of them remaining lost to us except for remnants who joined Zerubavel when he returned under the protectorate of the Persian King Cyrus. In the legends transmitted by the sages these tribes were exiled to a mysterious region beyond the river Sambatyon, an unbridgeable and inaccessible region about which many tales have been spun. The essence of the verse is that G’d speaks (through Moses’ vision) of having wanted to destroy the exiles utterly so that history would forget their existence. [second half of our verse. Ed.] He would have done so if not:
   32,27. לולי כעס אויב אגור, “If I had not had to fear that this would be misinterpreted by the Antisemites as their victory over My people, instead of My punishment of My people, etc.” Nachmanides writes that from this verse there is proof that in our present exile the merit of our illustrious forefathers has ceased to be a factor ameliorating our political/social position in the host countries. In this verse Moses describes a scenario in which our continued survival is not credited to G’d remembering the merits of our patriarchs, but is credited only to His concern about His own reputation among the nations of the world. It is not that G’d has a desire to display His power among the nations. There is no point to this, seeing that all these nations combined are completely impotent when compared to Him, so that there would be no contest in which one party would emerge as a victor. G’d’s concern is that seeing that He has created man to inhabit the “lower” regions of the universe, i.e. the earth, it is of importance to Him that these creatures called “man” recognise His existence, and the fact that they are His creatures and that His domain extends to the region of the earth and that man has to be obedient to Him, and that He deals with man on the basis of reward for good behaviour and retribution for rebellious behaviour. Seeing that all the other nations had denied His existence, or His right to interfere with their lifestyle and to make rules by which they have to abide, only the Jewish nation remained and had been wiling to accept His sovereignty on earth. In response G’d had demonstrated by supernatural miracles that He is the supreme authority in this universe, that His power far outranks that attributed to astrological constellations. If G’d were to allow the Jewish nation, the only one that had recognised Him, to perish, He would nullify all that He had meant to accomplish by putting a living human being on earth in the first place.
   32,29. לו חכמו, “Had they only displayed some elementary wisdom, etc.” If the nation who hosted the Israelites and who did believe that the misfortunes of the Jewish people had been due to G’d, [either to His weakness or to His anger Ed.] had only possessed a minimum of common sense, they would have realized that what happened to G’d’s people had nothing to do with their power, but was due solely to the retribution G’d exacted from this people for their disloyalty to Him. They would have realized that at the time when one of them was able to put to flight a thousand times their number, this too had been possible only by the strength given to His people by their Creator and Protector. Now that they had abandoned His Torah, their G’d had reacted by abandoning them.
   32,38. אשר חלב זבחימו יאכלו, “the fat of whose offerings they would eat, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason that Moses employs the plural mode is that the nations of the world are numerous, so that when the Jews ate of the offerings presented to the various deities of the nations, they ate of a whole variety of such offerings. This made their sins even worse
   32,9. ראו, “See!” Moses addresses the nations collectively, hence the plural mode.
   @כי אני אני הוא, “that I, I am He;” I am unique, have no duplicate.
   @ואין אלוהים עמדי, “and no deity is with Me.” I do not have nor need any helper. There is no one who can effectively oppose Me, and prevent Me from carrying out anything I have set My mind to do.
   Ibn Ezra says that the meaning of the repetition in the phrase אני אני הוא, is that G’d announces that He is constant and will not undergo any change. I am the G’d, Who, when the need arises brings death to Israel, and I am the same G’d, Who, when the situation warrants it, brings this people back to life. They will be saved, but from no other source than Myself. Many commentators say that the concept of a future world, one beyond death, is derived plainly from this verse. They prove this from G’d saying first: “I will kill,” and then “I will revive,” and not the reverse order according to which physical death is the end of the human existence. The same thought is expressed in the same sequence as מוריד שאול ויעל, ”He brings death and gives life.“ (Samuel I 2,6 Channah’s prayer of thanksgiving.)
   32,43. וכפר אדמתו עמו, “He will grant atonement to His land and for His people.” According to some commentators mentioned by Ibn Ezra, the word עמו should really have the letter ו in front of it, so that the meaning of the phrase would be: “He will provide atonement for its land and for its people.” An allegorical approach taken by the <i>Midrash</i> is that the land is seen as atoning of behalf of its people. [The idea is that the land, for many years neglected, serves as the scapegoat for the Jewish people who had neglected to observe the laws of <i>sh’mittah.</i> Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra personally, understands the phrase as a promise that in due course, the gentiles who had shed so much innocent Jewish blood on that land, will at that time atone for all this when the Jews will take their vengeance on them. The retribution for innocent blood spilled must be undertaken by the victimized party or their offspring, (their blood avengers), whose blood had been shed, so that in the war preceding the redemption, Jews will kill their adversaries, the ones who had contaminated the soil of the Holy Land in former years. Ibn Ezra quotes Job 14,19 and Ezekiel 43,20 as verses in which such concepts also appear.
   Yet another interpretation of our phrase understands the word as meaning the same as וטהר, “it will purify, cleanse.” Israel, when the time comes, will cleanse its soil from all kinds of contaminations it had been exposed to in the interval since its people went into exile.
   32,44. הוא והושע בן נון, “he and Hoshea son of Nun.” Ibn Ezra explains the reason why Moses at this point calls Joshua by his original name Hoshea, to make sure that the Israelites would all know who he was speaking about, since some of the people may not have been aware that his name had been changed. Only the top echelon of the people had been aware of the name change. The allegorical explanation of our verse is familiar to all my readers. [For the readers of Ibn Ezra not familiar with the meaning of the name change from הושע to יהושע that we learned about in Numbers 13,16 the <i>Midrash</i> says that Moses added the letter י symbolizing G’d’s name so as to provide him with a spiritual assist when the time would come to take a stand against the other ten spies. Ed.]
   Parshat Vezot Hab’rachah
   33,1. וזאת הברכה אשר ברך משה איש האלוקים, “And this is the blessing which Moses the man of G’d bestowed, etc.” His blessing endures until this day. The reason why the blessing is introduced with the word וזאת [the ו which suggests that it is a continuation, Ed.] is that Moses carried on where Yaakov’s blessings had left off.
   We are told in the <i>Midrash</i> that when Yaakov was on his deathbed he told his children that in due course there would arise another, similar to him, who would give his blessing to the tribes and who would continue where he, their father would leave off. This is why Moses made a point of recording that he viewed his own blessing as a continuation of the blessing bestowed upon them by the patriarch Yaakov.
   33,2. ה' מסיני בא, “<i>Hashem</i> came from Sinai, etc. “ Nachmanides writes that this is in accordance with how our sages portrayed G’d as having offered the Torah to the various nations of the earth, and the nations refusing to accept it, each for reasons of their own. Moses refers specifically to the descendants of Avraham including the descendants of Esau, who had two of the patriarchs in common with the Jewish people. Seeing that they were not willing to accept the Torah, His glory descended onto Mount Sinai to offer it to the Jewish people.
   It is possible to explain the words מסיני בא, “He came from Sinai,” as simply meaning that this was not the last stop on G’d’s journey inviting other nations to accept the Torah, but His first stop-on earth, so to speak, -the first time that G’d allowed His Presence to reside on earth again permanently since Adam had sinned in the garden of Eden. G’d’s Presence remained in that region during all the time that Moses spent on the Mountain, on and off. Once Moses had received the second set of Tablets, this Presence of <i>Hashem</i>, the שכינה, resided temporarily over Moses’ own tent until the inauguration of the Tabernacle. Ever since that occasion, G’d’s communications with Moses all emanated from the Tabernacle, i.e. from the lid of the Holy Ark between the cherubs.
   @וזרח משעיר למו, “after having shone forth from Seir in its direction.” After the people had started journeying from Mount Sinai in the direction of the land of Canaan, the cloud symbolizing His Presence hovered over the desert of Paran from where Moses dispatched the spies. After that debacle, the Presence of <i>Hashem</i> went into voluntary exile until in the fortieth year when the people had reached the borders with Edom it re-appeared as is indicated by Deut. 2,7 כי ה' אלוקיך ברכך בכל מעשה ידך וגו', “for the Lord your G’d has blessed you in all your undertakings, etc.” From that point on the <i>Shechinah</i> did not again depart from the encampment of the Jewish people. When G’d had appeared to them coming from Se-ir, He was as a shining light for them and the period of mourning that had commenced after the episode of the spies had come to an end. This being the case, the time had come when they could hope to defeat Sichon and Og in battle, though they were warned not to attack or harass the Moabites and Edomites.
   @הופיע מהר פארן, “He had appeared from Mount Paran.” This was where G’d became the people’s guiding light once they entered the great and forbidding desert; G’d looked out for all their needs. The expression הופיע is analogous to Job 10,3 על עצת רשעים הופעת, “that You should shine on the counsel of the wicked?”
   @ואתה מרבבות קודש מימינו אש דת למו, “He approached with some of His myriads of holy (angels) flanked on His right by His fiery Torah.” Although He was preceded when approaching them by tens of thousands of angels, when it came to presenting the Torah, He did so personally, with His right hand.
   @אש דת למו, “the fiery Torah toward them.” <i>Hashem</i> displayed for the people heavenly fire and let them hear heavenly voices, similar to when Moses had described this spectacle in Deut. 4,36 ועל הארץ הראך את אשו הגדולה, “and, while you remained on earth, He showed you His great Fire.”
   33,3. אף חובב עמים, “You were indeed fond of the various tribes;” Moses describes G’d’s fondness as extending to each tribe separately as if it ranked as a whole nation. We find another example of a tribe being treated or referred to as a whole nation in Judges 5,14: בנימין בעממיך, “Benjamin amongst Your peoples.”
   @כל קרושיו בידך, “all its holy ones were in Your hand.” This is a reference to all the members of the tribe of Levi whom You G’d brought especially close to You, in allowing them to encamp around the Tabernacle and within easy range of the Holy Ark.
   Nachmanides writes that the word חובב is derived from the same root as חבי in Job 31,33 לטמון בחבי עוני, “to bury my guilt in a well hidden place.” The expression מחבא means a “hiding place.” The Holy Ark is the place on earth within which G’d’s Power is hidden. Allegorically speaking, Moses acknowledges that G’d also provided the Jewish nation with a hidden reservoir of spiritual fortitude. The entire Jewish nation is holy, and G’d “hides” them within His hand, as a gesture of His protection.
   @והם תכו לרגליך, “for they had sat down at Your feet.” Ibn Ezra writes that there is no other instance in the Bible in which the word תכו or a derivative of it occurs [not in our editions of his commentary. Ed.]. According to him, some people consider the word as related to תוך, “within, in the midst of,” in which case the Israelites are perceived as walking within the protective umbrella of G’d’s feet. Others say that the letter ת in תכו instead of the letter ה, indicates that Moses refers to these people who have been the victims of every conceivable affliction during the forty years in the desert. They endured it all in order to follow G’d wherever He led them.
   @ישא מרברותיך, “bearing Your utterances.” Israel has the words of Torah (i.e. G’d) constantly on its lips, similar to an ox that bears its yoke.
   33,4. מורשה קהלת יעקב, “the heritage of the congregation of Yaakov.” Our sages pointed out that Moses did not describe Israel here as “the descendants of Yaakov,” or as “the house of Yaakov,” but as “the congregation of Yaakov.” The implication is that when proselytes join the Jewish nation, i.e. they congregate around us, that they too will be so much part of our nation that Torah is their heritage as much as it is ours. Alternately, the reference is to “resident strangers,” who have not converted but who desire to live near us even if in a state of semi-servitude.
   33,5. ויהי בישורון מלך, “He became King over Yeshurun;, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the word ישורון is an allusion to the holy name of <i>Hashem</i> Who was indeed King in Israel as long as the Jewish people were loyal to Him and His Torah. The verse is a continuation of the previous verse and describes when all the leaders of the people gathered themselves and the whole nation. The Israelites, when they accepted the Torah, meant that it was everyone’s Torah, not a Book aimed at the elite of the people only. As such it is aptly termed a “national heritage, מורשה.” It will never be exchanged, even in the sense of being “updated.” Acceptance of עול מלכות שמים, “the yoke of the Kingdom of Heaven, by definition means that it is forever, not subject to change. Moses has to reiterate all this, seeing that the people, at their own request, had received all the laws except for the first two of the Ten Commandments from Moses whom they had appointed to be their trusted intermediary.
   Some commentators say that the subject of ויהי בישורון מלך is not G’d, but Moses; He had been accepted and hailed as such at the assembly of all the people including the elders who had heard the Torah explained by Moses directly, having heard it from his own mouth. Moses had commanded that henceforth this Torah was to be considered as a national heritage of all the people forever more. Seeing that Moses was so outstanding and illustrious, it was appropriate that the Torah he had brought to the people should be embraced with the greatest respect.
   A third view holds that the words ויהי בישורון מלך refer to the Torah, i.e. that the Torah should rule over Israel like a king, enjoy the same respect and awe. “Yeshurun”, in all these interpretations, is a complimentary term for the people of Israel.
   33,6. יחי ראובן, “May Reuven live, etc.” Nachmanides, quoting Ibn Ezra, writes that the reason that Moses commenced the blessings with Reuven was because he was Yaakov’s biological firstborn, and that the reason why Moses did not include Shimon in the list of tribes whom he blessed was because that tribe had been so guilty in the sin at Baal Peor. In fact, most of the people that sinned there were from the tribe of Shimon, something that can be proved by comparing the tremendous reduction in the number of men over 20 during the second census compared to that in the first census. The reason was that the sinners died during the plague before Pinchas had stabbed Zimri and Cosbi to death. Nachmanides adds that in his view this is not conclusive proof of anything, as even after deducting the 24000 men who had died during that plague, and assuming even that all of them had belonged to the tribe of Shimon there are still 13000 missing men from Shimon unaccounted for. (at the first census there had been 59,300 men of the required ages from the tribe of Shimon, whereas after the sin of Baal Pe’or there were only 22,200. Moreover, we observe that there was substantial shrinkage in the number of men of recruiting age among some of the other tribes also, The tribe of Gad numbered 45,500 such men during the first count, whereas now it had only 40,500. The number of men counted from the tribe of Ephrayim during the second count was also 5000 fewer than when they had been counted during the first census. Besides, when the Torah reports (Numbers 25,3) that Israel became attached to Baal Pe’or and that G’d told Moses “to take (gather) the leaders of the nation and hang them before <i>Hashem,</i> etc.,” it is clear from this verse that members of all tribes had been involved in sinning at Baal Pe’or. The fact that Zimri was the one whom Pinchas killed is no proof, as he was only the head of a בית אב, and not the prince of the tribe. The tribe of Shimon had a number of heads of families with that title. Moreover the rebels from the tribe of Reuven, Datan and Aviram, who went into the bowels of the earth with Korach were of higher rank in their tribe than Zimri was in his, and Moses did not deny the tribe of Reuven a blessing on that account. It is quite inconceivable that Moses would deny a whole tribe a blessing on account of a sin committed by one of their leading members. The Torah (Moses’ words) expressly stated that all the people who had not sinned on the occasion of the debacle of Baal Pe’or were included in the complimentואתם הדבקים בה' אלוקיכם חיים כולכם היום, “all of you who have cleaved to the Lord your G’d are alive as of this day.” In other words, Moses faced only righteous people at the time when he set out to bless the nation.
   The correct interpretation of why Moses did not bless the tribe of Shimon specifically has to do with the long-standing tradition that the Jewish people comprise no more than 12 tribes. At the time when Yaakov had blessed his children, he had given one blessing to Joseph, although part of the whole procedure had been the vision that both of Joseph’s sons would develop into two separate tribes. This left Moses with the problem of which tribe to delete from his blessings, seeing that including the “super” tribe Levi, there were now in effect 13 tribes. The division of the tribe of Joseph into two tribes did not occur as a mere wish of Yaakov, or as its interpretation by Moses on his own. At the inauguration of the Tabernacle and when establishing the groupings around the Tabernacle by the various tribes, Ephrayim and Menashe, by Divine decree, had clearly been treated as separate tribes. Furthermore, there was a need to mention Joshua who would be Moses’ successor and who would lead the people to the Divinely ordained heritage in the Land of Canaan, and he was a member of the tribe of Ephrayim. Seeing that Ephrayim was the junior of the two sons of Joseph, it would have been inconceivable for Moses to ignore the senior son (tribe) Menashe by not blessing that tribe separately. Moses, clearly, wanted to bless the tribe of Levi, the tribe whose members henceforth would dispense blessings to all of the people. The people’s various sacrificial offerings would have been meaningless unless the Priests, members of the tribe of Levi had blessed them. Moses could not avoid deleting one tribe from his blessing as the number 12 was not arbitrary but was symbolical of the 12 signs of the zodiac, the twelve months of the year, etc. According to the <i>Midrash</i> these twelve constellations in the sky known as the zodiacal constellations, are considered the arms of the universe, G’d’s instruments in supervising nature at work. When the people were blessed at Mount Gerizim and Mount Eyval, the tribe of Shimon most certainly took part in that procedure (Deut. 27,12.) On that occasion the tribe of Levi was not mentioned, as its members did not share in the distribution of ancestral land. Yaakov, on his deathbed had indicated that he wished both the tribe of Shimon and that of Levi to be separated from one another in order to forestall the kind of violence plotted against the city of Shechem by these two brothers to ever occur again. (Compare Genesis 49,7)
   The entire portion of וזאת הברכה had, of course, been said by Moses while he was inspired with the Holy Spirit, and the reason why Reuven had been listed first was because he was the first of the tribes to receive his ancestral heritage (on the east bank of the Jordan). An additional reason was the fact that he was chronologically the most senior of the tribes, the founding father having been Yaakov’s oldest son, the firstborn. Moses prayed for the tribe’s continued well being, wishing that its name not be extinguished on account of the sin of their founding father involving an indiscretion with Bilhah, his father’s steady mate after the death of Rachel. To underscore this point, Moses referred to the fact that Reuven was the firstborn, something that everybody had been well aware of. He blessed Yehudah next, as this tribe would be the first tribe to receive its heritage in the land, and he would lead the nation in its war against the Canaanites. The blessing given by Moses to Yehudah was meant to include all of the Jewish people. Moses blessed the tribe of Levi next, as the Levites who largely lived in Jerusalem, would be territorial neighbours to Yehudah. They would ensure that the sacrificial offerings of the Jewish people, both communally and individually, would enjoy a welcome reception by <i>Hashem.</i> Binyamin was next in line for Moses’ blessing, as the holy Temple would stand on its territory. After having blessed Binyamin, Moses blessed the tribes named after Joseph’s two sons, as they were next in conquering and settling the land of Israel. Next Moses blessed the remaining tribes that had as their founding father sons of Yaakov principal wife Leah. He followed the pattern used by Yaakov when he had blessed those sons. This left the tribes whose founding fathers were the maidservants of Leah and Rachel, respectively. History shows that the lots allocating lands to the various tribes also confirmed the order in which Moses had blessed these tribes. Gad was mentioned first, as he with Reuven was the first to receive his share on the east bank of the Jordan. He was also part of the flag commanded by the army headed by Reuven.
   @יחי ראובן ואל ימות, “May Reuven live and not die, etc.” Ibn Ezra understands this to mean that Reuven (the tribe) should live indefinitely, never die out. It had been possible that the lifetime of a tribe might be no different from the lifetime of an individual human being.
   @ויהי מתיו מספר, “and may its numbers never shrink into insignificance.” Seeing that all things that are subject to count are also subject to a decline in number, Moses prayed that Reuven should not experience such a reduction in numbers.
   Nachmanides writes that in his view a better explanation of the above words is that of <i>Rashi,</i> i.e. that Moses prayed that Reuven should live on as a tribe of Israel in this world and not disappear as an entity in the world to come, either. The sin of his founding father should not be visited upon him and his descendants even in the hereafter. When reflecting on Yaakov’s comments on Reuven on his deathbed, Moses realized that it contained a great deal of anger that had been suppressed for a long time. Moses prays to protect the tribe against any fallout from this also in the future, beyond life on earth. The word מתיו, “his population,” is used to include all members of the tribe against such fallout. The word מספר “number,” is to be understood as if the Torah had written: במספר, ”in number,” a construction similar to בית אביה, ”her father’s house,” where what is meant is בבית אביה, “in her father’s house.” (Compare Genesis 38,11)
   It is also possible that the words מתיו מספר refer to the people of Israel who are to always look upon the tribe of Reuven as one looks on a firstborn son.
   Some commentators understand this blessing as being directed at the days of the conquest of the land of Canaan, Moses blessing the soldiers of the tribe of Reuven who would be in the vanguard with the members of the tribe of Gad, as agreed when they received their allocation of land on the east bank. Moses included the soldiers of the tribe of Gad in his prayer, asking <i>Hashem</i> not to let either of these two tribes sustain casualties during that campaign. Whereas this interpretation has much to commend it, the first interpretation is most likely the correct one.
   33,7. וזאת ליהודה, “and this to Yehudah, etc.” Ibn Ezra translates the word וזאת, as “and similarly he said to Yehudah, etc.” i.e. he too should live on indefinitely and not be diminished in numbers, adding that <i>Hashem</i> should respond to the prayers of Yehudah. [Presumably, Ibn Ezra felt that Yehudah’s role in the sale of Joseph and the deception of his father Yaakov also needed forgiveness still.
   Nachmanides disagrees with the interpretation of Ibn Ezra on this, seeing that Yehudah’s sin had not been of the type that the Torah would punish with the <i>karet</i> penalty [generally understood to include destruction of one’s soul, Ed.] if it had been committed deliberately and had not been repented properly. This is also, in his opinion, why Moses did not offer a special prayer on behalf of Yehudah, just as he did not do so on behalf of the other tribes whose founding fathers had been involved in the sale of Joseph and the deception of their father. He therefore understands the words וזאת ליהודה as the preamble to the blessing he would forthwith bestow on that tribe. He would receive the latter part of Reuven’s blessing also, as he, more than any other tribe needed G’d’s protection against suffering casualties, as this tribe was always leading in the wars Israel fought. He had a merit exceeding that of the other brothers, as it had been he who had saved Joseph from the brothers’ demand that he be killed immediately.
   @שמע ה' קול יהודה!, “Hearken O <i>Hashem</i> to the voice of Yehudah!” when he entreats you whenever he goes into battle, seeing he is at the head of the army.
    ואל עמו תביאנו,“and return him to his people;” to the encampment. This verse could also be understood as a general prayer to bring back all those who went out to battle in the enemy’s country, to return home safely, unharmed.
   @ידיו רב לו, “may his hands suffice to fight on his behalf;” may he not have to rely on outside assistance other than the help of <i>Hashem,</i> alone. Some commentators, seeing in the word רב an analogy to ריב, “quarrel, strife,” understand the verse to mean that Moses wishes that Yehudah’s hands alone should prove equal to any strife he will be involved in. Still other commentators see an analogy to Psalms 18,15 וברקים רב, where the word is used to describe “stunning” blows, by means of lightning.
   Nachmanides writes that these words are an allusion to the first war against the Canaanites, and are an encouragement to Yehudah to not only worry about conquering his own allotted ancestral territory, but also that allotted to his brethren of the other tribes. In particular, it would be a hint to conquer land beyond that needed by himself, and to cede it to the members of the tribe of Shimon, who, as it turned out were going to be an enclave within the boundaries of the tribal lands of Yehudah. This is borne out by Joshua 19,9 where the members of the tribe of Shimon are described as receiving their share of the ancestral heritage as “within” that of the tribe of Yehudah.
   33,8. וללוי אמר, “and concerning Levi, Moses had said” <i>Rashi</i> understands the letter ו at the beginning of the word וללוי, as meaning על, i.e. “about.” Similar use of that letter in that sense is found in Genesis 26,7 וישאלו אנשי המקום לאשתו, “the people of that place enquired about his wife.” There are other examples of that kind of usage made of the letter ו in the Scriptures.
   Nachmanides writes that seeing Moses had addressed Reuven and Yehudah in his blessings by name both in the introduction and as an integral part of the blessing, he hastens to face each tribe separately when blessing them, so that they do not feel slighted. In other words, each time we find the introductory letter ו before the tribe’s name, this means that at that moment Moses had taken up position directly in front of the members of that tribe. After positioning himself opposite the members of the tribe of Levi, he commenced with the words תומיך ואריך וגו'. 
   @אשר נסיתו במסה, “whom You had tested at Massah.” According to Ibn Ezra the word במסה is not a reference to a location but to a test of faith when executing the fellow Israelites during the golden calf episode was not considered death without benefit of trial, i.e. murder, but an act of supreme faith, risking their lives on behalf of preserving the glory of the Holy Name of <i>Hashem.</i> The only sin the Levites were guilty of collectively also, was the one their leaders Moses and Aaron also became victims of, the confrontation after Miriam’s death when the people ganged up on Moses and Aaron demanding water to drink. (Numbers chapter 20); [note that whereas at the beginning of that chapter only העם, the common people, the mixed multitude according to some, is mentioned as being rebellious, near the end even the בני ישראל, the elite of the people, are described as having quarreled with Moses. Presumably, Ibn Ezra feels that the Levites were included, or the Torah would have credited them with being without guilt during that episode. Ed.]
   Nachmanides, approaching the verse from the <i>peshat</i> point of view, writes that the correct interpretation is that the word במסה refers to a location, i.e. the place previously known as Refidim, which was renamed on account of the unruly behaviour of the Israelites there, as detailed in Exodus 17,2-7. Moses credits the Levites with already at that time not being part of the people who ganged up on him and adopting a threatening posture. [Perhaps the Levites’ “cool” when the people had no water is especially commendable seeing that the Levites were not subject to slave labour in Egypt; they had been the ones to benefit least by the redemption, and therefore suffered most by deprivation in the desert. Ed.] Moses therefore blesses them with the blessing that its loyalty and steadfastness should remain a characteristic of theirs throughout the ages. This is the meaning of the reference to תמיך ואוריך. “May the qualities displayed then ensure that you will always be men of piety.” The people’s sin, even then had not been that they had clamoured for drinking water; far from it. Their sin had been that they had accused Moses for being responsible for the absence of the <i>Shechinah</i>, which most certainly would not have allowed a situation such they found themselves in to arise had not their leaders fallen out of favour with <i>Hashem</i> The thought that they themselves could have been at fault did not even occur to them.
    תריבהו, “you have quarreled with Him at the waters of Merivah.” Compare Psalms 35,1 ריבה ה' את יריבי, “O G’d strive with my adversaries” (David speaking). It sounds as if Moses is hinting that G’d ought to punish those who had been responsible for his losing his temper at מי מריבה. He hints that the people had provoked him to lose his composure so that he had shouted at them: (Numbers 20,10) “listen you rebellious people!” Moses had first addressed the priests, as he had said to Levi, asking them to be loyal to the High Priest, wearer of the <i>urim</i> and <i>tumim,</i> the breastplate that had the ineffable Name in its pouch, assuring the High Priest constant communication with G’d if the situation warranted this. Afterwards, he addressed the whole tribe of Levi who had participated in the general uproar on that occasion.
   33,10. יורו משפטיך ליעקב, “They shall teach Your social laws to Yaakov;” These words refer to the entire tribe of Levi. The priests, on their part will offer the incense on behalf of the entire nation.
   33,11. ברך ה' חילו, “Bless, O <i>Hashem</i> its resources, etc.” According to Nachmanides this is a plea by Moses to <i>Hashem</i> to grant the tribe of Levi plenty of human resources, seeing that in fulfilling their tasks they put their lives at risk if they make any of many possible mistakes which result in such people forfeiting their lives. Compare Numbers 4,18 “Do not let the tribe of the Kehatites be cut off from the rest of the tribe of Levi.”
   Onkelos translates חילו as “its material resources,” using Genesis 37,29 and Number 31,9 as his models. In both those verses the expression ואת כל חילם means: “all their physical possessions.” The verse is an appendix to ישימו קטורה באפך in the previous verse, which describes the material possession of man most closely related to a spiritual asset, i.e. the fragrance of the incense burned on the Altar.
   @ופועל ידיו תרצה, “and may the work of his hands be received with goodwill.” A reference to the sacrificial offerings, generally, the incense being the most refined type.
   @מחץ מתנים קמיו ומשנאיו מן יקומון, “smash the loins of his foes and his enemies so that they may not arise again.” Ibn Ezra understands the words מן יקומון as “preventing them from arising again.” 
   33,12. ידיד ה', “<i>Hashem’s</i> beloved;” Benjamin, G’d’s beloved, will dwell securely on his land.
   @עליו, “over him;” guarding the habitat of <i>Hashem</i> in the Tabernacle or Temple. <i>Hashem’s</i> Presence, in turn will hover over him (Benjamin) in turn all of his days and allow His glory on his territory,
   @ובין כתיפיו ישכון, “and he will feel at home between his shoulders.” An allusion to what our sages explained that during a competition as to who would be the first one into the Sea of Reeds, Binyamin did not wait for the argument to be settled but jumped in (<i>Sotah</i> 36) [first version of that argument. Folio 37 there has a different version. Ed.] Another allusion contained in this simile is that our verse contains references to all three Temples and the respective significance of each one. The statement about “dwelling securely,” would apply to the period of the first Temple, whereas the statement about “hovering all day long,” would refer to the period of the second Temple, a period during which the Jewish state was a vassal state, and many of the symbols of our close connection with the <i>Shechinah</i> were absent, the Tablets and the Holy Ark being some of these symbols. The description of “residing between its shoulders,” is an allusion to the third Temple, the one that will be built after the arrival of the Messiah.
   33,16. וממגד ארץ ומלואה, “from the bounty of the land and its fullness;” this refers to the produce grown in the coastal plains, seeing that the produce growing on mountains and on hills has already been mentioned.
   Nachmanides explains the words as referring to blessings of the breast and womb respectively, corresponding to Yaakov’s blessing in Genesis 49,25. He claims that every living creature is called מלואה inasmuch as they help fill the earth. He quotes as proof Chronicles I 16,32 ירעם הים ומלואו, “let the sea and all that is in it thunder.”
   @ורצון שוכני סנה, “and by the favour of Him Who rested on the thorn bush.” This was when the <i>Shechinah</i> had his first encounter with Moses. This was also where he had spent many days (either receiving the Torah, or pleading for forgiveness for his people.) The thorn bush was at the bottom of Mount Sinai, or Mount Chorev as it is known also. Eventually, after the building of the Tabernacle, the <i>Shechinah</i> came to rest above the Holy Ark in that Tabernacle, i.e. over the encampment of the whole Jewish people.
   @תבואתה, “may it be present, etc.;” a reference to this blessing.
   @לראש יוסף, “upon Joseph’s head.” Moses expresses the wish that <i>Hashem</i> bestow this blessing on the tribe of Joseph. Alternately, the meaning is that “the goodwill of the One Whose residence is above the thorn bush should bestow His blessing on the tribe of Joseph.” The reason that Moses would be referring to G’d in the feminine mode (apparently, by saying תבוא instead of יבוא, is that this is the standard mode employed in Aramaic when referring to attributes of <i>Hashem.</i> [Compare<i> Targum</i> on Kohelet 5,7 where G’d is described in the feminine mode as רעותא ד'.]
   Some commentators say that when viewed from the perspective of the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, Moses means to say that although there is no need to express a special blessing for the parts of the land of Israel which is naturally bountiful, Moses wanted to bestow a similar blessing on the parts which normally do not yield nature’s bounty. The thorn bush represents such normally barren areas in any country.
   33,17. בכור שורו הדר לו, “Like a firstling bull is his majesty;” Nachmanides, referring to the plain meaning of the verse, writes that seeing Moses had blessed the tribe of Joseph in terms of abundant crops, he had likened that tribe to an ox, the animal without whose work most crops would never see the light of day. He wishes that the firstborn of this tribe be majestic, an allusion to the position which Joshua, an illustrious member of the tribe of Joseph, would occupy among the people shortly, after Moses would die. He would henceforth be remembered as the most illustrious of Joseph’s descendants.
   @וקרני ראם קרניו, “his glory will be like the horns of the <i>Re’em</i>.” Moses refers to the horns in the plural, parallel to the term רבבות אפרים, the tens of thousands of Ephrayim, on the one hand, and the אלפי מנשה, “the thousands from Menashe” on the other. Ephrayim’s blessing recalls that Yaakov, at the time, had insisted on placing his right hand on Ephrayim, and his left hand, i.e. אלפי, on Menashe. Israel has been described elsewhere as consisting of רבבות אלפי, “tens of thousands of thousands,” (Numbers 10,36)
   33,20. ברוך מרחיב גד, “Blessed, He, Who broadens the territory of Gad;” Ibn Ezra states that seeing that he had likened Gad to a lion, Moses pronounces a blessing on the One Who had equipped Gad with such an imposing stature; allegorically speaking, his territory is so wide, as no one dares hem him in, come too close to him.
   Nachmanides writes that the correct interpretation of our verse is that the word מרחיב refers to the territorial size of the ancestral heritage of Gad, which was larger than anyone else’s. The two and a half tribes who took their lands on the east bank of the Jordan had not been required to participate in the allocation by lot that took place under the supervision of Joshua. It is quite possible, that in light of the Gadites being natural born warriors, that they grabbed more land for themselves than did the members of the tribe of Reuven. Furthermore, the Gadites had been the very first to raise the subject of remaining on the east bank of the Jordan because the land was suited for grazing and they possessed such large herds after the war against Sichon. Large land allocation was therefore a factor high on the Gadites’ agenda.
   33,21. כי שם חלקת מחוקק ספון, “for it is there that the lawgiver’s plot is hidden.” Ibn Ezra understands the three words חלקת, מחוקק, ספון as if the Torah had written חלק ומחוקק וספון, that Gad had three reasons for choosing the portion he chose, 1) the land was very desirable, 2) the lawgiver, Moses, would be buried on that land, 3) there the Emorites had fancy houses with paneled walls.. He quotes Chagai 1,4 speaking of בבתיכם ספונים, “in your houses with the paneled walls and ceilings,” as another example of the use of the word ספון in that sense.
   @צדקת ה' עשה, “he exacted G’d’s righteous justice.” The <i>Midrash</i> states that the words וירא ראשית לו mean that Gad took the lands of Sichon and Og, which represented the beginning, ראשית, of the Israelites’ conquest of the Canaanite nations. By doing so he did a צדקה, a righteous deed for the whole of the people of Israel, who learned from that tribe to build fortified cities. All the elderly and sick people of Israel stayed in those fortified cities during the seven years that the conquest of the land lasted. 
   33,22. יזנק מן הבשן, “leaping forth from the Bashan.” Ibn Ezra points out that the word יזנק, i.e. the root זנק, does not occur any place else in the Bible. It describes that the might of the lion to which Dan is compared here is that he appears to leap forth suddenly from a lair or hiding place one has not been aware of, has not suspected.
   33,23. נפתלי שבע רצון, “Naftali is sated with favour;” <i>Rash</i> understands this phrase to mean that the territory allocated to Naftali would prove to be so well endowed that all its inhabitants would express their satisfaction with it.
   Nachmanides writes that the words שבע רצון, “well pleased,” refer to <i>Hashem</i> being well pleased with the lifestyle of this tribe and this would express itself visibly through the blessings He would shower upon that tribe.
   23,24. ברוך מבנים אשר, “Asher is more blessed than any of the other tribes;” Nachmanides writes that if the letter מ in front of the word בנים is meant to introduce a comparative, i.e. “more than,” similar to the expression תבורך מנשים in Judges 5,24 where it means that Yael was more blessed than other women, we have a problem, as Moses would then have portrayed all the other tribes as at a disadvantage when compared to the blessings received by Asher. Surely, Moses did not mean to arouse the other tribes’ jealousy? Furthermore, and even more to the point, if that had been what Moses meant, history did not bear out what Moses promised or predicted.
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that he had seen a comment in the <i>Sifri</i>, according to which none of the other tribes had been blessed with children as abundantly as had the tribe of Asher. [It is strange that Nachmanides did apparently not know of that comment in the <i>Sifri.</i> Ed.] Nachmanides contents himself with considering that statement as unsupported by evidence of any kind.
   Nachmanides writes that our sages understood these words to mean that whereas all the other tribes’ blessings referred in some manner to the blessed nature of the piece of land they would inherit, in the case of Asher Moses emphasized the quality of the children that the tribe of Asher would be blessed with. The versions of the <i>Sifri</i> that were in circulation at Nachmanides’ time did not have the line quoted by <i>Rashi.</i> There is no record of the prediction made by Moses here being fulfilled. Perhaps Chronicles I 7,40 which commences with the words כל אלה בני אשר, having given details of descendants of Asher to the ninth generation, is some hint that the tribe developed exceedingly well. [Compare relative tables in the דעת מקרא edition of Chronicles by <i>Mossad Harav</i> Kook, and edited by Yehudah Kil. Ed.] The 26000 officers of varying rank listed in Chronicles as Asher’s contribution to the army is not matched by any of the other tribes.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the פשט, Moses expresses a prayer that seeing that the land granted to the tribe of Asher is exceedingly productive, he hopes that the tribe will enjoy the blessing of G’d to ensure that they can benefit from this to the full extent possible, seeing that this land has a greater potential than that of the other tribes. The tribe should nonetheless be so well liked by the members of the other tribes, that instead of being jealous, they formulate a blessing when they bestow it, by using Asher as the model of someone being blessed by <i>Hashem</i>.
   Onkelos translates the phrase above as אשר יהי רעוא לאחוהי, “may he be well liked by his brothers, etc.” As a result of Asher’s popularity, the other tribes would make a point of buying their olive oil from that tribe’s ample supplies.
   33,25. ברזל ונחושת מנעליך, “your borders (those of all the tribes having borders other that the sea) be sealed tightly by iron and copper fences.” May <i>Hashem</i> always protect your borders from attack.
   @וכימיך דבאיך, “may your old age be similar to your prime.” Nachmanides understands the word דבאך as being similar in meaning to זובאך, claiming that the letter ד and ז are very often used interchangeably, quoting one or two examples. The meaning of the line would be: “may the oil flowing from your olive presses be so bountiful that you can dip your feet in it, כימיך, as long as you live.”
   It is true that what commentators have pointed out in connection with Deut. 28,65, that the word דאבון, which means “mental depression,” is the opposite of the optimism that one possesses in one’s prime. i.e. ימיך. Moses’ prayer is that the Jewish nation, when its members experience old age, should not feel depressed by it, but should enjoy it no less than their prime.
   33,26. אין כא-ל ישורון, “There is none like G’d, Yeshurun;” The reason is that there is no other nation equal to the Jewish people, a people who are able to call upon G’d Who rides across heaven and earth to help them.
   33,27. מעונה אלוקי קדם, “that (the שחקים at the end of the last verse) is the abode of G’d since days immemorial.” Some commentators understand this phrase as meaning: “Your abode is that of the Immemorial G’d.” 
   34,1. ויראהו ה' את כל הארץ, “<i>Hashem</i> showed him the whole country.” Nachmanides emphasizes that the words את כל הארץ, do not refer to the whole earth, but to the whole of the land of Israel on the west bank of the Jordan, whereas afterwards the Torah added that He showed him also in detail the territory of the two and a half tribes on the east bank of the Jordan.
   @את הגלעד עד דן, “Gilead as far as Dan.” Moses was standing on part of the land owned by the tribe of Reuven, whose territory also included some parts of Gilead. Menashe had conquered the other half of Gilead. There was also a “Gilead” in the mountains of Lebanon, which was located on the west side of the Jordan in Israel proper. This is based on Jeremiah 22,6 גלעד אתה לי ראש הלבנון, “Gilead, you are for Me the head of Lebanon etc.;” The reason the Torah mentions the words עד דן, is because that is the northernmost boundary of the land of Israel. The land of Yehudah, basically describes the southern part of the country. Proof of this is Samuel II 24 where Beer Sheva is listed as the southernmost city in Yehudah at the time David commanded Yoav to count the men capable of bearing arms. The tribes of Menashe and Ephrayim are mentioned by name as they populated the others regions. So are Naftali and Dan. Naftali bordered Yehudah in the east. Issachar’s boundaries are not mentioned, as its territory bordered Ephrayim on one side and Menashe on the other. Shimon was an enclave within the territory of Yehudah, and also did not need to be mentioned separately. Binyamin is also not mentioned because its territory was wedged between Yehudah to the south and the tribes of Joseph in the north. The reason the boundary of the Mediterranean is mentioned is on account of Zevulun whose territory was adjacent to the shores of that ocean. There is a view that the territory of Zevulun was situated all the way to the Dead Sea, near Jericho, based on the Torah describing that tribe as dwelling between “seas” (plural). (Genesis 49,13) The valley of the Jordan near Jericho is mentioned especially, seeing that the area is 1200 meters below sea level and not easily visible from where Moses had been standing. G’d invoked a miracle to enable Moses to see all this with his physical eyes. It is clear that Moses was shown the entire land clearly as the Torah testifies that G’d said: “I have shown you the whole land that I have sworn to give to Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yaakov.” (34,4) The principal reason G’d showed Moses the land was to impress him with its goodness. G’d was aware of the tremendous love Moses possessed both for his people and for the land of Israel. He knew that He gave Moses a great deal of joy by showing him what his people had to look forward to.
   34,10. אשר ידעו ה' פנים אל פנים, “whom <i>Hashem</i> had known face to face.” <i>Rashi</i> explains this strange expression as Moses feeling so familiar with <i>Hashem</i> that he would speak to Him at any time, without special preparation.
   Nachmanides questions this, writing that if this were correct the Torah should have made Moses the subject in our verse, not <i>Hashem</i>¸ and should have written אשר ידע את ה' “who was familiar with <i>Hashem,</i> who knew<i> Hashem</i> so well, etc.” According to Nachmanides the meaning of the verse is based on the statement ואדעך בשם, (Exodus 33,17) where it means: “I have known you by name.” Knowing someone by name presumes knowing someone closely, relatively intimately. In the case of <i>Hashem</i>, who had told Moses that it is impossible for a living human being to see His essence or comprehend it, he was granted the next best thing described by the Torah repeatedly in the above terms. Knowing someone by name also implies a degree of mutuality.
   While it is true that the term פנים בפנים occurred also as a mode of speech employed by <i>Hashem vis</i> a <i>vis</i> the whole people, (Deut. 5,4) the difference is that on that occasion it was G’d speaking out of the fire and the people having had to prepare themselves for that spiritual experience for three days beforehand. Moses was always on a level when he was spiritually prepared. [Likely as not, the term פנים אל פנים is a way of describing the difference between believing something and knowing something, the latter being superior to the former. Ed.]
   34,11. לכל האותות, “as evident by all the miracles, etc.” According to Nachmanides verses 10 and 11 have to be understood as sequential, i.e. there had never arisen another prophet who performed so many miracle, etc.”
   Alternately, the words לכל האותות refer back to the words אשר ידעו ה' פנים אל פנים, meaning that there had never been another prophet who performed so many miracles in the name of <i>Hashem</i> and that the people all heard about.
   The fact is that we know about many other prophets performing אותות and מופתים, different categories of miracles; to mention only the many miracles performed by the prophet Elijah. The main difference between the miracles performed by Moses and those performed by other prophets, has been defined by the <i>Midrash</i> as being that all the other prophets were not able to perform their miracles without first having prayed to <i>Hashem</i> to enable them to perform whatever miracle they wanted to perform. A case in point is the occasion when Joshua arrested the orbit of the moon and the sun in order to successfully complete the pursuit of the defeated Canaanites. (Joshua 10,12) The same was true of Elijah’s encounter with the woman from Tzorfat, his decreeing the absence of rainfall, or Elisha’s reviving the son of the Shunamit. Moses, on the other hand –according to that <i>Midrash</i>- performed the miracles ביד ה'. This wording is obscure.
   Maimonides (M<i>oreh Nevuchim</i> 2,35) explains that a major difference between Moses’ kind of prophecy, including his performing miracles to establish his authenticity as prophet, or G’d’s authenticity as the Creator and controller of nature, was, that whatever he did was designed to silence all those who had doubted his veracity, and to do so in full view of all the Israelites. Other prophets performed miracles for individuals, or in the case of Elijah at Mount Carmel before a select audience.
   Nachmanides rejects this definition by Maimonides, as how can one describe the arrest of rainfall over a period of three years, something Elijah had decreed, as a miracle performed for the benefit of individuals? (Compare Kings I 17,1) Besides, Joshua’s plea to arrest the sun’s orbit was made in front of the whole Jewish nation.
   [In his notes on his commentary on Nachmanides, Rabbi Chavell quotes a <i>Rit’va</i> who points out that Maimonides’ wording referred to the immediacy of Moses’ miracles coming true, whereas absence of rainfall to be interpreted as proof of something decreed by a prophet takes months or years to impress the parties concerned as due to the prophet who decreed it his holding the key to rainfall. Besides, both the miracle of the sun’s orbit being temporarily halted, and the rainfall being halted were not performed for an audience who disputed the prophet’s power or ability, as did the Egyptians to whom Moses had to prove himself and his G’d over and over again. Ed.] 
   According to tradition, the splitting of the sea was witnessed in the respective waterways throughout the world. 
   According to the plain meaning of the text, all these words describing Moses’ activities as a prophet and miracle worker are directly connected to what is written in verse 10, i.e. ולא קם נביא עוד בישראל וגו', that there never arose another prophet in Israel comparable to Moses. We must look at Moses’ career as a whole, including the revelation at Mount Sinai, his repeated lengthy stay on that Mountain without food or drink as we understand the term, and the period of 40 years during which he led the people without a visible sign of aging, etc. Not only that, but some of his miracles continued as such for the entire forty years, such as the manna, the heavenly bread, for instance. All of this made him incomparable throughout history up until now.
   34,12. ולכל היד החזקה, “and by all the strong hand, etc.;” according to Nachmanides this is a reference to the splitting of the Sea of Reeds at the time, as the Torah had testified then וירא ישראל את היד הגדולה, “the people saw with their own eyes the strong hand, etc.” (Exodus 14,31)
   @ולכל המורא הגדול, “and the awesome power, etc.” This is a reference to the revelation at Mount Sinai and all that this involved. Moses had been on record that the awesome spectacle had as a major purpose ובעבור תהיה יראתו על פניכם, וגו', “in order that the awe of Him shall be on your faces, etc.” (Exodus 20,17) This is why Moses mentions the words לעיני כל ישראל, “within view of the entire people of Israel,” as distinct from the miracles performed in the presence of Pharaoh which had not been designed to make the Israelites fear G’d, but to make him and his people recognize the existence and power of the attribute of <i>Hashem.</i>
   According to <i>Sifri</i> the words ולכל היד החזקה, refer to the killing of all the Egyptians firstborn, as the Torah had predicted this יד החזקה as the catalyst that would set in motion the Exodus already when G’d appeared to Moses at the burning bush. (Exodus 3,19) The words ולכל המורא הגדול, are understood by the author of <i>Sifri,</i> to refer to the splitting of the Sea of Reeds. Yet another interpretation of the words ולכל המורא הגדול, is that they refer to the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai.
   @אשר עשה משה, “that Moses had orchestrated;” Nachmanides understands the word עשה here as in Genesis 12,5 ואת הנפש אשר עשו בחרן, “and the persons whom they had converted in Charan to the service of the one and only G’d.” Seeing that one can hardly credit Moses with orchestrating the splitting of the sea, he only acted as G’d’s agent, Nachmanides understands Moses’ cardinal contribution as being that he made the people understand the concept of the Sabbath in all its dimensions, primarily as a symbol of G’d having created the universe, and of His having orchestrated the Exodus from Egypt in order to make this nation His special people. The word לעשות in the above sense is used in connection with the observance of the Sabbath in Deuteronomy 5,15.
   
   
   
   1

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
