Eruvin
עירובין
Soncino Translation from Halakhah.com
http://halakhah.com/pdf/moed/Eiruvin.pdf

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b

And then he changed his mind; and a fellow townsmen met him and [asked for the document] saying:
'Your name is the same as mine and your wife's name is the same as my wife's name,' [the document is] invalid for the purpose of divorcing therewith [the other man's wife]?
What a comparison!
Concerning that case it is written in Scripture: And he shall write for her, hence it is required that the writing shall be expressly for her sake; but in this case it is written: And he shall execute upon her, hence it is required that the execution shall be expressly for her sake, and the execution in her case is the blotting out. 
R. Aha b. Hanina said:
It is revealed and know before Him Who spoke and the world came into existence, that in the generation of R. Meir there was none equal to him; then why was not the halachah fixed in agreement with his views? Because his colleagues could not fathom the depths of his mind, 
for he would declare the ritually unclean to be clean and supply plausible proof, and the ritually clean to be unclean and also supply plausible proof. 
One taught: 
His name was not R. Meir but R. Nehorai.
Then why was he called R. Meir? Because he enlightened the Sages in the halachah.
His name in fact was not even Nehorai but R. Nehemiah or, as others say, 
R. Eleazar b. Arak.
Then why was he called Nehorai? Because he enlightened the Sages in the halachah. 
Rabbi declared 
The only reason why I am keener than my colleagues is that I saw the back of R. Meir
but had I had a front view of him I would have been keener still
for it is written in Scripture:
But thine eyes shall see thy teacher. 
R. Abbahu stated in the name of R. Johanan:
R. Meir had a disciple of the name of Symmachus who, for every rule concerning ritual uncleanness, supplied forty-eight reasons in support of its uncleanness, and for every rule concerning ritual cleanness, forty-eight reasons in support of its cleanness. 
One taught:
There was an assiduous student at Jamnia who by a hundred and fifty reasons proved that a [dead] creeping thing was clean.
Said Ravina:
I could also by logical argument prove it to be clean.
If a snake that kills [man and beast] and thus causes much uncleanness, is itself ritually clean, how much more should a creeping thing, which does not kill [either man or beast] and consequently causes no uncleanness, be ritually clean. 
This, however, is no argument, since [the snake] is merely acting like a thorn.
R. Abba stated in the name of Samuel: 
For three years there was a dispute between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel, the former asserting, ‘The halachah is in agreement with our views’ and the latter contending, ‘The halachah is in agreement with our views’. 
Then a bath kol issued announcing, 
‘[The utterances of] both are the words of the living God, but the halachah is in agreement with the rulings of Beth Hillel’. 
Since, however, both are the words of the living God’ what was it that entitled Beth Hillel to have the halachah fixed in agreement with their rulings? Because they were kindly and modest, they studied their own rulings and those of Beth Shammai, 
and were even so [humble] as to mention the actions of Beth Shammai before theirs, 
as may be seen from what we have learnt: 
If a man had his head and the greater part of his body within the sukkah but his table in the house, Beth Shammai ruled [that the booth was] invalid but Beth Hillel ruled that it was valid. 
Said Beth Hillel to Beth Shammai, 
‘Did it not so happen that the elders of Beth Shammai and the elders of Beth Hillel went on a visit to R. Johanan b. Hahoranith and found him sitting with his head and greater part of his body within the sukkah while his table was in the house?’ 
Beth Shammai replied: 
From there proof [may be adduced for our view for] 
they indeed told him, 
‘If you have always acted in this manner you have never fulfilled the commandment of sukkah’. 
This teaches you that him who humbles himself, the Holy One, blessed be He, raises up, and him who exalts himself, the Holy One, blessed be He, humbles; 
from him who seeks greatness, greatness flees, but him who flees from greatness, greatness follows; 
he who forces time is forced back by time but he who yields to time finds time standing at his side. 
Our Rabbis taught: 
For two and a half years were Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel in dispute, the former asserting 
that it were better for man not to have been created than to have been created, and the latter maintaining 
that it is better for man to have been created than not to have been created. 
They finally took a vote and decided 
that it were better for man not to have been created than to have been created, but now that he has been created, let him investigate his past deeds or, 
as others say, 
let him examine his future actions. 
Mishnah. The cross beam of which they [the Rabbis] spoke must be wide enough to hold an ariah
which is half of a lebenah of three handbreadths.
It is sufficient for a beam to be one handbreadth wide in order to hold the width of an ariah. 
[The beam must be] wide enough to hold an ariah  but also strong enough to support such an ariah.
R. Judah ruled: 
[The beam is valid if it is sufficiently] wide, although it is not strong. 
If it was made of straw or reeds it is looked [upon] as though it had been made of metal;
[if it was] curved it is looked upon as though it were straight; if it was round it is looked upon as though it were square. 
Whatsoever has a circumference of three handbreadths is one handbreadth in diameter.