Bava Metzia
בבא מציעא
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Two men are holding onto a garment. One says, "I found it!" and the other says, "I found it!" One says, "It's all mine!" and the other says, "It's all mine!" One swears that he doesn't own less than half and the other swears he doesn't own less than half and they split it. One says, "All of it is mine!" and the other says "Half of it is mine!" The one who says all of it is his swears he doesn't own less than three quarters and the one who says half swears he doesn't own less than a quarter and this one gets three quarters and that one gets one quarter. Two men are riding on the back of an animal, or one man is riding and the other is leading. One says, "It's all mine!" and the other says, "It's all mine!" One swears that he doesn't own less than half and the other swears he doesn't own less then half and they split it. In a time in which they agree or where there are witnesses present they split without an oath.
Why does the mishna teach, "One says, "I found it!" and the other says, "I found it!" One says, "It's all mine!" and the other says, "It's all mine!"" Teach them separately! Teach, " One says, "I found it and it's all mine!" and the other says "I found it and it's all mine!" And furthermore, teach just "I found it!" and we can infer that "it's all mine!" If it only taught "I found it!", I would have thought that finding was seeing!

Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b


... ... ... ... ... ... R. Yehuda was doing business after Mar Shmuel in the grain-pounder’s marker. He asked Mar Shmuel, “If a person found a purse here, what is the ruling?  He replied, “It is his.” “And if an Israelite came, and gave him a sign [proving that the lost item was his], what is the ruling?” He replied, “The finder is obligated to return it.” “Both?”  Mar Shmuel said to him “within the line of the law,” for the father of [Mar] Shmuel had once found donkeys in the desert and had returned them to their owner after twelve months had already passed–[he acted] within the line of the law. Rava was following after R. Nachman in the leatherworker’s market–there are those who say [it was] the marketplace of the rabbis–and he asked R. Nachman, “If a person found a purse here, what is the ruling?” He said to him, “It is his.” “And if an Israelite came and gave him a sign, what is the ruling?” He said to him “It is his [it still belongs to the finder].” Wouldn’t he [the Israelite] stand and shout in protest? Such behavior is like one who protests against his house falling, or his ship sinking at sea. ... ... ... ...


Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b

... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rava said, “In any situation where he would return his own [livestock], he must return those which belong to his friend. In any case where who would load and unload his own property, he must also load and unload that which belongs to someone else.” R. Ishmael, son of R. Yossi, was walking on the road when he came upon a man who was carrying bundles of sticks. The man put them down, and rested. Then he said to R. Ishmael, “Help me pick them up.” He asked him, “How much are they worth?” He said to him, “Half a zuz.”  So R. Ishamel gave him half a zuz, and declared the bundle of sticks ownerless.  But the man took them back for himself. So R. Ishmael again paid him half a zuz, and declared the sticks ownerless. Seeing that the man intended to acquire them for himself again, he said to him: “With respect to the rest of the world, these sticks are ownerless [and anyone can take them]. But with respect to you, they are not ownerless [and you cannot reacquire them].” But if that is the case, who would say it was really ownerless? As it has been taught according to the House of Shammai, items declared ownerless can only be acquired by the poor. According to the House of Hillel, an item only qualifies as ownerless if it can be acquired by rich and poor alike, as in [the case of the rules pertaining to] the sabbatical year. So R. Ishmael the son of R. Yossi did, in fact, declare it ownerless and available to anyone to take! It was by words alone that he stopped him.  But R. Ishmael was an elder, and it was not in accordance with his dignity [to help the man]. R. Ishmael, son of R. Yossi, acted within the line of the law. R. Yosef taught [expounding Ex. 18:20], “You shall make known to them” - this refers to their livelihood; “The path” - this refers to acts of loving-kindness; “They are to walk” - this refers to visiting the sick; “Upon” - this refers to burial; “The deeds” - this refers to the law; “They are to perform” - this refers to [actions] within the line of the law.
The master [i.e. R. Yosef] said: “They are to walk ” - this refers to visiting the sick. If so, the prooftext for deeds of loving-kindness would appear to be redundant. However, is necessary to include the case of someone visiting a sick person with whom he shares a particular affinity. The master reasoned that one who visits a sick person with whom shares a particular affinity takes one-sixtieth of his illness upon himself, but he must visit him nevertheless.  “Upon it” – this refers to burial. We still would not need to mention [a prooftext for] deeds of loving-kindness, except for the case of an elder, where the task is not in accordance with his dignity. “They are to perform” – this refers to [actions] within the line of the law. R. Yohanan taught, “Jerusalem was destroyed because its inhabitants judged according to the law of Torah.” Should they instead have made arbitrary judgments?! Rather, [the teaching means that] they based their judgments on a strict interpretation of Torah law, instead of acting within the line of the law.
