Gittin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The previous mishnah discussed a person who conditioned his wife’s divorce upon his subsequently dying.  For this to work, he must state that the divorce would retroactively be effective from the time he gave her the get.  However, until he dies she is not divorced because the get is conditional upon his death. Our mishnah discusses her status between the time he gives her the get and the time that he dies, thereby finalizing her divorce.

Mishnah Four
She should not be alone with him except in the presence of witnesses, even a slave or a handmaid— [any witness is sufficient] except for her own female slave, since she can take liberties in front of her own handmaid.   
What is her status during those days?   
Rabbi Judah says that she is regarded as a married woman in every respect. 
Rabbi Yose says that she is both divorced and not divorced.

Explanation 
Section one:  Once the husband gives her the conditional get, she will retroactively be divorced from that moment onward.  Therefore, he is not allowed to have sexual relations with her.  Furthermore, as we shall learn in a later mishnah (8:4), sexual relations with her at this point, renders the get invalid.  In order to avoid the possibility that they would engage in sexual relations, they are not even allowed to be secluded together.  Seclusion is defined as being totally alone. The presence of anyone else in the room means that they are not secluded.  The one exception is her handmaid.  Since she would not be embarrassed at having sexual relations in front of her own handmaid, the handmaid’s presence is not sufficient to prevent seclusion.
Section two:  The mishnah now asks what her status is in-between the time that the divorce was given and the husband dies. According to Rabbi Judah, she is fully married.  Rabbi Judah seemingly disagrees with the previous clause and holds that when the husband dies the get is retroactively effective to a point a moment before he died.  It is not retroactively effective to the time when he gave her the get.  Therefore, she can continue to live with him as a married woman.  Rabbi Yose disagrees and holds that the get is retroactively effective to the point at which he gave it to her.  Therefore, she is both married and not married. This means that she could not have relations with him and not eat terumah if he was a priest.  However, she could not marry anyone else and if she did have relations with someone else, it might have the status of adultery.  

