Gittin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah makes reference to Yevamoth 15:4. That mishnah teaches that some women may not testify that another woman’s husband has died.  The fear is that these women will intentionally lie in order to trick the woman into remarrying while her husband is still alive, thereby causing an irreparable rupture in their marriage.  In our mishnah we learn that although these women are not trusted to testify regarding the death of the husband, they are trusted to deliver a get.

Mishnah Seven
Even the women who are not trusted to say “Her husband died,” are trusted to bring her get:  her mother-in-law, the daughter of her mother-in-law, her rival wife, her sister-in-law (husband’s brother’s wife) and the daughter of her husband.
What is the difference between the get and death?
The writing [on the get] proves [that she is divorced.]
A woman may bring her own get but she must say, “In my presence it was signed and in my presence it was delivered.”

Explanation
Section one:  These five women may dislike or even hate a wife and therefore cannot testify that her husband died (see Yevamoth 15:4).  As stated in the introduction, these women may nevertheless deliver a get to a wife, thereby showing to her that she is divorced and allowed to remarry.
Section two:  In this section the mishnah questions why these women can deliver a get but not testify regarding a husband’s death.  The answer is that the get’s validity is ultimately proved by those who wrote and signed the get, and not by the person who delivered it.  Although an agent delivering a get is under certain circumstances required to declare “In my presence it was signed and in my presence it was delivered”, this is not truly testimony, but rather a means of allowing the get to be accepted without checking its validity.  This is why those who are not allowed to testify can still deliver a get and make the above declaration.  In contrast, testifying that a husband has died is truly testimony.  Therefore, since we fear that these women may lie, they are not trusted.  [Note that women in general are allowed to testify regarding a husband’s death in order to lessen the problem of wives not knowing if their husbands have died.]  
Section three:  Theoretically speaking a woman could even bring her own get and this would not be considered testifying about herself, since the writing on the get proves its validity.  However, she is still required to state, “In my presence it was signed and in my presence it was delivered”, the statement that is always required when a get is brought from abroad to the land of Israel.  This situation could happen if the husband gave her the get outside of Israel but told her that he didn’t want the divorce to be enacted until she reached Israel.  A truly Zionist husband!


