Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who is half a slave and half free. This could happen if he was owned jointly by two masters and one of his masters freed him but not the other.  

Mishnah Five
One who is half a slave and half free works for his master one day and for himself one day, the words of Beth Hillel. 
Beth Shammai said to them: you have set things right for the master but you have not set things right for the slave. He cannot marry a female slave because he is already half free, and he cannot marry a free woman because he is half a slave.  Shall he then decease [from having children]? But wasn’t the world only made to be populated, as it says, “He did not create it as a waste, he formed it to be inhabited” (Isaiah 45:18)?  Rather because of tikkun olam we compel his master to emancipate him and he writes a document for half his purchase price. 
Beth Hillel retracted [their opinion and] ruled like Beth Shammai.  

Explanation
Section one:  Beth Hillel seems to make a reasonable suggestion for what to do in this situation.  The half-slave splits his time between working for his master and working for himself.
Section two:  Beth Shammai responds in what is in my opinion one of the more remarkable statements in the Mishnah.  Beth Hillel’s solution for the half slave is beneficial to his master but leaves the half slave in an untenable position.  Slaves and free people cannot marry. Since this person is a half slave, he can marry neither a slave nor a free woman.  However, the commandment of having children “be fruitful and multiply” applies to everyone, even slaves and half slaves.  The halakhah cannot allow a situation where a person has no one to marry.  The world, after all, was formed by God for it to be inhabited, and not for it to lay desolate of human beings.  Therefore, because of tikkun olam, his master is forced to free him, thereby allowing him to marry a free woman.  The slave merely writes a document for half of his value and owes that amount to the owner.  
Section three:  Indeed, Beth Shammai’s argument was so compelling that Beth Hillel changed their opinion and ruled like Beth Shammai.  
