Gittin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with situations in which we assume that a person is still alive even though we cannot be sure that he is.  

Mishnah Seven
If a man lends money to a priest or a levite or a poor man on condition that he can may separate [terumah or tithes] from their portion, he may do so, in the presumption that they are still alive, and he need be concerned that the priest or the levite may have died or the poor man may have become rich. 
If they died, he must obtain the permission of the heirs. 
If he made the loan in the presence of the court, he need not obtain permission from the heirs.

Explanation
Section one:  In this scenario a person loans money to a priest, Levite or poor person with the agreement that the debt will be worked off by the person withholding terumah (given to the priest), first tithe (to the Levite) or poor tithe (the poor person) which he would have given to them.  In such a case, the person will harvest his produce and separate terumah and tithes as he normally does. The terumah he must sell to another priest but he may keep the money for himself as payment for his debt.   Note that he may not eat the terumah since terumah is strictly forbidden to non-priests.  The tithes he may eat himself, since non-Levites and people who are not poor may eat tithes.  
The person paying off his debt need not be concerned that the priest or Levite died or that the poor person is no longer poor.  As we learned in the previous mishnayoth, we can assume that a person is still alive until we have strong reason to believe otherwise.
Section two:  If the lender knows that the priest, Levite or poor person died, he may not continue the arrangement without obtaining permission from the heirs.  Since the heirs may prefer to pay back the debt, the lender must let them know what about the arrangement.  Assumedly they will find the arrangement acceptable.  Furthermore, if the arrangement was made in the presence of the court, he need not obtain their permission.  The court has the power to finalize the debt such that the debtor may not preemptively pay it back.  

