Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The first section of our mishnah continues to discuss a husband who attempts to cancel his get after he has already sent it to his wife.  In this section, a “takkanah” of Rabban Gamaliel is mentioned.  “Takkanah” literally means “a fixing”, and it refers to a rabbinic decree which remedies a problematic situation.  The remainder of this chapter and the next chapter contain lists of “takkanot”, made because of “tikkun olam”—fixing the world or other related reasons.  Today this concept has come to mean good deeds such as charity done in order to make the world a better place.  In the Mishnah its meaning was more specific and it usually refers to correct either problems created because of  marital laws or economic injustices.
Throughout the Mishnah I will leave the term “tikkun olam” untranslated, as there is no word that precisely captures its meaning.  I also think that the best way to understand the mishnaic meaning of “tikkun olam” is through the examples used by the Mishnah itself.  
 
Mishnah Two
Originally, a husband would bring together a court wherever he was and annul the get. 
Rabban Gamaliel the Elder established that this should not be done, because of “tikkun olam”.  
Originally the husband would change his name, or his wife’s name, or the name of his town or of his wife’s town.  
Rabban Gamaliel the Elder established that he should write, “The man so-and-so or any name that he has,”;  “the woman so-and-so or any name that she has,” because of “tikkun olam.” 

Explanation
Section one:  In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that if a husband catches up with someone delivering a get to his wife or arrives at his wife before the messenger gets there and delivers the get, he may annul the get.  Today we learn that in older times the husband could gather together a court and in front of them annul the get i without getting to his messenger or his wife.  This would be extremely problematic for the wife because she might not know that her husband had annulled the get.  If she were to assume that the get was valid and that she was divorced, she might remarry and have children.  In such a scenario, her second marriage would be illegitimate and her children with her new husband would be mamzerim, because she is still married.  Another problem would be that women receiving gittin by messenger would not know if the get was valid, because their husbands may have annulled it.  To avoid problems they wouldn’t remarry.  To prevent these complications Rabban Gamaliel the Elder who lived during the time of the Second Temple established that people should not do this.  
Section two:  In mishnaic times people evidently would have several different names, names which may have been used in different regions or perhaps by speakers of different languages (i.e. a Greek name and a Hebrew name).  The problem arose in identifying the get— who was the husband or who was the wife.  This is what the mishnah means “change his name” etc.  The husband would write only one of his names, or his wife’s names or his town’s name and then he would claim that the get was not his and thereby annul it.  Rabban Gamaliel established that the husband should write “The man so-and-so or any name that he has” so that annulling the get after the wife has received it would be impossible.  Some commentators interpret this to mean that this formula itself should be written in the get, whereas other commentators hold this to mean that inside the get the husband must list all of the names that he goes by.   
