Gittin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The remainder of chapter seven discusses conditional divorces.  Today’s mishnah discusses someone who divorces his wife on the condition that she pay him a large sum of money.  

Mishnah Five
[If a husband says], “This is your get on condition that you give me two hundred zuz”, she is divorced and she has to give [him the money]. 
[If he says], “On condition that you give [the money to] within thirty days from now, if she gives him within thirty days she is divorced, but if not she is not divorced. 
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: “It happened in Sidon that a man said to his wife, “This is your get on condition that you give me my robe”, and his robe was lost, and the Sages said that she should give him its value in money.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case, the divorce is effective immediately and she must give him the two hundred zuz.  If she elects not to give him the two hundred zuz, then the get is invalid.  
Section two:  In this case, the husband wisely set a time limit for her to pay the divorce money.  If she wishes to be divorced, she must give him the money immediately.  If she does not do so, the get is invalid.  
I should note that the amount of 200 zuz is probably not accidental.  This is the amount of money that the husband would have to pay her for her ketubah if he divorces her.  What we may have here is a husband who wants to divorce his wife, and perhaps a wife who wants to be divorced, but he cannot afford to pay her the ketubah.  He is in essence saying that he wants to divorce her without paying her marriage settlement.  She has a right to forego her ketubah, should she wish to be divorced.
Section three:  In the case that happened in Sidon (on the coast of modern Lebanon), a husband wanted to retrieve his robe from his wife.  However, the robe was lost and therefore the question arose whether the wife could fulfill the get’s condition by returning to him the value of the robe.  The Sages answered that she could.  In essence, the husband was not asking for the robe back but for the value of the robe.    

