Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The first two sections of this mishnah deal with certain responsibilities that guardians have in taking care of orphans.  The final section deals with damages that are done to food or sacrifices that cannot be seen.  

Mishnah Four
If orphans relied on a householder or if their father appointed a guardian for them, he must tithe their produce. 
A guardian who was appointed by the father of the orphans is required to take an oath.  [A guardian who was] appointed by the court does not need to take an oath. 
Abba Shaul says that the rule is the reverse. 
One who renders impure [someone else’s pure food] or mixes terumah [with someone else’s non-terumah produce] or makes a libation [with someone else’s wine], if he does so inadvertently, he is exempt, but if intentionally he is liable.  
Priests who intentionally made someone else’s sacrifice piggul in the Temple are liable. 

Explanation
Section one:  A guardian has the responsibility to tithe the produce of orphans who are relying on him to manage their lives.  This clause is here to introduce the next sections of the mishnah.  
Section two:  When the orphans grow up, according to the law they can make the guardian swear that he did not misappropriate any of their money (see Shevuoth 7:8).  According to the first opinion in this section, the orphans have such power only when they were appointed by the father.  If the court appointed the guardian, he is not liable for such an oath.  This is because the court forced him to be a guardian, and he didn’t necessarily receive any satisfaction.  If the halakhah were to force him to take an oath, people would refuse to become guardians.  However, if the father appointed him, the guardian has the satisfaction of helping out the father who was assumedly his friend. Since he has that satisfaction, he will accept becoming a guardian even though he might eventually have to take an oath.  We can see here that the “tikkun olam” is to exempt guardians from taking oaths if the oath would deter them from accepting such appointments in the first place.
Abba Shaul reasons that the exact opposite is true.  If the father appoints him he need not swear since he was only doing a favor for the father.  According to Abba Shaul, if guardians appointed by the father were forced to swear they would not want to become guardians.  However, when the court appoints someone to be a guardian he gets the added benefit of the community knowing that the court believes that he is a trustworthy man.  Since he receives this added benefit, he will not refuse becoming a guardian even if it might cause him to take an oath.
Section three:  There are three types of invisible damage mentioned in this first clause.  If one causes someone else’s terumah to become impure, it has to be thrown away.  If someone mixes in terumah with another person’s normal produce it must be sold to priests at the price of terumah which is lower than the price of normal produce.  Finally, if someone makes an idolatrous libation with someone else’s wine, the wine must be thrown away.  Similarly, if one mixes already libated wine with non-libated wine it must all be thrown away.  In all of these cases the damage is done but the object has not physically changed at all.  The bottom line halakhah holds that damage that cannot be seen is not considered damage.  Therefore, if any of these things were done intentionally, the damager need not make restitution.  However, had he done so intentionally he must pay because of “tikkun olam”—to prevent people from intentionally damaging other’s property.
“Piggul” is a sacrifice offered by a priest who has intends to eat it at a time when that sacrifice may no longer be eaten.  “Piggul” cannot be put onto the altar and it does not bring about the intended result of a sacrifice (for instance atonement).  This is again a case of invisible damage, and as above, if a priest intentionally causes such damage he is liable.  

