Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah teaches rules that were made in order to keep peace between people.  These “ways of peace” are a subcategory of “tikkun olam”.  Whereas many of the other enactments made because of “tikkun olam” had a strong economic element, these rules are more concerned with interpersonal relations. 

Mishnah Eight
These were the rules they laid down because of the ways of peace:   
A priest is called up first to read the Torah and after him a Levite and then an Israelite, because of the ways of peace. 
An “eruv” is placed in the room where it has always been placed, because of the ways of peace. 
The cistern which is nearest to the channel is filled first, because of the ways of peace. 
[Taking of] beasts, birds and fishes from traps [set by others] is robbery, because of the ways of peace. 
Rabbi Yose says that it is actual robbery. 
[Taking away] anything found by a deaf-mute, an idiot or a minor is robbery, because of the ways of peace. 
Rabbi Yose says that it is actual robbery. 
If a poor man strikes [down olives] on top of an olive tree, [taking the fruit] that is beneath him is robbery. 
Rabbi Yose says that it is actual robbery.
Poor Gentiles are not prevented from gathering gleanings, forgotten sheaves, and the corners of the field, because of the ways of peace.

Explanation
Section one:  The custom of the Kohen receiving the first aliyah to the Torah and the Levite the second and only then the rest of the congregation was enacted because of the ways of peace.  [Quite frankly, it seems that this hasn’t worked all that well and synagogue-goers will just find something else to argue about but that’s another story.] 
Section two:  An “eruv” is made by enclosing an area (done today with twine or something similar) and by putting a symbolically communal meal in one house in the area.  This is a legal fiction to turn a large community into a “home” so that people can carry on Shabbat within this area.  The mishnah teaches that this meal is put in the same house every week.  If it were to move around from week to week people might argue where it should be put.  Alternatively, people might not trust that the eruv was set properly because they didn’t know where it is.  Therefore, it is left in the same house week after week.  
Section three:  To irrigate cisterns channels were made from the river.  The mishnah teaches that the first cistern on the channel is allowed to fill up first and the other cistern owners cannot tell the owner of the closest cistern that he should periodically close his up so that they can fill up first.  Rather the cisterns are always filled up in the same order to avoid fights.
Section four:  The mishnah now begins with a list of three things the taking of which is not considered to be true robbery.  Rather, taking these things is prohibited only because of the “ways of peace”.  In each of these cases, Rabbi Yose holds that it is prohibited not because of the “ways of peace” but because taking them is truly robbery as defined by the Torah.  
The first case is taking animals from traps.  Since these animals have not yet come into the physical possession of the trap-setters, taking from them is not technically robbery.  However, it is still prohibited because of the “ways of peace.”  Rabbi Yose holds that although they have not yet come into the physical possession of the trap-setters, the trap-setters have acquired them and therefore taking them is full “robbery.”
Section five:  According to the first opinion, a deaf-mute, imbecile or child do not legally acquire things that they find.  Therefore, technically speaking when one takes something that they found away from them, he is not robbing them.  However, for many obvious reasons, this is prohibited because of “the ways of peace.”  Again, Rabbi Yose considers this to be full robbery.
Section six: There are three things that a poor person can take—1) the corners of the field; 2) things which the harvester forgot to take; 3) grain that fell out of the harvesters’ hands.  In our mishnah a poor person is on top of an olive tree, beating the tree so that the olives fall below so that he can collect them.  Technically, the olives which fall below are not his until he gathers them into his possession.  Therefore, if someone else takes them before he gathers them he has not technically stolen them.  However, because of “the ways of peace” it is forbidden.  Again, Rabbi Yose holds that this is “full robbery.” 
Section seven:  The agricultural products left in the field are meant to be for poor Jews.  However, in the interest of peace Jews are supposed to allow non-Jews to take them as well.  I should note that this obviously is an important issue for modern Jews, both in the Diaspora and in Israel.   

