Gittin, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah returns to discussing  one who delivers a get from abroad and is obligated to say, “In my presence it was written and in my presence it was signed.”  Today’s mishnah deals with one who can only recite part of the formula.  
I should note that the Talmud provides a very complicated explanation for this mishnah.  I have tried to explain according to the words of the mishnah without the Talmudic explanation.  

Mishnah One
If one brings a get from abroad and declares: 
“It was written in my presence” but not, “It was signed in my presence”;
“It was signed in my presence” but not “It was written in my presence”; 
“All of it was written in my presence and in my presence but only one of the witnesses signed in my presence”;
“Half was written in my presence but both witnesses signed in my presence”; — [in all these cases] the get is invalid.  
If one says “It was written in my presence” and another says, “It was signed in my presence”, the get is invalid. 
If two say, “It was written in our presence” and another says, “It was signed in my presence”, it is invalid. 
Rabbi Judah declares it valid. 
If one says, “It was written in my presence” and two say, “It was signed in our presence”, it is valid.

Explanation
Section one:  In all of these cases one person brings the get, and he cannot recite the full formula.  Even if he can recite nearly the whole formula but cannot honestly say that the entire get was written and fully signed by two witnesses in his presence, the get is invalid.  As we learned above in 1:3, that this get is invalid means that in order for the woman to use this get to remarry, the witnesses themselves must verify their signatures or two witnesses must testify that they recognize both signatures.  The testimony of the one who brought the get is not sufficient in and of itself.  
Section two:  In this case, one messenger testifies that the get was written in his presence but cannot say that it was signed in his presence, and the other person with him says that the get was signed in his presence but cannot say that the get was also written in his presence.  Since there is no complete declaration made by any one messenger, the get is not valid.  Again, this means that it remains invalid until its signatures are validated.
Section three:  In this case two people bring the get and both can testify that the get was written in their presence, but neither can say that it was signed in their presence.  A third person says that it was signed in his presence. The first opinion states that the get is still invalid, and still needs to be upheld by validating the signatures.  Rabbi Judah holds that the get is already valid since there is full testimony by two witnesses on the writing.  To Rabbi Judah, the writing is the essential part of the making of the get and if two testify that the writing was done properly, the get is valid.  This is not through their being deliverers of the get, but rather through their being witnesses. However, one person saying that the writing was done properly is not valid, because one person is not full testimony in Jewish law.  
Section four:  In this case two testify that they saw the get signed.  This is essentially upholding the signatures on the get and it always makes the get valid.  Again, these two function as witnesses.     


