Gittin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
In this mishnah a man conditions the validity of his get upon his arrival at a certain place or lack of return within thirty days.   The idea would be that if he arrived at his destination and did not return, he either was never intending on returning or something else had occurred to him, preventing his return and thereby validating the get.

Mishnah Seven
[If a husband says,] “This is your get if I do not return within thirty days”, and he was going from Judea to Galilee, if he got as far as Antipatras and then returned, his condition is broken.   
[If he says,] “This is your get if I do not return within thirty days”, and he was going from Galilee to Judea, if he got as far as Kefar Otnai and then returned, the condition is broken. 
[If he said,] “This is your get if I do not return within thirty days”, and he was going into foreign parts, if he got as far as Acco and then returned his condition is broken. 
[If he said,] “This is your get as long as I shall keep away from you for thirty days”, even though he came and went and came and went, since he was not secluded with her, the get is valid.

Explanation
Sections one, two and three:  All three of these sections have identical structures, so we will explain them together.  According to the Talmud explains that in each case the husband made two conditions: 1) if he were to arrive at his destination the get would become effective immediately; 2) if he did not return within thirty days the get would come into effect.  [I should note that there are other explanations of this mishnah, and its language is actually quite difficult and open to various interpretations.] In all three scenarios, he does not arrive at his destination and he returns within thirty days.  Antipatras is on the border between Judea and the Galilee, but it is still in Judea.  Kefar Otnai is still in the Galilee. Acco, while almost being considered outside the land of Israel (however, compare Gittin 1:2).  
Section four:  In this case, the husband conditions the validity of the get upon his staying away from his wife’s presence for thirty days.  The mishnah teaches that his intention was that he should not be secluded with his wife for thirty days.  Therefore, even if he comes and goes but they are not secluded together, she is divorced.        

