Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The two sections of this mishnah deal with a person who sold either himself, his children or his fields to a Gentile.  

Mishnah Nine
If a man sells himself and his children to a Gentile, he is not to be redeemed but his children are to be redeemed after the death of their father.
If a man sells his field to a Gentile, and an Israelite bought it back, he has to bring, the purchaser must bring first fruits from it, because of tikkun olam.  

Explanation
Section one:  If the Jewish community were to redeem a man who sold himself to a Gentile, others in the future would be encouraged to do so in order to raise money, and eventually it would become a serious financial burden.  Therefore, the community is not allowed to redeem such a person.  However, his children were sold through no fault of their own.  In order to prevent them from being lost to the Jewish community they are redeemed after their father’s death.  However, while he is still alive even they are not redeemed so that the father will not be encouraged to sell them again.  
Section two:  There are two versions to this section, the one that I translated above, and another version which Rashi used.  I will explain both.  
When a Gentile acquires land in Israel, the land still retains its holiness and therefore the first fruits (bikkurim) which grow from this land must be brought to Jerusalem, as is the rule with all first fruits.  However, the person who buys the land from the Gentile might think that since the fruits grew while owned by the Gentile, he need not bring first fruits.  To prevent this situation, the rabbis stated that the one who bought the land from the Gentile must bring first fruits.  Note that according to this interpretation something done because of tikkun olam is also a “toraitic” law (deoraita).  This is unusual and hence makes this interpretation tentative.  The Talmud adds further complicated wrinkles to this mishnah to solve this problem.
Rashi’s version reads, “If one sells his land to a Gentile, he must buy the first fruits and bring them.”  This is easier to understand.  The Gentile will obviously not do so himself and therefore if the Jew doesn’t go back and buy the first fruits, they will not be brought.  Furthermore, this is a penalty on the person for selling his land to a Gentile.   

