Gittin, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that messengers who deliver divorce documents from abroad must declare that the document was written and signed in their presence.  In the Talmud there are two explanations for this requirement.  The first is that if the husband comes to protest the get, saying that he did not send it, the people who heard the messenger testify that he saw it written and signed will be able to disregard a  husband’s potential appeal. This is especially important if his wife had already remarried and had children.  If her get is invalidated, her subsequent children would become mamzerim.  The reason why the testimony of the messenger is only necessary if he comes from abroad is that in such a case it would be more difficult to find the original witnesses.  Furthermore, in the ancient world travel was often dangerous, and the original witnesses could not always travel to testify concerning the validity of the get.  The testimony of the messenger makes it easier to uphold the validity of the get, in essence a service for the woman.  The other opinion in the Talmud, which is really an additional opinion, is that outside of the Land of Israel they were not knowledgeable in writing gittin. Therefore, someone who came from abroad had to testify that it was written properly.  Those which were written in the Land of Israel did not need such testimony.  

Mishnah One
One who brings a get from abroad [to the Land of Israel] must declare, “In my presence it was written and in my presence it was signed.” 
Rabban Gamaliel says: even one who brings it from Rekem or from Heger.  
Rabbi Eleazar says: even one who brings it from Kefar Ludim to Lud.  
The sages, however, say: declaration “In my presence it was written and in my presence it was signed” is required only from one who brings a get from abroad or who takes it there.
One who brings [a get] from one province to another province in foreign lands is also required to declare, “In my presence it was written, and in my presence it was signed.” 
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: even from one hegemony to another hegemony.

Explanation
Section one:  This section was explained in the introduction.  
Section two:  The tannaim in this section, Rabban Gamaliel, Rabbi Elazar and the other sages disagree with regard to the applicability of the halakhah in section one.  According to Rabban Gamaliel, even if a messenger brings a get from towns such as Rekem or Heger which lie on the border, he must recite the formula. This is either because it is hard to bring the witnesses from these towns to testify, or because people who live on the border do not know how to properly write gittin.  Rabbi Elazar adds that even if the two cities lie adjacent but one is in the land of Israel and one is not, such as Kefar Ludim, which is outside and Lud which is inside, one must still recite the formula.  However, the sages disagree and hold that the formula must be recited only by one who brings a get from abroad, or one who brings one back from there.  The reason that someone bringing a get from Israel to a different land must recite the formula is lest the original witnesses cannot be found in order to uphold the get.  
Section three:  Just as the messenger must make the declaration that the get was written and signed in his presence when bringing the get to and from Israel, so too must he make the declaration when bringing the get to and from provinces outside of the land.  The reason is that the original witnesses may be difficult to find if there is a need to uphold the get.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel adds that even within one province, if he is switching hegemonies, places ruled by different governors, all within the Roman empire, he must make the declaration.     
