Gittin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a case where a rumor went around that a certain woman was either betrothed, and hence forbidden to marry anyone else, or divorced and permitted to remarry.  Without full testimony regarding either status, her status would seem to be uncertain.  Nevertheless, the mishnah generally relies on the rumors.  We should remember that in mishnaic times they didn’t have the systems of verification and documentation that are available today and hence people would inevitably have to at least occasionally rely on rumors.  

Mishnah Nine
If a report goes out in the town: “[A certain woman is] betrothed,” she is regarded as betrothed;   
[If a report goes out in the town: “A certain woman is] divorced,” she is regarded as divorced.   
[This is only the case] provided the report has no qualification.   
What is meant by a qualification? 
[If the report is,] “So-and-so divorced his wife with a stipulation” [or], “He threw her the betrothal money, but it is uncertain whether it landed nearer to her or nearer to him” — this is a qualification.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah regards either rumor as being true.  The Talmud explains that a rumor alone would not be enough to create a legal assumption that a woman is married. Rather, physical signs of a marriage must have been observed.  For instance, women seemed to be celebrating with her, saying “she’s married.”  
With regard to the rumor of divorce, the Talmud explains that this clause refers to the woman who was regarded as married based on a rumor.  Since the assumption of her being married was not based on evidence but on a rumor, a rumor of divorce is sufficient to allow her to remarry.  In contrast, a woman who was known to be married cannot be assumed to be divorced based on a rumor. Rather, she must bring evidence, either witnesses who saw her divorced or the document itself.
Section two:  If there is a “qualification” to the report, then it is not regarded as true.  The “qualification” is something that would cause us to disbelieve the rumor.  For instance, her husband attempted to divorce her, but the divorce came with a stipulation that was not fulfilled.  Or he attempted to betroth her by throwing the betrothal money at her, but we’re not sure if it landed closer to her (in which case she is married) or closer to him (in which case she is not).  In both of these cases, since there was a qualification to the rumor, the rumor is not accepted.   
  



