Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah contains three different “takkanot”, decrees meant to remedy situations.  The first was made by Rabban Gamaliel the Elder, as were those in yesterday’s mishnah.  The second is anonymous and the third was made by Hillel.

Mishnah Three
A widow is paid back [her kethubah] from the property of orphans only by taking an oath.   [When the court] refrained from imposing an oath on her, Rabban Gamaliel the Elder established that she could take any vow which the orphans wanted and collect her kethubah. 
Witnesses sign their names on a get because of tikkun olam.   
Hillel instituted the prosbul because of tikkun olam.

Explanation
Section one:  We learned this law in Ketuboth 9:7-8.  If a widow wants to collect her ketubah money from her husband’s orphans, she must take an oath that she has not already collected.  In our mishnah we learn that at some point courts began to refrain from imposing an oath upon her, for fear that she would swear falsely.  It is not that she would lie but that she would think that the money she had collected from her husband’s estate was not really her ketubah but payment for helping take care of her husband’s children.  If the court would not impose an oath upon her then she could not collect the ketubah and she would be left without any money.  In order to fix this problem the rabbis said that the widow could circumvent the court by taking any vow that the orphans so choose. The vow would be something like, “Let such and such an object become forbidden to me if I have already collected my ketubah.”  This change in the law also kept the court from being involved in potentially false oaths. 
Section two:  According to the letter of the law (contrasted with “takkanot”), a get is valid even if the witnesses had not signed on it.  As long as they saw that it was written by the directive of the husband and given to the wife, the get is valid.  However, without witnesses written on the get it will be more difficult to validate.  Therefore the rabbis established that the get should be signed.  We can see that the “tikkun olam” here was done in order to make it easier to validate a get, something that would have been in the best interests of the woman.
Section three:  The third takkanah of our mishnah is the famous takkanah of the prozbul.  I shall explain this takkanah briefly.  According to the Torah all debts are remitted in the seventh year.  While this may be thought of as a benefit for the borrower (and in a perfect society perhaps it would be), in reality it could work against him.  If lenders see that their loans will be erased in the seventh year they might not lend money, thereby making it difficult for those in need to take out loans.  In order to remedy this problem Hillel established that a creditor could write out a document through which he transmits all debts to the court.  According to the rabbis’ interpretation of the Torah, debts to the court are not remitted in the seventh year.  In this way the creditor’s loans are not erased and the interests of those who need to borrow money (i.e. farmers) are also served.  

