Gittin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah discusses what can be used to write a get.  The second section deals with what gittin may be written on.

Mishnah Three
They write [a get] with any material, with ink, with arsenic, with red chalk, with gum or with sulfate of copper or with anything which is lasting. 
It may not be written with liquids or with fruit juice or with anything that is not lasting. 
They write [a get] on anything: on an olive leaf, on the horn of an ox—and he must give her the ox, or on the hand of a slave--and he must give her the slave. 
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: they do not write [a get] on anything living or on food.

Explanation
Section one:  The writing materials in the first part of this section are lasting and those in the second part are not lasting.  The get should not be written with something that can easily be erased.  We should note that since parchment and paper were scarce and expensive in the ancient world, people often reused paper, scratching off the previous layer and starting afresh.  
Section two: The get need not be written only on a scroll, as seems to be prescribed in the Deuteronomy 24:1. Rather it can be written on nearly any material.  The one condition is that there must be no step between the writing of the get and its being given to the woman.  This is the reason that if the get is written on the horn of an ox, he must give her the ox, or if on the hand of the slave, he must give her the slave.  He cannot cut the ox’s horn off and give it to her, for that would be an added step. This halakhah is derived from the verse “And he writes her a bill of divorcement and puts it in her hand” (Deuteronomy 24:1).  The writing must lead directly to the giving.
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says it may not be written on anything that is still alive (like the horn of an ox or the hand of a slave) or is food.  The Torah says it should be written on a scroll.  While Rabbi Yose the Galilean does not require it to be written on a scroll, he says that it must be somewhat similar to a scroll, which is neither alive nor serves as food.    
