Gittin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah discusses scenarios where due to the way in which the writing of the get is found on the paper, it is somewhat doubtful whether the witnesses are testifying to the get. 

Mishnah Seven 
If he left over some of the get [from the first sheet] and he wrote the rest of the get on the next column and the witnesses [sign] below, [the get is] valid. 
If the witnesses have signed at the top of the sheet or at the side or on the back of a simple get, it is invalid. 
If he connected the top of one get to the top of another and the witnesses’ signatures are between the two, both of them are invalid.   
If the end of one is connected to the end of the other and the witnesses’ signatures are between, the one with which the witnesses’ signatures reads is valid. 
If the top of one is connected to the bottom of the other and the witnesses’ signatures are in the middle, the one with which the witnesses’ signatures reads is valid. 

Explanation
Section one:  A scribe folds a piece of parchment in half and begins to write the get on the right hand column.  He doesn’t have room to complete the get, so he continues on the top of the left hand column.  If the witnesses signed below the left hand column, the get is valid.  We can assume that they were testifying also to what is written in the right column.
Section two:  A simple get is one that is not folded.  It is simply written and usually signed below.  Signing on the back of such a get is not valid.  Signing on top or on the side is never valid because the signatures are not read with the text.   It could be that the signatures were originally on something else on that piece of paper, and then the person cut it off, thereby creating a forgery.  The signatures must always be directly below the text of the get. 
Section three:  In the following three sections, two gittin were written on one page, in one column, each containing a separate divorce formula.  If the two tops meet in the middle and the signatures are in the middle as well, then neither get is valid because the signatures do not read with either get.  In other words, the signatures are above each get and hence they are both invalid.
Section four:  Here the scribe placed the gittin with the two bottoms connected to each other and the witnesses signed in between.  The get which is read in the same direction as the witnesses is valid and the other is not.  
Section five:  Here he simply wrote two gittin in a row and the witnesses signed in the middle.  The top one has signatures which read with it, and therefore is valid.  The bottom one has signatures above it and hence is invalid.  
