   	Mishnah. A woman is acquired [in marriage] in three ways and acquires her freedom  in two. She is acquired by money, by deed, or by intercourse. ‘by money’: beth shammai maintain, a denar  or the worth of a denar; beth hillel rule, a perutah or the worth of a perutah.  and how much is a perutah? An eighth of an italian issar.  and she acquires her freedom by divorce or by her husband's death. A yebamah  is acquired by intercourse, and acquires her freedom by halizah  or by the yabam's death. 
	mishnah. A hebrew slave is acquired by money and by deed; and acquires himself by years,  by jubilee,  and by deduction from the purchase price.  a hebrew maidservant is more [privileged] in that she acquires herself by ‘signs’.  he whose ear is bored  is acquired by boring, and acquires himself by jubilee or his master's death.
	mishnah. A heathen slave is acquired by money, deed, or by hazakah,   and reacquires himself by money through the agency of others,   and by deed, through his own agency:   this is r. Meir's view. The sages maintain: by money, through his own agency, and by deed, through the agency of others;   providing that the money is furnished by others.
	mishnah. Large cattle  are acquired by mesirah  small cattle  by lifting: this is the opinion of r. Meir and r. Eliezer.   but the sages rule: small cattle are acquired by meshikah.
   	mishnah. Property which offers security  is acquired by money, by deed or by hazakah. [property] which does not offer security  can be acquired only by meshikah. Property which does not offer security may be acquired in conjunction with property which provides security by money, deed, or hazakah;  and it obligates the property which provides security, to take an oath concerning them. 
	mishnah. Whatever can be used as payment for another object, as soon as one party takes possession thereof, the other assumes liability for what is given in exchange.   how so? If one barters an ox for a cow, or an ass for an ox, as soon as one party takes possession, the other becomes liable for what is given in exchange.  
Mishnah. The sanctuary's  title to property [is acquired] by money; the title of a common man to property by hazakah.  dedication to the sanctuary is equal to delivery to a common person.
	mishnah. The [rites of] laying hands, waving, bringing near [the meal-offering], taking the handful, burning [the fat], wringing [the neck of bird sacrifices], receiving and sprinkling [the blood], are performed   by men but not by women, excepting the meal-offering of a sotah   and a nezirah,   where they [themselves] do perform waving.
Mishnah. Every precept which is dependent on the land is practised only in the land [palestine]; and that which is not dependent on the land is practised both within and without the land [in the diaspora],   except ‘orlah  and kilayim.  r. Eleazar said: hadash  too. 
Mishnah. He who performs one precept is well rewarded,  his days are prolonged, and he inherits the land,  but he who does not perform one precept, good is not done to him, his days are not prolonged, and he does not inherit the land. 
Mishnah. He who is versed in bible, mishnah, and secular pursuits   will not easily   sin, for it is said, and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.   but he who lacks bible, mishnah and secular pursuits does not belong to civilisation.
Mishnah. A man can betroth [a woman] through himself or through his agent. A woman may be betrothed through herself or through her agent. A man may give his daughter in betrothal when a na'arah [either] himself or through his agent.
	mishnah. He who says to a woman, ‘be thou betrothed unto me with this date, be thou betrothed unto me with this one’ — if any one of them is worth a perutah, she is betrothed; if not, she is not betrothed, [if he says,] ‘with this and with this and with this one’ — and they are all together worth a perutah, she is betrothed; if not, she is not betrothed. If she eats them one by one, she is not betrothed unless one of them is worth a perutah.  
	mishnah. [if a man says to a woman], be thou betrothed unto me with this cup of wine,’ and it is found to be of honey, or ‘of honey’ and it is found to be of wine; ‘with this silver denar,’ and it is found to be of gold, or ‘of gold’ and it is found to be of silver; ‘on condition that i am wealthy,’ and he is found to be poor, or ‘poor’ and he is found to be rich; she is not betrothed. R. Simeon said: if he deceives her to [her] advantage,  she is betrothed.
	mishnah. ‘[be thou betrothed unto me] on condition that i am a priest,’ and he is found to be a levite, or ‘a levite’ and he is found to be a priest; a nathin,’   and he is found to be a mamzer,   or ‘a mamzer’ and he is found to be a nathin; ‘a townsman, and he is found to be a villager, or ‘a villager’ and he is found to be a townsman; ‘on condition that my house is near to the baths,’ and it is found to be far, or ‘far’ and it is found to be near; on condition that he has a daughter or maidservant   that is grown up,   and he has not, ‘or on condition that i have [them] not’, and he has; ‘on condition that he has no sons’, and he has, or ‘on condition that he has sons, and he has none-in all these cases, even if she declares, it was my intention to become betrothed to him notwithstanding,’ she is not betrothed. It is likewise so if it was she who deceives him.
Mishnah. If he says to his agent, ‘go forth and betroth to me so-and-so in such and such a place, and he goes and betroths her elsewhere, she is not betrothed. ‘she is in such and such a place, and he betroths her elsewhere, she is betrothed.
Mishnah. If he betroths a woman on condition that she has no vows upon her, and it is found that she has, she is not betrothed, if he marries her   unconditionally, and it was found she had vows upon her, she is divorced   without her kethubah.   [if he betroths her] on condition that she has no blemishes, and blemishes are found in her, she is not betrothed. If he marries her unconditionally and blemishes are found in her, she is divorced without her kethubah. All blemishes which incapacitate priests [to serve at the altar] render women unfit.  
Mishnah. If he betroths two women with the value of a perutah, or one woman with less than a perutah's worth, even if he subsequently sends gifts,   she is not betrothed, because they were sent on account of the first kiddushin.  it is likewise so if a minor betroths. 
	mishnah. If one betroths a woman and her daughter or a woman and her sister simultaneously,   they are not betrothed. And it once happened to five women, amongst whom were two sisters, that a man gathered a basket of figs, which was theirs, and which was of the seventh year,   and declared, be — hold, be ye all betrothed unto me with this basket, and one accepted it on behalf of all: the sages ruled, the sisters are not betrothed.
Mishnah. If one [a priest] betroths [a woman] with his portion,   whether [it is of] the higher or of the lower sanctity,   she is not betrothed.   [if] with second tithe,   whether unwittingly or deliberately, he does not betroth [her]: this is r. Meir's view.   r. Judah said: if unwittingly, he has not betrothed [her]; if deliberately, he has. [if] with hekdesh,   if deliberately, he has betrothed her; if unwittingly, he has not: this is r. Meir's view. R. Judah said: if unwittingly, he has betrothed her; if deliberately, he has not.  
Mishnah. If he betroths [a woman] with ‘orlah, or kil'ayim  of the vineyard, or an ox condemned to be stoned,  or the heifer which is to be beheaded,  or a leper's bird-offerings,  or a nazirite's hair, or the firstling of an ass, or meat [seethed] in milk,  or hullin   slaughtered in the temple court, she is not betrothed.   if he sells them and betroths [her] with the proceeds,   she is betrothed.   	
Mishnah. If he says to his neighbour, ‘go forth and betroth me such a woman,’ and he goes and betroths her to himself, she is betrothed to the second. Likewise, if he says to a woman, ‘be thou betrothed unto me after thirty days,’ and another comes and betroths her within the thirty days, she is betrothed to the second: thus an israelite's daughter [betrothed] to a priest may eat terumah.   [but if he declares, be thou betrothed unto me [from now and after thirty days,’   and another comes and betroths her within the thirty days, she is betrothed and not betrothed [to both]:   an israelite's daughter [thus betrothed] to a priest, or a priest's daughter to an israelite, may not eat terumah.  
Mishnah. If one betroths [a woman] with terumoth,   tithes, [priestly] gifts, the water of purification and the ashes of purification,   she is betrothed, even if an israelite.  
Mishnah. If one says to a woman. ‘behold, thou art betrothed unto me   on condition that i give thee two hundred zuz,’ she is betrothed, and he must give it. On condition that i give thee within thirty days from now: if he gives her within thirty days, she is betrothed; if not, she is not betrothed. On condition that i possess two hundred zuz, she is betrothed, providing he possesses [them]. ‘on condition that i shew thee two hundred zuz,’ she is betrothed, and he must shew her. But if he shews her [money lying] on the counter,   she is not betrothed.  
Mishnah. [if he says to her ‘be thou betrothed unto me]   on condition that i own a beth kor   of land’,   she is betrothed, providing that he does own it. On condition that i own it in such and such a place’, if he owns it there she is betrothed, but if not she is not betrothed. ‘on condition that i shew thee a beth kor of land,’ she is betrothed, providing that he does shew it to her. But if he shews it to her in a plain,   she is not betrothed.
Mishnah. R. Meir said: every stipulation which is not like that of the children of gad and the children of reuben is not a [valid] stipulation, because it is written. And moses said unto them, if the children of gad and the children of reuben will pass with you over the jordan, [. . . Then ye shall give them the land of gilead for a possession]. And it is also written. But if they will not pass over with you armed, then they shall have possessions among you in the land of canaan.   r. Hanina b. Gamaliel maintained: the matter had to be stated. For otherwise it implies that they should have no inheritance even in canaan.  
. Mishnah. If he betroths a woman and then declares, ‘i thought that she was a priest's daughter, whereas she is of a levite.’ or of a levite whereas she is of a priest; ‘poor’, whereas she is wealthy, or ‘wealthy’, whereas she is poor, she is betrothed, since she did not deceive him. If he says to a woman, behold, be thou betrothed unto me after i become a proselyte,’ or ‘after thou becomest a proselyte, after i am liberated,’ or ‘after thou art liberated, after thy husband dies’. Or, ‘after thy sister dies.’   or ‘after thy yabam performs halizah for thee’; she is not betrothed. Likewise, if he says to his neighbour, if thy wife bears a female, let her be betrothed unto me,’ she is not betrothed. (if his wife, however, is pregnant, the child being discernible, his words are valid, and if she bears a female, she is betrothed.)  
	mishnah. If one says to a woman, behold. Thou art betrothed unto me on condition that i speak to the governor on thy behalf’, or ‘that i work for thee as a labourer’, if he speaks to the governor on her behalf or works for her as a labourer, she is betrothed; if not, she is not betrothed.
Mishnah. [if he says,] ‘on condition that [my] father consents,’ if his father consents, she is betrothed; if not, she is not betrothed. If his father dies, she is betrothed; if the son dies, the father is instructed to say that he does not consent.  
Mishnah. [if a man declares,] ‘i have given my daughter in betrothal, but do not know to whom i have betrothed her,’ and then one comes and states, i betrothed her, he is believed. If one says, i have betrothed her,’ and another [also] says, ‘i betrothed her,’ both must give a divorce;  but if they wish, one gives a divorce and the other marries her.
	mishnah. [if a man declares.] ‘i have given my daughter in betrothal,’  ‘i gave her in betrothal and divorced her whilst a minor,’ and she is [now] a minor,  he is believed.  ‘i gave her in betrothal and divorced her whilst a minor,’ and she is now an adult, he is disbelieved.  ‘she was taken captive and i redeemed her,  whether she is a minor or an adult  he is disbelieved.
Mishnah. If a man says at the time of his death i have sons, he is believed;   ‘i have brothers,’ he is disbelieved.  
Mishnah. If one gives his daughter in betrothal with out specifying which, the bogeroth  are not included. If one has two groups of daughters by two wives, and he declares, i have given in betrothal my eldest daughter, but do not know whether the eldest of the seniors or the eldest of the juniors, or the youngest of the seniors who is older than the senior of the juniors, all are forbidden, except the youngest of the juniors: this is r. Meir's opinion. R. Jose said: they are all permitted, except the eldest of the seniors. I have betrothed my youngest daughter, but do not know whether the youngest of the juniors or the youngest of the seniors, or the eldest of the juniors who is younger than the youngest of the seniors,’ they are all forbidden, except the eldest of the seniors; this is r. Meir's view. R. Jose said: they are all permitted, except the youngest of the juniors.
	mishnah. If he says to a woman, ‘i have betrothed thee,’ and she says, thou hast not betrothed me: her relations  are forbidden to him,  but his relations are permitted to her. If she says, ‘thou hast betrothed me,’ and he maintains, ‘i have not betrothed thee,’ her relations are permitted to him. But his relations are forbidden to her. ‘i have betrothed thee,’ and she replies, thou hast betrothed none but my daughter,’ the relations of the senior [the mother] are forbidden to him, whilst his are permitted to the senior; the junior's relations are permitted to him, and his relations are permitted to the junior.   i have betrothed thy daughter,’ and she replies, ‘thou hast betrothed none but myself’; the junior's relations are forbidden to him, whilst his relations are permitted to the junior; the senior's relations are permitted to him, whilst his relations are forbidden to the senior.
	mishnah. Wherever there is kiddushin and there is no transgression,   the issue follows the status of the male: such is the case when the daughter of a priest, a levite or an israelite is married to a priest, a levite or an israelite.   but wherever there is kiddushin and there is transgression, the issue follows the status of the inferior;   this is the case when a widow is married to a high priest, or a divorced woman or a haluzah to an ordinary priest, or a mamzereth or a nethinah   to an israelite, and the daughter of an israelite to a mamzer or a nathin.   and whatever [woman] who cannot contract kiddushin with that particular person   but can contract kiddushin with another person, the issue is mamzer. This is the case when one has intercourse with any relation prohibited in the torah.   and whatever [woman] who can not contract kiddushin with that particular person or with others, the issue follows her status.; this is the case with the issue of a bondmaid or a gentile woman.
	mishnah. R. Tarfon said: mamzerim  can be purified.  how? If a mamzer marries  a bondmaid, her son is a slave;  if he is freed, it is found that the son is a free man.  r. Eliezer said: behold, he is a slave, a mamzer. 
   	mishnah. Ten genealogical classes went up from babylon:   priests, levites, israelites, halalim,   proselytes, freedmen, mamzerim, nethinim,   shethuki   and foundlings. Priests, levites and israelites may intermarry   with each other. Levites, israelites, halalim, proselytes, and freedmen may intermarry. Proselytes and freedmen, mamzerim and nethinim, shethuki and foundlings, are all permitted to intermarry. Now, these are they: shethuki: he who knows his mother but not his father; foundling: he who was gathered in from the streets and knows neither his father nor his mother, abba saul used to call the shetkuki ‘beduki’.  
Mishnah. All who are forbidden to enter into the assembly   may intermarry with each other; r. Judah forbids it. R. Eleazar said: certain [unfits] are permitted [to intermarry] with certain [unfits].   certain [unfits] with doubtful [unfits], doubtful with certain, or doubtful with doubtful, are forbidden. Now, these are the doubtful: shethuki, foundlings and cutheans.  
Mishnah. He who marries a priest's daughter   must investigate her descent   up to four mothers, which are eight. [viz.,] her mother and her mother's mother, her mother's paternal grandmother   and her mother, her father's mother and this one's mother, her father's paternal grandmother and her mother.   [in the case of] the daughter of a levite or an israelite, one more is added.   we make no investigation from the altar and upwards, from the dukan [dais] and upwards, nor from the sanhedrin and upwards.   and all whose parents were established to have been among the public officers   or charity overseers are permitted to marry into the priesthood, and their descent is not investigated. R. Jose said: also whoever was signed as a witness in the old court   of sepphoris.   r. Hanina b. Antigonus said: also one who was recorded in the king's list of officers.  
Mishnah. The daughter of a male halal is unfit for the priesthood for all time.  if an israelite marries a halalah, his daughter is fit for the priesthood. If a halal marries the daughter of an israelite, his daughter is unfit for the priesthood.  r. Judah said: the daughter of a male proselyte is as the daughter of a male halal. R. Eliezer b. Jacob said: if an israelite marries a female proselyte, his daughter is fit for the priesthood, and if a [male] proselyte marries the daughter of an israelite, his daughter is fit for the priesthood. But if a male proselyte marries a female proselyte, his daughter is unfit for the priesthood. [the same law applies to] a proselyte as to freed slaves, even unto ten generations, [his daughter is unfit] unless his mother is of israelite stock.  r. Jose said: also if a male proselyte marries a female proselyte, his daughter is fit for the priesthood.
	mishnah. If a man declares, ‘this son of mine is a mamzer,’ he is disbelieved. And even if both [the husband and wife] admit that the child within her is mamzer,   they are disbelieved. R. Judah said: they are believed.
Mishnah. If a man authorizes his agent to give his daughter in betrothal,   and then he himself goes and gives her in betrothal to another, if the [betrothal] by him was first, his betrothal is valid; if the agent's was first, the latter's betrothal is valid. But if it is unknown, both must give her a divorce;  but if they wish, one gives a divorce, and the other marries her. Likewise, if a woman authorizes her agent to give her in betrothal, and she goes and betroths herself [to another]: if her own preceded, her betrothal is valid; if her agent's preceded, his betrothal is valid. And if they do not know, both must give her a divorce; but if they wish, one gives a divorce and the other marries her.
Mishnah. If a man emigrated overseas together with his wife, and then he, his wife, and his children returned,   and he declared, ‘behold, this is the woman who emigrated with me overseas, and these are her children’, he need not bring proof in respect of the woman or of the children.   [if he declares.] She died [abroad] and these are her children,’ he must bring proof of the children, but not of the woman.   [if he said,] ‘i married a woman overseas, and behold, this is she, and these are her children: he must bring proof of the woman,   but not of the children.   [if he said,] ‘she died, and these are her children: he must bring proof of the woman and of the children.
Mishnah. A man may not be alone with two women, but one woman may be alone with two men. R. Simeon said: even one man may be alone with two women, if his wife is with him,  and he may sleep with them in an inn, because his wife watches him. A man may be alone with his mother and his daughter, and he may sleep with them in immediate bodily contact;  but when they grow up, she must sleep in her garment and he in his. Mishnah. An unmarried man must not be an elementary teacher,  nor may a woman be an elementary teacher. R. Eleazar said: one also who has no wife must not be an elementary teacher.  r. Judah said: an unmarried man must not tend cattle, nor may two unmarried men sleep together under the same cover,  but the sages permit it.
	mishnah. One whose business is with women must not be alone with women;  and one should not teach his son a woman's trade.  r. Meir said: one should always teach his son a clean and easy craft, and pray to him to whom [all] wealth and property belong. For no craft does not contain [the potentialities of] poverty and wealth, for neither poverty nor wealth is due to the craft, but all depends on ones merit. R. Simeon b. Eleazar said: have you ever seen a wild beast or a bird with a craft? Yet they are sustained without anxiety. Now, they were created only to serve me, while i was created to serve my master: surely then i should make a living without anxiety! But because i have acted evilly and destroyed my livelihood.   abba gurion of zadian   said on the authority of abba guria: one should not teach his son [to be] an ass-driver, camel-driver, waggoner,   sailor, shepherd, or shopkeeper, because their profession is the profession of robbers.   r. Judah said in his name:   most ass-drivers are wicked,   while most camel-drivers are worthy men;   and most sailors are pious.   the best of doctors are destined for gehenna,   and the worthiest of butchers is amalek's partner.  

   	r. Nehorai said: i abandon every trade in the world and teach my son torah only, for man enjoys the reward thereof in this world while the principal remains to him for the world to come. But all other professions are not so; for when a man comes to sickness or old age or suffering and cannot engage in his craft, he must die of starvation, whereas the torah is not so, for it guards him from all evil in his youth and gives him a future and hope in his old age. Of his youth what is said? But they that wait upon the lord shall renew their strength;   of his old age what is said? They shall still bring forth fruit in old age.   and thus it is said of our father abraham, and abraham was old . . . And the lord blessed abraham with everything.   we find that our father abraham observed the whole torah before it was given, for it is said, because that abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.  
