


Mishnah  . If a woman says: ‘i vow a pair of birds if i give birth to a
Male child’;   and she does give birth to a male child, then she must
Offer up two pairs — one for her vow and one for her obligation.   If
[before she assigned them] she gave them to the priest,   and the priest
Who ought to offer three birds above and one below   does not do so,
But offers two above and two below, and does not seek guidance,  
Then must she bring another bird [of the same kind]   and offer that
Above.   [this is if the birds she brought] are of one kind. If they were of
Two kinds, then must she bring two others.   If she had expressly
Defined her vow. 9 then must she bring three other birds.   [this is if the
Birds she brought] are of one kind, for were they of two kinds, she must
Bring four others.   If she made a definite fixture at the time of her
Vow,   then must she bring another five birds — [that is, if those she
Originally brought] were of one kind.   If they were of two kinds, then
Must she bring six others.   If she gave them to the priest and it be not
Known what she gave,   and the priest performed the sacrifice, but
Knows not now how he performed it,   then must she bring four other
Birds for her vow,   and two for her obligation   and one for her
Hatat. 9 ben ‘azzai says: [she must bring] two hatats.   R.
Joshua said: to this applies what [the sages] have said: ‘when [the beast]
Is alive it possesses one sound, but when it is dead its sound is
Sevenfold’.   In what way is its sound sevenfold? Its two horns [are
Made into] two trumpets,   its two leg-bones into two flutes, its hide
Into a drum, its entrails for lyres and its large intestines for harp
Strings; and there are some who add that its wool is used for the blue
[pomegranates.   R. Simeon b. Akashiah says: uninstructed persons, the
Older they become, the more their intellect gets distracted, as it is
Said: he removeth the speech of men of trust and taketh away the sense
Of the elders’;   whereas of aged scholars, it is not so. On the contrary,
The older they get, the more their mind becomes composed, as it is said:
‘with aged men there is wisdom, and understanding in length of days’.  













