Rosh Hashanah, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
As we stated in the introduction, in mishnaic times they set the calendar each month based on the testimony of witnesses who would come to the central court and testified that they had seen the new moon.  Our mishnah teaches that on two months in order to testify that they had seen the new moon the witnesses may even profane Shabbat.  We shall explain what is special about these two months below.  What is critical is that the rabbis perceived it to be so critical that these witnesses come on time that they even allowed Shabbat to be profaned.  Shabbat might need to be profaned if, for instance, the witnesses had to travel beyond the Shabbat border limit (2000 cubits outside of the city) in order to get to Jerusalem to testify.  

Mishnah Four
On account of two months they profane Shabbat: on account of Nissan and Tishri, for on those months messengers go forth to Syria and in them the dates of the festivals are fixed.
When the Temple stood they used to profane Shabbat for all the months, in order that the sacrifice might be offered on the right day.

Explanation
Section one: There are two months on which witnesses may come to testify even if they need to profane Shabbat—Nissan and Tishri.  This is because on those days the dates of the holidays, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Pesah and Shavuot were set. Once we know when the first day of Nissan is we know when Pesah is, and we know when Shavuot will be as well.  Similarly, once we know when the first of Tishri falls, we know when Yom Kippur and Sukkot fall.  The messengers would go forth to Syria, meaning to the Diaspora, and let them know when the festivals would fall.  Therefore, it was critical that they find out what day Rosh Hodesh was as soon as possible.  
Section two:  In the Temple there was a special sacrifice offered on Rosh Hodesh.  Hence, it was essential that the witnesses testify on time every month so that the sacrifice would be offered on the correct day.  Hence, they could profane Shabbat in order to get to Jerusalem to testify concerning any of the months.    
. 

