Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
As the core of the three special Mussaf Amidah blessings, “malkhuyot (kingships)”, “zikhronot (remembrances)” and “shofarot” we recite verses from the Torah that use the roots of these three verses.  Our mishnah contains several debates concerning the quantity and order of these verses.  

Mishnah Six
They do not recite less than ten kingship [verses], ten remembrance [verses], and ten shofar [verses]. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: if he said three from each set he has fulfilled his obligation.
They do not mention kingship, remembrance and shofar verses of punishment. 
He begins with [verses] from the Torah and concludes with [verses] from the prophets. 
Rabbi Yose says: if he concludes with [a verse] from the Torah he has fulfilled his obligation.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion, each section must include ten verses.  This is the current practice.  We recite three verses from the Torah, three from the Prophets and three from the Writings and then we conclude with a final verse from the Torah.
Section two: Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that as long as one has recited three verses, assumedly one from each of the three sections of the Tanakh, he has fulfilled his duty. 
Section three:  The words for “king”, “remember” and “shofar” sometimes appear in connection with punishment. These verses should not be used as part of the liturgy, for what seems like obvious reasons.    
Section four:   According to the first opinion, he begins by reciting verses from the Torah and ends with verses from the Prophets.  In between the two, he recites verses from the Writings.
Section five:  Rabbi Yose seems to say that while he should conclude with a verse from the Prophets, as was stated in the previous opinion, nevertheless if he concludes with a verse from the Torah he has discharged his obligation. However, the Talmud understands Rabbi Yose as saying that it is actually preferable to end with a verse from the Torah. Due to this understanding of his words, the accepted halakhah is that we conclude with a verse from the Torah.  
