Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah teaches two halakhot:  1) one must hear the sound of the shofar and not an echo of the sound of the shofar; 2) when hearing the shofar one must have intention to hear it for the sake of the fulfillment of the commandment.  The mishnah illustrates cases where one may have heard a shofar blast and nevertheless not fulfilled his obligation

Mishnah Seven
One who blows into a pit or a cistern or a jug, if he heard the sound of the shofar, he has fulfilled his obligation, but if he hears the echo [also], he has not fulfilled his obligation. 
And also one who was passing behind a synagogue or if his house was next to the synagogue and he heard the sound of the shofar or of the megillah [being read], if he directed his heart (had intention), then he has fulfilled his obligation, but if not he has not fulfilled his obligation. 
Even though this one heard and this one heard, this one directed his heart and this one did not.

Explanation
Section one:  Here someone blows a shofar into an echo-producing chamber, such as a pit, a cistern or a jug. The mishnah rules that in order to fulfill his obligation he must be sure that he heard the sound of the shofar and not the echo of the sound of the shofar. There is a geonic commentary on this mishnah, according to which the mishnah refers to a time of persecution when the Romans outlawed the public observance of commandments. They hid their shofar blasts to avoid the authorities.    
Section two:  This section teaches that when hearing the shofar on Rosh Hashanah, or Megillat Esther on Purim, one must have the intention of hearing them in order to fulfill the commandment.  A person might be walking behind a synagogue and hear them blow the shofar and then think to himself, “Great, I’ve just fulfilled my commandment” (and no need to go to shul today!). The mishnah rules that the act of hearing the shofar is not sufficient.  One must have the intention to hear in the fulfillment of a commandment.  The final section of the mishnah notes how strongly this commandment is connected to intention—both the one who walked behind the synagogue and the one who actually went to the synagogue heard the same exact thing, yet one has fulfilled his obligation and one has not.   Tomorrow’s mishnah will contain the central rabbinic statement as to the role that intention plays in halakhah.  
