Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
As we mentioned in yesterday’s mishnah, once the witnesses arrived in Jerusalem they were brought to Bet Yazek where the court would examine them.  Our mishnah teaches how they were examined.

Mishnah Six
How do they test the witnesses? 
The pair which arrives first, they test them first. 
They bring in the older of them and they say to him, “Tell us, how did you see the moon — in front of the sun or behind the sun?  To the north of it or to the south? How high was it, and in which direction was it inclined?  And how broad was it?” 
If he says [he saw it] in front of the sun, his evidence is rejected.   
After that they would bring in the second and test him. 
If their accounts were the same, their evidence was accepted.
And the other pairs were only questioned briefly, not because they were required at all, but so that they should not go out disappointed, so that they would be regular in coming [to testify].

Explanation
Section one:  The first pair to get there would be the first pair that would be examined—first come, first serve.  
Section two: As is usual in all court cases, they interrogate the witnesses one at a time.  The examination would consist of several questions which would ascertain that the witnesses had actually seen the new moon.  At the time of the new month (the molad, in Hebrew) the moon is found at sundown in the west near the sun.  From that time on it goes further east away from the sun, until at the fifteenth of the month it is in the east opposite the sun.  Right before the new moon it is west of the sun and it sets before the sun such that it looks as if it is “in front of the sun.”  After the new month (the molad) it sets after the sun and is further from the horizon and it looks as if it is “after the sun.”  Therefore, if he says that he saw it “in front of the sun,” he has not seen the new moon and his testimony is rejected.  
One who stands looking west at sunset, where he might see the new moon at the right time of the month has the north to his right and the south to his left.  Therefore, when they ask north and south, what they mean is was the moon to the right or left of the sun. 
Section three:  If the witnesses said the same thing, then there testimony is accepted.
Section four:  Once two witnesses have testified, there is no need for more testimony from other witnesses.  Nevertheless, the court didn’t want to just turn the rest of the pairs of witnesses away because if they did so they might not come back in the future reasoning that there was no need for their testimony. Therefore, they asked the witnesses a few questions in order to make them feel that their long trip to Jerusalem had not been in vain.  

