Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
Although this is the first mishnah of a new chapter, it is really the last mishnah to deal with the sanctification of the new month.  It contains a few final rules governing how the court decides that the new month should be declared.

Mishnah One
If the court and all of Israel saw it, if the witnesses were examined and there was no time left to say “Sanctified” before it grew dark, then the month is impregnated (it has thirty days).   
If the court alone saw it, two of them should stand up and testify before them, and then they can say, “Sanctified, sanctified.” 
If three people saw it, and they [themselves] are the court, two [of them] should stand up and they should seat some of their colleagues with the one [remaining judge], and they [the two] should testify before them and they can then say, “Sanctified, sanctified.” For an individual is not trusted [to sanctify the new month] by himself.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case, it was abundantly clear that the new month had arrived, but the court was not able to convene and sanctify it before it grew dark and the thirtieth day of the previous month was over.  The mishnah rules that since the court did not have time to declare the new month sanctified, it is not sanctified and Rosh Hodesh will have to wait for the next day.  We should note that again we see here the ideology that the court, that is humans, are what create the reality of the new month, and not the astronomical phenomenon itself.
Section two:  If the members of the court themselves were the only ones who saw the new moon, then those who saw the new moon should testify in front of the others (at least three others) that the new moon had been sanctified, and then the court may declare, “Sanctified, sanctified.”
Section three:  Here, only three people see the new moon, and they themselves are the court that is supposed to declare that it is sanctified. Since the same people that function as witnesses cannot function as judges, two of them must find two other people to take their place as judges and then they may testify that they saw the new moon.  The mishnah concludes by noting that one person cannot serve as the sole decision maker with regard to the declaration of the new month.  

