Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
This mishnah contains a few more rules concerning the shofar.

Mishnah Eight
[For the sake of] the shofar of Rosh Hashanah one is not allowed to go past the [Shabbat] border, nor remove a pile of rocks, nor climb a tree, nor ride on an animal, nor swim on the water. 
One may not cut it, neither with an instrument forbidden because of shevut, nor with an instrument forbidden by a negative commandment.   
But if he wants to pour wine or water into it he may do so.   
They need not prevent children from blowing the shofar [on Rosh Hashanah]; on the contrary, they may help them until they learn how to blow. 
One who is just practicing has not fulfilled his obligation, and the one hears [the blast made] by another when practicing has not fulfilled his obligation.

Explanation
Section one:  In this section there is a list of activities that are rabbinically (derabanan) prohibited on Shabbat. That is to say, they are prohibitions that are less significant than those prohibited by the Torah.  Nevertheless, the mishnah states that one does not transgress these prohibitions in order to be able to blow the shofar.  For instance, if one needs to go past the Shabbat border limit (2000 cubits outside of the city) to get a shofar or to hear one blown, one should not do so.  If the shofar is under a pile of rocks, one may not clear them away in order to get to them.  One may not climb a tree if the shofar was in a tree (this is beginning to sound like a famous Dr. Seuss book—I would not hear it under rocks, I would not hear it in a tree). Nor may one ride an animal or swim in water to get to the shofar.  The important issue here is the principle—one does not transgress any commandments in order to hear the shofar.  
Section two:  Should one need to cut the shofar in order to make it usable for blowing, one may not do so, neither with a type of knife prohibited derabanan—on account of shevut (mandated resting)—nor with a type of knife prohibited deoraita—from the Torah.  A knife that is typically used to cut something like a shofar would be prohibited from the Torah, while one not typically used for such purposes would be prohibited derabanan, a lesser prohibition.  
Section three:  One may pour wine or water into the shofar in order to improve its sound. This is not considered to be a violation of the Shabbat and Yom Tov prohibition of “making a vessel.” 
Section four:  Children are not obligated to hear or blow the shofar on Rosh Hashanah. Since they are not obligated, we might have thought that they should not blow the shofar at all because the shofar is a form of work on Rosh Hashanah. The mishnah dispels this notion and states that not only do we not stop children from blowing the shofar, but we encourage them to practice and we teach them until they know how to blow.  The Talmud adds that even on Shabbat we can help them practice.
Section five:  Since the previous section discussed practicing, this mishnah concludes by teaching that practicing does not count as blowing the shofar in order to fulfill one’s obligation.  A person who on Rosh Hashanah blows the shofar as practice has not fulfilled his obligation because he did not have the proper intention.  Similarly, one who hears the shofar from a person practicing has not fulfilled his obligation, because one must hear the shofar being blown by someone who intends to fulfill his and others’ obligation.   

