Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah is the continuation of yesterday’s story of Rabban Gamaliel, Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas and the sanctification of the new moon based on erroneous testimony.  At the end of yesterday’s mishnah, Rabbi Joshua agrees with Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas that the witnesses’ testimony was false and therefore Rabban Gamaliel should not have accepted it.  

Mishnah Nine 
Rabban Gamaliel sent to him: I order you to appear before me with your staff and your money on the day which according to your count should be Yom Hakippurim.  
Rabbi Akiva went and found him in distress.  
He said to him: I can teach that whatever Rabban Gamaliel has done is valid, because it says, “These are the appointed seasons of the Lord, holy convocations, which you shall proclaim at their appointed times” (Leviticus 23:4), whether they are [proclaimed] at their proper time or not at their proper time, I have no other appointed times save these.   
He [Rabbi Joshua] then went to Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas.  
He said to him: if we call in question the court of Rabban Gamaliel we must call in question the decisions of every court which has existed since the days of Moses until now. As it says, “Then Moses and Aaron, Nadav and Avihu and seventy of the elders of Israel went up” (Exodus 24:9).  Why were the names of the elders not mentioned?  To teach that every group of three which has acted as a court over Israel, behold it is like the court of Moses.   
He [Rabbi Joshua] took his staff and his money and went to Yavneh to Rabban Gamaliel on the day which according to his count should be Yom Hakippurim. 
Rabban Gamaliel rose and kissed him on his head and said to him: Come in peace, my teacher and my student — my teacher in wisdom and my student because you have accepted my decision.

Explanation
Section one:  The action begins with Rabban Gamaliel’s response to Rabbi Joshua. Rabban Gamaliel sends one of his messengers (henchmen) to him and demands that he come to Rabban Gamaliel on the day which he believes to be Yom Kippur, the day after Rabban Gamaliel would have celebrated Yom Kippur.  This is a harsh decree, one delivered by the politically potent Rabban Gamaliel, to the wise yet weak Rabbi Joshua. Rabbi Joshua would be forced to desecrate the holiest day of the year by carrying his stick and money in the public domain and by going beyond the Shabbat border limit.  Indeed, if Rabbi Joshua believes that that day is Yom Kippur, he would have to ignore Rabban Gamaliel’s demands rather than transgress such a serious prohibition.  
Section two:  Rabbi Akiva hears about the goings on and comes to Rabbi Joshua to offer him advice.  His advice is based on a midrash. The verse seems to imply, at least according to its midrashic reading, that the holidays are holy whether or not the court decrees them to fall at their “proper” time or at the wrong time.  In other words, Yom Kippur is when the court determines it to be, and not when it really should fall according to some predetermined “heavenly” time.  If the court makes a mistake and sanctifies the new month of Tishri on the wrong day, then ten days later is still Yom Kippur.  Rabbi Akiva is basically telling Rabbi Joshua that even if Rabban Gamaliel is wrong with regard to the new month, the day upon which he declares Yom Kippur to fall is still Yom Kippur.  
Section three:  Rabbi Joshua now goes to Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, the same sage who said in yesterday’s mishnah that the witnesses were lying.  This is a fascinating move.  He is basically going to Rabbi Dosa and asking him, “What should I do?  I agreed with you, and see what a predicament it has gotten me into.”  Rabbi Dosa, like Rabbi Akiva, provides him with a midrash which supports him going to Rabban Gamaliel on the day which he thinks is Yom Kippur.  Rabbi Dosa’s midrash teaches that the court that stands at every generation is equal in authority to that of Moses and his court.  This is the ultimate statement of rabbinic authority.  One shouldn’t think that the current rabbinic courts are inherently of a lesser status. Although the sages that live today may not be as close to the source, God and the Torah, as was Moses, their authority is nevertheless not diminished.
Section four:  Peace is finally made and rabbinic unity is restored.  Rabbi Joshua is either convinced by Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, or he realizes that he has no choice but to go to Rabban Gamaliel.  Rabban Gamaliel greets him with open arms, praising him for both his wisdom and importantly, also for his acceptance of his decree.  


