Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with blowing the shofar on Shabbat.  It is somewhat unclear why blowing the shofar on Shabbat should be prohibited at all.  After all, as we shall see, some places did blow the shofar on Shabbat. It seems to me that there may have been a desire among the sages to prevent the celebration of Rosh Hashanah from overshadowing that of Shabbat.  In the Talmud they provide a midrashic reason why one shouldn’t blow the shofar on Shabbat.   
  
Mishnah One
If Yom Tov of Rosh Hashanah fell on Shabbat, they would blow the shofar in the Temple but not in the country.
After the destruction of the Temple, Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai decreed that it should be blown [on Shabbat] in every place where there was a court. 
Rabbi Eliezer said: Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai decreed for Yavneh only.  
They said to him: both Yavneh and any place where there is a court.

Explanation
Section one:  There are two different explanations for “Temple” and “country.” Some commentators explain “Temple” to refer to all of Jerusalem and “country” to refer to anywhere outside of Jerusalem. According to this interpretation, they allowed the shofar to be blown in Jerusalem because there they would know whether the new moon had been sanctified.  In other words, they would know for certain whether it was Rosh Hashanah.  Outside of Jerusalem they couldn’t be sure, so they wouldn’t blow the shofar on Rosh Hashanah.  Assumedly, at this period there were already two days of Rosh Hashanah so that they could blow the second day. 
The other explanation is that “Temple” refers to the Temple itself, and “country” refers to all places outside of the Temple. They allowed the shofar to be blown in the Temple because rabbinically prohibited activities are allowed on Shabbat in the Temple.  However, this interpretation does not fit particularly well with the mishnah which we shall learn tomorrow.       
Section two: This begins a series of decrees made by Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai, one of the leaders of the rabbis after the destruction of the Second Temple. The other decrees will appear in the following mishnayot. Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai decreed that the shofar should be blown on Shabbat in all places where a rabbinic court, according to some a Sanhedrin, sat.  This in essence bequeathed the authority of the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem on all subsequent courts, no matter where they sat.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer disagrees with the broad application of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai’s decree (takkanah) and limits it only to the court in Yavneh.  Rabbi Eliezer may be claiming that it is only Rabban Yohanan’s personal authority that allowed him to make such a decree.  Other courts, which will not be able to count Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai as one of them, will not have such authority.  
The other rabbis reject Rabbi Eliezer’s statement.  The decree bestowed authority on all subsequent courts and not just on the one in Yavneh. We might say that the authority is vested in the office and not in the individual rabbi, charismatic and learned as he may be.  
