Mishna Sanhedrin
משנה סנהדרין
Open Mishna
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Mishnah

Chapter 1

Monetary suits (are ruled) with three (judges); theft and personal injury with three; damage and half-damage, (crimes for which one would) pay double, or pay quadruple or quintuple, rape, violation, and giving a bad name with three - these are the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say, giving a bad name with 23 because this is a capital crime.
(Cases concerning) lashings, (are to be judged) with three (judges). (However,) Rabbi Ishmael says, with 23. Intercalating the month with three; intercalating the year, with three, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says, begin with three, go and give with five, and finish with seven, but if you finish with three, it's still valid.
The laying of the hands by the elders, and the breaking of the neck of the heifer (should be judged) with three (judges), such are the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says, with five. Levirate nullification and nullification of youth betrothal, with three. Dedication (for the Temple), with three. Fourth year produce or the second tithe with unknown value, with three. Payment for a vow with movable property, with three. Rabbi Yehuda says: one must be a priest. With immovable property, nine and a priest. With a man, we take it from this.
Capital cases (are to be judged) with 23 (judges). Bestiality and buggery, with 23, as it is written (Leviticus 20:16) "kill the woman and the beast" and it is written (20:15) "and the beast, kill it." An ox to be stoned, with 23, as it is written (Exodus 21:29) "the ox shall be stoned and also its owner killed," like the death of the owner is the death of the ox. The lion, the bear, the tiger, the panther, and the snake, kill them with 23. Rabbi Eliezar says: [if] anyone kills the animal (without waiting), this is correct. Rabbi Akiva says: kill them with 23.
There is no judgment for a tribe, or a false prophet, or a high priest, except by a court of 71. (The nation) cannot send [declare] to a war of free choice, except by a court of 71. Cannot add [annex] to a city or region, except by a court of 71. Cannot make a Sanhedrin for tribes except by a court of 71. Cannot proclaim a city of idolatry, except by a court of 71, and there cannot be a city of idolatry on the border, and there cannot be three cities of idolatry, only one or two.
Great courts are of 71 and small are of 23. From where do we learn that great are of 71? It is written (Numbers 11:16) "gather for you 70 men from the elders of Israel." And Moses on their backs, behold, this is 71. Rabbi Yehuda says: 70. And from where do we learn that small are of 23? It is written (35:24-25) "the assembly shall decide ... the assembly shall protect." The assembly decides and the assembly protects - behold this is twenty. From where do we learn that the assembly is ten? It is written (Numbers 14:27) "until when, the wicked assembly." This excludes Joshua and Caleb. And from where do we bring the other three? We learn this, as it is written (Exodus 23:2) "don't side with the majority to do evil". Should I learn to side with them to do good? If so, why is it written (ibid) "Following the majority [do not] distort" - this is not acquittal [distortion for good], but (rather) conviction [distortion for bad]. Acquittal is by one, conviction by two. There cannot be an even court, add to it one more - behold this is 23. And how many are in a city before they have a Sanhedrin? 120. Rabbi Nehemiah says, 230, so that (they are) rulers of ten.

Chapter 2

The High Priest can judge and be judged himself, can serve as a witness and others can witness against him, can perform Levirate nullification and others can perform Levirate nullification for his widow, and others can marry her through Levirate marriage, but he cannot marry another through Levirate marriage, because it is forbidden for him to marry a widow. (Someone close to him) dies, he cannot follow the coffin, except when they enter he is not there, and they are not there when he enters. He can go out to the opening [gates] of the city, such are the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says, he cannot leave from the Temple, as it is written (Leviticus 21:12) "And from the Temple, he cannot leave." When he comforts others, everyone passes by one after one, and an appointed person places himself between him and the people. When he is being comforted by others, everyone says to him, "we atone for him," and he says to them "you are blessed from heaven." And when he is fed in comfort, the whole nation sits on the ground and he sits on a bench.
The king cannot judge or be judged himself, cannot serve as a witness nor can others serve as a witness against him, cannot perform Levirate nullification, nor can others perform Levirate nullification for his widow. Rabbi Yehuda says, if he wants to perform Levirate nullification or marry through Levirate marriage, allow it. They [the sages] answered him: don't listen to him. And no one may marry his widow. Rabbi Yehuda says, a king may marry the widow of another king, like we find when David married the widow of Saul, as it is written (II Samuel 12:8), "and I give you the house of your master and the women of your master in your lap."
(Someone close to him) dies, he cannot go out from the opening of his palace. Rabbi Yehuda says, if he wants to go out following the coffin, he cna go out, because David went out following the coffin of Abner, as it is written (II Samuel 3:31), "And King David went out after the coffin." They [the sages] answered: no, that was only a thing of compromise. And when he is fed in comfort, the whole nation sits on the ground, and he sits on an ottoman.
He [the King] can send people to a war of free choice according to the court of seventy one. He can break through to build a road, and there is no protest. The king's road has no measure. And everything that the nation plunders, they place in front of him, and he takes the first portion. "He cannot amass too many wives" (Deuteronomy 17:17), only 18. Rabbi Yehuda says, he can amass more, until they would turn his heart. Rabbi Shimon says, even if only one would turn his heart, he cannot marry her. If so, why does it say (ibid) "He cannot amass too many wives" - because of Abigail. "He cannot amass too many horses" (ibid, 17:16), only enough for his chariots. "And silver and gold, he cannot amass too much." (ibid, 17:17), only enough to pay his soldiers' wages. He must write a Torah scroll himself. (When) he goes to war, he takes it with him. (When) he enters, it's with him. (When) he sits for judgment, it's with him. (When) he reclines, it's opposite of him, as it is written (ibid 17:16), "and it will be with him, and he shall read in it all the days of his life."
No one may ride his horse, and no one may sit in his throne, and no one may use his scepter, and no one may look at him while his hair is is being cut or while he is nude or while he is in the bathhouse, as it is written (Deuteronomy 17:16), "set a king over yourself," whose awe is over you.

Chapter 3

Monetary suits (are ruled) with three (judges). One (litigant) chooses one and the other chooses one, and both of them choose the other one, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say, the two judges choose the other one. One (litigant) invalidates the judge of the other, and the other invalidates the judge of the one, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say, when? Only if evidence is brought that they [the judges chosen] are related (to the litigant) or otherwise forbidden. But if they are acceptable, or an expert from the court, they cannot be invalidated. One (litigant) invalidates the witness of the other, and the other invalidates the witness of the one, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say, when? Only if evidence is brought that they are related (to the litigant) or otherwise forbidden, but if they are acceptable, they cannot be invalidated.
(If) one says to another: 'my father is trustworthy to me,' or 'your father is trustworthy to me,' or 'three herdsmen are trustworthy to me,' Rabbi Meir says he can take it back. But the sages say he cannot take it back. (If) one obligated the other with an oath and said to him, 'vow to me by the life of your head,' Rabbi Meir says he can take it back. But the sages say he cannot take it back.
These are invalid: dice-players, loan-sharks, pigeon-flyers, sellers of Sabbatical goods. Rabbi Shimon says, previously they were called gatherers of Sabbatical goods, but because of tax-collectors, they became known as sellers of Sabbatical goods. Rabbi Yehuda says, When? When they have no other trade, but when they have another trade, behold, this is acceptable.
And these are the relations: his brother, brother of his father, brother of his mother, husband of his sister, husband of the sister of his father, husband of the sister of his mother, his step-father, his father-in-law, and his brother-in-law [specifically the brother of his wife], these and their children, and the spouses of their children, and his step-son alone [not the step-son's children]. Rabbi Yose says, this is the ruling of Rabbi Akiva. But the original ruling (said): his uncle and the son of his uncle. And anyone who is seen to be his potential heir and anyone related to him at that time. Those that used to be related to him but are no longer - behold, they are acceptable. Rabbi Yehuda says, even if his daughter dies, and she had children - behold, he [the daughter's widowed husband] is a relation.
(These are also invalid:) He who loves and he who hates. He who loves, this is a groomsman. He who hates, this is anyone who didn't speak with him for three days because of anger. They (the sages) said: Don't suspect Israel of this.
How are the witnesses checked? They bring them in and warn them, and send each man outside, but keep the greatest among them. And they say to him: "Say how you know that the one owes the other." If he says, "he told me, 'I owe him,'" or "So-and-so told me that he owes him" - this means nothing. Only if he says "in front of us, he told him 'I owe you 200 zuz.'" And after this, they bring in the second (witness) and check him. If they find that their words are the same, they [the judges] discuss the matter. (If) two say innocent, and one says guilty, (the verdict is) innocent. Two say guilty and one says innocent, (the verdict is) guilty. One says innocent and one says guilty, or even if the two acquit or the two convict and one says he does not know, add judges.
When the word [verdict] is finished, they bring him [the defendant] in. The greatest of the judges says, "So-and-so, you are innocent" or "So-and-so, you are guilty." And when they leave, one form the judges cannot say, "I acquitted him but my fellows convicted him but what was I to do, as my fellows were the majority. On this it is said, (Proverbs 11:13) "He who gossips reveals secrets."
Each time that he brings evidence (anew), overturn the (previous) judgment. They say to him: "all evidence that you have, bring it here within thirty days." (If it is) found within thirty days, overturn (the previous judgment). After thirty days, do not overturn. Rabban Shimon Ben Gamliel said, "what could he have done that it is not found within thirty days but it is found after thirty?" (If) they say to him, "bring witnesses" and he says, "I have no witnesses," or they say to him, "bring evidence" and he says, "I have no evidence," and after a time he brings evidence or finds witnesses, behold this is nothing. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said, "what could he have done that he did not know there were witnesses and then found witnesses, or that he did not know there was evidence and then found evidence?" (If) they say to him, "bring witnesses" and he says "I have no witnesses" or "bring evidence" and he says "I have no evidence," and he sees that he will be convicted in the court, and he says, "Come, So-and-so and So-and-so, and serve as witnesses for me or bring evidence from your wallet," behold this is nothing.

Chapter 4

Both cases of money (non-capital) and cases of life (capital) have examination and inquiry, as it is written (Leviticus 24:22) "You shall have one justice." What is the difference between cases of money and cases of life: Cases of money [are tried] with three [judges], and cases of life, with twenty-three. Cases of money are opened either [with arguments] to acquit or to convict, and cases of life open [with arguments] to acquit but do not open [with arguments] to convict. Cases of money are decided by one either to acquit or to convict; cases of life are decided by one to acquit or by two to convict. Cases of money, [the verdict] can change between acquittal and conviction; cases of life can change to acquittal but cannot change to conviction. Cases of money, all can rule for acquittal or conviction; cases of life, all can rule for acquittal but all cannot rule for conviction. Cases of money, one who convicts can acquit and one who acquits can convict; in cases of life, one who convicts can acquit, but one who acquits cannot turn and convict. Cases of money can be tried in the day and can finish in the night; cases of life are tried in the day and must finish in the day. Cases of money finish on the same day for either acquittal or conviction; cases of life finish on the same day for acquittal and the next day for conviction, therefore there cannot be trials on Friday evening or the evening before a holiday.
Cases of impurity and purity begin from the greatest [judge], cases of life begin from [the judges on] the side. All are acceptable to judge in cases of money, but none are acceptable to judge in cases of life except for priests, Levites, and Israelites whose daughters can marry priests.
The Sanhedrin was (organized like) half of a round granary, so that each (judge) could see each (judge). Two court scribes stood before them, one on the right and one on the left, and they wrote the words of the acquitting [defense] and the words of the convicting [prosecution]. Rabbi Yehuda says, (there were) three, one wrote the words of the acquitting and one wrote the words of the convicting, and the third wrote the words of the acquitting and the words of the convicting.
And three rows of students sit before them, each one knows his (proper) place. (When) there was a need to appoint (a new judge), they appointed from the first (row). One from the second (row) comes to the first, and one from the third (row) comes to the second, and they choose for them one more (student) from the community who is seated in the third (row). He didn't sit in the place of the first (student), but rather he sits in the place seen for him.
How do we press the witnesses in a capital case? We bring them in (to the court's chambers) and press them: "Perhaps what you say (isn't eyewitness testimony) is but your own assessment, or from rumors, or your witnessing an actual witness testify, or your reporting what a trustworthy said. Or perhaps you were unaware that by the end we'd interrogate you, with examination and inquiry. Know that capital cases are not like monetary ones. In monetary cases, (a false witness) can return the money and achieve atonement. But in capital cases, the blood of (the victim) and all his future offspring hang upon you until the end of time. For thus we find in regard to Cain, who killed his brother, "The bloods of your brother scream out!" - the verse does not say blood of your brother, but bloods of your brother, because it was his blood and also the blood of his future offspring (screaming out)! [Another explanation of the verse: for his blood was splattered over the trees and rocks (i.e. there was more than one pool of blood).] (The judges' speech continues:) "It was for this reason that man was first created as one person (viz. Adam), to teach you that anyone who destroys a life (some editions: from Israel) is considered by Scripture to have destroyed an entire world; any any who saves a life (some editions: from Israel) is as if he saved an entire world." [And also, to promote peace among the creations, that no man would say to his friend, "My ancestors are greater than yours." And also, so that heretics will not say, "there are many rulers up in Heaven." And also, to express the grandeur of The Holy One [blessed be He]: For a man strikes many coins from the same die, and all the coins are alike. But the King, the King of Kings, The Holy One [blessed be He] strikes every man from the die of the First Man, and yet no man is quite like his friend.] (The judges' speech continues:) "Maybe you (the witnesses) will now say, 'What do we need this, and all this anxiety for (let's not come forward even with true testimony)!' But Scripture has already spoken: "If he be a witness - having seen or known - if he does not express it, he shall bear his sin." (Lev. 5:1) Maybe you will now say, 'What do we need this, to be responsible for another man's death?' But Scripture has already spoken: "When the wicked are destroyed there is rejoicing." (Prov. 11:10)"

Chapter 5

You must check (testimony) with seven inquiries: what week, what year, what month, when in the month, what day, what time, and in what place. Rabbi Yosi says: in what day, what hour, and in what place, did you recognize him, did you warn him? For the idolator - what did he worship, how did he worship it?
The more (the judge) checks (the witnesses), behold, this is more praiseworthy. Once, Ben Zakkai checked even the stalks of figs. What's the difference between investigating and checking? In investigation, one says "I don't know", his testimony is invalid. In checking, one says "I don't know" even if two say "We don't know," their testimony still stands. But one during investigation and one during checking, in this time, they contradict each other, their testimonies are invalid.
One says on the second of the month, and the other says on the third of the month, their testimony stands, since one might have known of the intercalation of the month and one didn't know of the intercalation of the month. One says on the third and one says on the fifth, their testimony is canceled. One says at the second hour and one says at the third hour, their testimony stands. One says at the third hour, and one says at the fifth hour, their testimony is canceled. Rabbi Yehuda says, it stands. One says at the fifth hour and one says at the seventh hour, their testimony is canceled, because at the fifth, the sun is in the east, and at the seventh, the sun is in the west.
And after this, they bring in the second (witness) and check him. If it is found that his words agree, they open with (arguments for) acquittal. If one from among the witnesses says "I have something to say on acquittal" or one from among the students says "I have something to say on conviction," they silence them. If one from among the students says "I have something to say on acquittal," they raise him up and sit him among them and do not bring him down from there the whole day. If his words have substance, they listen to him. And even if he [the accused] says "I have something to say on acquittal," listen to him, but only if his words have substance.
If he is found innocent, they let him go. If not, they hold the judgment to tomorrow. They go together, pair by pair, eat a little, drink no wine all day, and they discuss the matter all night, and on the morrow, early, they come to the court. The acquitter says "I acquit and I find him innocent in my place," and the convicter says, "I convict and I find him guilty in my place." He who convicts can acquit, but he who acquits cannot change to convict. If they err, the two scribes remind them. If (the verdict) comes to acquit, let him go. If not, stand and vote. If twelve acquit and eleven convict, acquit. If twelve convict and eleven acquit or even if eleven acquit and eleven convict and one says "I don't know," or even if 22 acquit or convict and one says "I don't know", add judges. Add how many? two by two until there are 71. If 36 acquit and 35 convict, acquit. If 36 convict and 35 acquit, the judges argue one against another until one from among the convicters acquits.