Mishna Sanhedrin
משנה סנהדרין
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

Both cases of money (non-capital) and cases of life (capital) have examination and inquiry, as it is written (Leviticus 24:22) "You shall have one justice." What is the difference between cases of money and cases of life: Cases of money [are tried] with three [judges], and cases of life, with twenty-three. Cases of money are opened either [with arguments] to acquit or to convict, and cases of life open [with arguments] to acquit but do not open [with arguments] to convict. Cases of money are decided by one either to acquit or to convict; cases of life are decided by one to acquit or by two to convict. Cases of money, [the verdict] can change between acquittal and conviction; cases of life can change to acquittal but cannot change to conviction. Cases of money, all can rule for acquittal or conviction; cases of life, all can rule for acquittal but all cannot rule for conviction. Cases of money, one who convicts can acquit and one who acquits can convict; in cases of life, one who convicts can acquit, but one who acquits cannot turn and convict. Cases of money can be tried in the day and can finish in the night; cases of life are tried in the day and must finish in the day. Cases of money finish on the same day for either acquittal or conviction; cases of life finish on the same day for acquittal and the next day for conviction, therefore there cannot be trials on Friday evening or the evening before a holiday.
Cases of impurity and purity begin from the greatest [judge], cases of life begin from [the judges on] the side. All are acceptable to judge in cases of money, but none are acceptable to judge in cases of life except for priests, Levites, and Israelites whose daughters can marry priests.
The Sanhedrin was (organized like) half of a round granary, so that each (judge) could see each (judge). Two court scribes stood before them, one on the right and one on the left, and they wrote the words of the acquitting [defense] and the words of the convicting [prosecution]. Rabbi Yehuda says, (there were) three, one wrote the words of the acquitting and one wrote the words of the convicting, and the third wrote the words of the acquitting and the words of the convicting.
And three rows of students sit before them, each one knows his (proper) place. (When) there was a need to appoint (a new judge), they appointed from the first (row). One from the second (row) comes to the first, and one from the third (row) comes to the second, and they choose for them one more (student) from the community who is seated in the third (row). He didn't sit in the place of the first (student), but rather he sits in the place seen for him. [Another explanation of the verse: for his blood was splattered over the trees and rocks (i.e. there was more than one pool of blood).] (The judges' speech continues:) "It was for this reason that man was first created as one person (viz. Adam), to teach you that anyone who destroys a life (some editions: from Israel) is considered by Scripture to have destroyed an entire world; any any who saves a life (some editions: from Israel) is as if he saved an entire world." [And also, to promote peace among the creations, that no man would say to his friend, "My ancestors are greater than yours." And also, so that heretics will not say, "there are many rulers up in Heaven." And also, to express the grandeur of The Holy One [blessed be He]: For a man strikes many coins from the same die, and all the coins are alike. But the King, the King of Kings, The Holy One [blessed be He] strikes every man from the die of the First Man, and yet no man is quite like his friend.]

Chapter 5



Chapter 6

Once the verdict is reached, they bring him [the accused] out to stone him. The stoning area was outside the courthouse, as it is written (Leviticus 24) "bring out the cursor." One person would stand before the entrance to the courthouse and the cloths would be in his hand and another person would ride on a horse before them at a distance so that he would see him. If someone  says 'I have a way to argue your innocence,' then he waves the cloths and the horse comes and supports him. And even if the accused says 'I have a way to argue my own innocence,' then he is returned, and this may happen even four or five times, so long as there is substance to his words. If he is found innocent, then he is exempt, and if not he is brought out to be stoned. And an announce comes out before him and announces, 'So-and-so, son of so-and-so is being brought out to be stoned for having committed such-and-such transgression, and so-and-so and so-and-so are his witnesses. Anyone who has any knowledge as to his innocence should come and argue for him.
Once he [the accused] is ten cubit from the stoning area they say to him, 'confess,' for such is the way of those sentenced to death to confess, for al who confess have a share in the world to come. This is what we have found  by Achan, to whom Joshuah said (Joshuah 7) "Son, give honor, please, to Gd, the Lord of Israel and give him a confession...and Achan  answered Joshuah and said, 'I have sinned to Gd the Lord of Israel..." And from where do we know that his confession atoned for him? As it is written (there), "And Joshuah said '
Once he is four cubits from the stoning area his clothes are removed. If it is a man, his front is covered. If it is a woman, her front and her back are covered, this is the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah. And the Sages say, both men and women are stoned naked.
The stoning area was two stories high.  One of the witnesses pushes him on his waist.  If he rolls on his chest, they roll him to his back.  If he dies from this, it is fulfilled.  If not, the second (witness) picks up the rock and puts it on his chest.  If he dies from this, it is fulfilled.  If not, his stoning is by all of Israel as it says (Deuteronomy 17), "The hand of the witnesses will be against him first to kill him and the hand of the rest of the nation following."  All who are stoned are hung, the words of Rabbi Eliezer.  The sages say, none are hung except the one who curses God's name and the idolitor.  They hang a man facing the people and a woman facing the wood, the words of Rabbi Eliezer.  The sages say, a man is hung but a woman is not hung.  Rabbi Eliezer said to them:  Didn't Shimon ben Shetach hang women in Ashkelon?  They said to him:  he hung eighty women and we don't even judge two in one day!  How do they hang him?  They lie the beam on the ground and the wood goes up from it.  And they tie his hands together and hang him.  Rabbi Yose says:  the beam leans on a wall and they hang him the way that butchers do.  And then they free him immediately.  If he stays there overnight, he violates a negative commandment.  As it says (Deuteronomy 21), "Do not leave his body on the wood but rather you must surely bury him on that same day, for a hung (body) is a curse of God."  Which is to say:  why was he hung?  Because he cursed God.  But God's name ends up cursed anyway.
Said Rabbi Meir: When a human being suffers, what does Gd say? 'I am in pain from my head, I am in pain from my arms.' If so then Gd feel distress over the blood of evil-doers that is spilled, how much the more so over the blood of righteous people. And furthermore, anyone who leaves a dead body out overnight [instead of burying it immediately] transgresses a negative commandment. But if one leave a body overnight without burying it for the sake of its honor, to bring it a coffin and a shroud, he does not transgress it. And such a body [of a convict] would not be buried in the grave of his fathers, rather two gravesites would be made before the courthouse, one for those punished by killing and stragulation, and one for those punished by stoning and burning.
When the flesh decomposes, the bones are collected and buried in their proper place.  And the relatives would come and greet the judges and the witnesses, as if to say, we hold nothing against you, and we know that you ruled with true justice.  And they do not mourn publicly but they do have aspects of mourning, since that kind of mourning is in the heart.

Chapter 7

Four forms of corporal punishment were passed on to the courts: stoning, burning, killing [by sword], and strangulation. Rabbi Shimon said, burning, stoning, strangulation, and killing. The following is the law of those being stoned.
The process of those who are burned:  They would bury him in manure up to his knees and fold a hard scarf inside a soft one and tie it around his neck.  One would pull one end and one would pull the other end until he opened his mouth.  Then they would light a wick and throw it into his mouth and it went down into his bowels and hardens his bowels.  Rabbi Judah says: if he died this way, they would not have fulfilled the commandment to burn.  Rather, they open his mouth with pliers which are not pleasant and light the wick and throw it into his mouth and it goes down into his bowels and hardens his bowels.  Rabbi Eliezer ben Zadok:  Once a priest's daughter who became a harlot, they surrounded her with grapevine rope and burned her.  They said to him:  that was because the court at that time was not expert.
The process of killing: they would chop off his head with a sword as the government does.  Rabbi Judah says: that is horrible!  Rather, they rest his head on a stump and cut it with a butcher's knife.  They said to him: there is no death more horrible than that!  The process of strangulation:  they would bury him in manure up to his knees and wrap a rough scarf in a soft one and tie it around his neck.  One would pull from one side and the other would pull from the other side until his soul departed.
These are those who are stoned [to death as capital punishment]: [a male] who sleeps with his mother, with the wife of his father, with his daughter-in-law, with a male, a woman who causes an animal to sleep with her, one who blasphemes [God's name], one who worships foreign worship [other gods], one who gives of his children to Molech, one who practices Ov and Yidoni, one who desecrates the Sabbath, one who curses his father and mother, one who sleeps with a betrothed girl, a convince-er, a sway-er [those who convince and sway a person to worship idols], one who performs magic, and a wayward son. One who sleeps with his mother is liable for [sleeping with his] mother and for his father's wife. Rabbi Yehuda says: he is only liable for [sleeping with his] mother. One who sleeps with his father's wife is liable for [sleeping with] his father's wife and for a married woman, whether in his father's lifetime or after his father's death, whether [she is his father's wife] through betrothal or through completed marriage. One who sleeps with his daugther-in-law is liable for [sleeping with] his daughter-in-law and for a married woman, whether in his sons's lifetime or after his son's death, whether [she is his son's wife] through betrothal or through completed marriage. One who sleeps with a male, or an animal, or a woman who causes an animal to sleep with her - if a person sinned, what has the animal sinned? Rather, since a person was brought to fall by its hand [i.e. because of it], therefore the text said it [the animal] should be stoned. Another thing [reason], so that the animal should not be passing through the market-place and they will say, "this is the one which so-and-so was stoned because of it."
One who curses [God] is not liable until he [explicitly] utter utters the name [of God]. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korchah said: every day the witnesses are [judged] with the kinui of "Yossi should hit Yossi". Once the judgement has been passed down, [the courts] don't kill [the defendant, based upon the testimony  of the witnesses through] kinui, rather, they take everyone outside, and ask the greatest one [witness] among them, and tell him: "say what you heard explicitly", and he says [the full curse], and the judges stand upon their feet, and tear [their clothes] and don't {}. And the second [witness] says also me [I heard] like him. And the third [witness] says also me [I heard] like him.
One who worships foreign worship - whether worshiping, offering offerings, bringing incense, pouring libations, bowing, accepting it as a god, or one who says to it, "You are my god." But one who hugs, kisses, honors, kneels before, washes, anoints, dresses, or puts its shoes on, [only] transgresses a "don't do" [negative commandment]. One who takes a vow in its name or upholds in its name transgresses a "don't do" [negative commandment]. One who is "po'er" to Pe'or [defecates on the idol named Pe'or], this is its worship. One who throws a stone to Markolis, this is its worship.
In the case of one who sacrifices of his children to Molech- he only becomes guilty when he gives over the child to Molech and passes it through the fire.  In the case of he who passes the child through fire but does not give over the child or he who gives over the child but does not pass him through fire, the man is not guilty until he gives over the child and passes him through fire.  A "Ba'al Ov" (master of ancestral spirits) is one who vivifies the dead to speak and speaks through them. A "Yidoni" (seer) is one who speaks through his own mouth.  The Ba'al Ov and Yidoni are killed by stoning, and the one who consults them is, with a warning, guilty of transgression.
One who desecrates Shabbat, if the act was done intentionally, he is liable to be cut off, and if his act was unintentional , he is liable to a sin offering. One who curses his mother and father, he is not liable, unless he curses them by name. If he curses them using a nickname, Rabbi Meir says he is liable, and the Sages exempt him.
One who comes upon a betrothed na'arah , he is not obligated (to stoning) until she is a na'arah, virgin, betrothed and in her father's household. If two come upon her (in an unusual manner), the first is obligated to stoning, and the second  is obligated to choking.
A inciter (to serve idols), this is a regular man who incites and one who incites a regular man, and says to him, "There is a deity in such-and-such place this is what it eats, this is what it drinks, this is good for it, this is bad for it." All capital obligations in the Torah we don't trap them, except for this one. If he says to two and they are his witnesses, we bring him to court and stone him. If he says to one, one responds, "I have friends who want this." If the inciter is crafty and is not able to speak before them, they set up a trap behind the fence, and he says to the inciter, "Say to me what you said to me in seclusion." The inciter says it to him. He responds, "How can we set aside our G-D in Heaven and go and serve wood and stones!" If he retracts, good. If he responds, "This is our obligation and this is good for us," those standing behind the fence bring him to court and stone him. One who says, "I will serve," "I will go and serve," "we will go and we will serve," "I will sacrifice," "I will go and sacrifice," "we will go and we will sacrifice," "I will offer incense," "I will go and I will offer incense," "we will go and we will incense," "I will pour libations," "I will go and pour libations," "we will go and pour libations," "I will bow," "I will go and bow," "we will go and bow," (are obligated to stoning). An instigator (maydiach) , this is one who says, "We will go and we will serve idols."
One who does sorcery, if he does an act of sorcery, he is obligated (stoning), not one who merely tricks the eyes. Rabbi Akiva says in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua, two people harvesting cucumbers, one harvests and is obligated the other harvests and is exempt. The one who does the act of sorcery is obligated, the one who tricks the eyes is exempt.

Chapter 8

A stubborn and rebellious son, When does he become a stubborn and rebellious son? When two hairs come until the beard fully surrounds. The lower beard and not the upper beard because the Sages spoke in clean language. As it says (in a Scriptural verse): "When there will be to a man a son," (Devarim 21) "a son," and not a daughter, "a son," and not a man. The minor is exempt for he has not entered the category of mitzvah observance.
From when is he obligated? from when he eats a tarmeetar of meat and drinks half a log of Italian wine. Rabbi Yosi says, a maneh of meat and a log of wine. If he eats it in a mitzvah gathering, if he eats in the meal for the adding of the month, if he eats it as ma'aser sheini in Jerusalem, If he eats carcasses and tereifos, creepy crawlies, [if he eats untithed produce and ma'aser rishon that it's terumah is not taken, and ma'aser sheini and hekdesh that weren't redeemed], if he eats something that is a mitzvah and something that is a aveirah, or eats any food but doesn't eat meat, drinks any drink but not wine, he does not become a stubborn and rebellious son, until he eats meat and drinks wine. As it says, "Gluttonous and drunken." (Devarim 21) Even though there is no proof to the matter, there is a remembrance to the matter, as it says,"Don't be in the wine drunkards and meat gluttons forever" (Mishlei 23).
If he steals from his father and eats in his father's property, from others and eats in other's property, from others and eats in his father's property, he does not become a stubborn and rebellious son, until he steals from his father and eats in other's property. Rabbi Yosi Bar Rabbi Yehudah says, until he steals from his father and his mother.
If his father wants (to bring the son to court) and his mother doesn't want, his father doesn't want and his mother wants,  he does not become a stubborn and wayward son until they both want. Rabbi Yehudah says, if the mother was not proper for the father, he does not become a wayward and rebellious son. If one of them was a/n amputee, cripple, mute, blind, or deaf-mute, he does not become a wayward and rebellious son. As it says (Devarim 21) "They grab him, his mother and father" and not amputees.  "and they take him out" and not cripples. "and they say" and not mutes. "This son" and not blind. "Doesn't listen to our voice" and not deaf-mutes. They warn him in front of three and lash him. If he goes back and sins, he is judged by a court of 23. And he is not stoned until the original three are there, as it says, "This son" this that was lashed before you. If he flees before his judgement is complete and then his beard grows full, he is exempt. If his judgement is complete and he flees and then his beard grows full, he is obligated.
The wayward and rebellious son is judged based on his end. He should die meritorious and not obligated (by sin), because the death of the wicked is a benefit to them and a benefit to the world, and for the righteous, it is bad for them and bad for the world. Wine and sleep for the wicked is a benefit for them and a benefit for the world, and for the righteous, it is bad for them and for the world. Scattering for the wicked is a benefit to them and to the world, and for the righteous, it is bad for them and for the world. Gathering of the wicked is bad for them and the world, and for the righteous, it is beneficial to them and the world. Quiet for the wicked is bad for them and bad for the world, and for the righteous, it is benefit for them and the world.
One who comes in a tunnel (into one's house) he is judged based on his end. If he came through a tunnel and broke a jug, if he has blood (it is a sin to murder him), he is obligated. If he does not have blood (it is not a sin to murder him), he is exempt.
These are those that can be saved with their lives (i.e. by killing them), One who chases after his friend to kill him, after a male (to have relations), or after a betrothed na'arah. But one who chases after an animal (to have relations), and one who is going to violate Sabbath, and one who is going to serve idols , one may not save them with their lives.

Chapter 9

And these are those who are burnt: one who has sex with a woman and her daughter, and a priest's daughter  who commits adultery. Included in the category of "a woman and her daughter" are: his daughter, and his daughter's daughter, and his son's daughter, and his wife's daughter, and her daughter's daughter, [his mother-in-law, the mother of his mother-in-law, the mother of his father-in-law]. And theses are those who are killed [beheaded]: a murderer and the occupants of a wayward city. A murderer who strikes his neighbor with stone or iron, or holds him down into water or fire and he cannot rise from there, and he [the victim] dies—he is liable. If he pushes him into water or into fire and he can rise from there, and he dies—he's exempt. If he sics a dog on him, or he sics a snake on him, he is exempt. If he causes the snake to bite him, R. Judah makes him liable, and the sages exempt him. One who strikes his fellow, whether with stone or iron, and they estimate that the victim will die, and [his condition] lessens from what it was and then later it becomes more severe and he dies—he is liable. R. Nehemiah says: he is exempt, because there are pre-existing indications [that his death did not result from this blow].
One who intended to kill an animal and killed a person, (to kill) a non Jew and killed a Jew, (to kill) a stillborn child and killed a living child is (in all the above cases) exempt. One who intended to strike another on the side, without enough strength to kill him on his side, and the blow hit him on his heart with enough strength to kill him, and he died, he is exempt. One who intended to strike another on his heart, with enough strength to kill him, and the blow hit him on the side without enough strength to kill him on his side, and he died, he is exempt. One who intended to strike an adult, without enough strength to kill an adult, and the blow landed on a minor with enough strength to kill a minor, and he died, he is exempt. One who intended to strike a minor, with enough strength to kill a minor, and the blow landed on an adult without enough strength to kill an adult, and he [the adult] died, he is exempt. But, one who intended to strike another on his side with enough strength to kill him on his side, and the blow landed on his heart, and he died, he is obligated. One who intended to strike an adult, with enough strength to kill the adult, and the blow landed on a minor, and he died, he is obligated. Rabbi Shimon said: even if one intended to kill this one, and he killed that one, he is exempt.
If a murderer mixes with others, they are all exempt. Rabbi Yehuda said: they bring him to the dome. Anyone guilty of murder that mixes with others [guilty of murder] are judged leniently. Those who are guilty to be stoned who mix with those who are guilty to be burned, Rabbi Shimon said: they are judged by stoning, as burning is more severe. The Sages said: they are judged by burning, as stoning is more severe. Rabbi Shimon said to them: if burning were not more severe, it would not be given [as punishment] to a priest's daughter who prostituted herself? They said to him: if stoning were not the more severe, it would not be given to one who cursed God and the idolater. Those who are guilty to be decapitated who mix with those who are guilty to be strangled, Rabbi Shimon says: with a sword. The Sages say: by strangulation.
One who is liable for two death penalties from the Beit Din, he is judged by the stricter one. One who commits a transgression for which there are two death penalties [proscribed], he is judged by the stricter. Rabbi Yose says: "He is judged by the first connected [death penalty] that comes upon him."
One who is lashed [for punishment] and then repeats [his crime], the Beit Din puts him in prison and makes him eat measures until his stomach bursts. One who kills someone without any witnesses, [the Beit Din] puts them in prison and makes him eat hard bread and forced water.
.....

Chapter 10



The generation of the flood has no portion in the world to come and will not stand in judgement, as it is written (Bereishis 6:3) "My spirit shall abide in man forever",  [not judgement and not spirit]. The generation of division has no portion in the world to come, as it is written (Bereishis 11:8) "Hashem scattered them from there all over the face of the earth." "Hashem scattered them" in this world, "From there Hashem scattered them" in the world to come. The people of Sodom have no portion in the world to come, as it is written, (Bereishis 13:13) "The people of Sodom are evil and great sinners to Hashem" "evil" in this world. "Sinners" in the world to come. But they will stand in judgement. Rebbe Nechemia says , both of these will stand in judgement, as it is written (Tehillim 1:5) "Therefore the wicked will not stand in judgement and sinners in the congregation of the righteous" "Therefor the wicked will not stand in judgement", this is the generation of the flood. "sinners in the congregation of the righteous", this is the people of Sodom. They said to him, they shall not stand in the congregation of the righteous, but they will stand in the congregation of the wicked. [The spies have no portion in the world to come, as it is written (Bamidbar 14:37) "And the men that brough an evil report on the land died in the plague before Hashem" "died" in this world.  "in the plague" in the world to come. The generation of the wilderness has no portion in the world to come and they will not stand in judgement, as it is written there, "In the wilderness they will be consumed and there they will die" , these are the words of Rebbe Akiva. Rebbe Eliezer says, about them it is said (Tehillim 50:5) "Gather to me my pious, those who have established my covenant with me with a sacrifice" The congregation of Korach will not rise in the future, as it is written, (Bamidbar 16:33) "The earth closed on them", in this world. "And they were destroyed from amongst the community" in the world to come, these are the words of Rebbe Akiva. Rebbe Eliezer says, about them it is said, (Shmuel 1 2:6) "Hashem kills and brings life, and casts to the grave and rises up". The ten tribes will not return in the future, as it is written, (Devarim 29:27) "will cast them them into another land like on this day" just like on this day, they go and do not return, so too they will go an not return, these are the words of Rebbe Akiva. Rebbe Eliezer says, "like on this day", just like the day becomes dark and becomes light, even the ten tribes that became dark, so in the future they will be light.
People from an ir hanidachas have no portion in the world to come, as it is written (Devarim 13:12) "Men have come out from amongst you and led astray the inhabitants of their city" They are not killed unless those leading them astray are from that same city and are from the same tribe and not until they led astray the majority and not unless they were men. If women or children led them or they only led a minority, or the leaders were from outside the city, then they are each considered as individuals. And they require two witnessed for each person. This is more strict for individuals than for the many, that individuals are killed by stoning, and therefore their property is saved. The many are killed by sword, and therefore their property is destroyed.
(Devarim 13:16) "You shall surely smite" Donkey drivers and camel drivers that pass from place to place, they may save it. "Destroy it and everything in it and its animals by the sword" And from here, they said, the property of the righteous which is in it is destroyed, that which is outside is saved. And that of the wicked, whether it is inside or outside, it is destroyed.
As it is written (Devarim 13:17) "And all the spoils you shall gather into the street..."; If it does not have a street, you shall make a street. If there was a street outside, bring it inside. As it is written there, "And you shall burn it with fire the city and all the spoils completely to Hashem your G-d" Its spoils, not the spoils of heaven. From here it is said, the consecrated things within it you shall redeem, and the terumos should rot, maaser sheini and holy writings should be buried. "completely to Hashem your G-d", Rebbe Shimon said, so said Hashem, If you make judgement on an ir hanidachas, I will consider it as is if you raised up an offering completely before me. "And it shall be a pile forever [it shall never be rebuilt], do not make [even] gardens or orchards, these are the words of Rebbe Yose HaGalili. Rebbe Akiva says, it shall never be rebuilt, like it was it will not be rebuilt, but it can be made into gardens and orchards. "And it shall not cleave in your hand anything from the banned", that all the time that the wicked are in the world, burning anger is in the world. When the wicked are destroyed from the world, burning anger is removed from the world.

Chapter 11

These are those that are strangled: one who strikes his mother or father, one who kidnaps a Jew, an elder who is rebellious according to a Beit Din [court], a false prophet, one who prophesies in the name of idolatry, an adulterer, one who schemes against a priest's daughter and sleeps with her. One who strikes his mother or father is not liable unless he wounds them. Thus it is more stringent regarding cursing than regarding striking, as one who curses after death is liable, while one who strikes after death is exempt. One who kidnaps a Jew is not liable until they enter his domain. Rabbi Yehuda said: until they enter his domain and he puts him to work [as a slave], as it says: "and he dealt with him as a slave and sold him" (Deuteronomy 24:7). One who steals his son, [Rabbi Yishmael the son of] Rabbi Yohanan the son of Beroka finds him liable, and the Sages exempt him. One who steals someone who is a half-slave, half-free, Rabbi Yehuda finds him liable, and the Sages exempt him.
An elder rebellious against the words of the Beis Din, as it is written (Devarim 17:8) "If there is something bewildering to you in judgement..." There were three courts there, one sits at the entrance of the Temple Mount, one sits at the entrance of the Courtyard, and one sits at the Gazis Chamber. They come to this one at the entrance of the Temple Mount, and they say, so I have explained and so have my fellows explained, so I have learned and so have my fellows learned. If they heard, they tell him. If not, they come to those that are at the entrance of the Courtyard, and they say, so I have explained and so have my fellows explained, so I have learned and so have my fellows learned. If they heard, they tell him. If not, they come to those that are at the Gazis Chamber, that from there comes out Torah to all of Israel, as it is written, "From that place which Hashem has chosen." If he returns to his city and repeats and teached the way he learned, then he is exempt. And if he instructed to do so, he is liable, as it is written, "And the man that does so purposefully, he is not liable until he instructs to do so". If a student instructs to do so, he is exempt, it results that his stringency is his leniency.
The words of the Sages are more stringent that the words of Torah. One that says there is no such thing as Tefillin, in order to transgress the words of the Torah, he is exempt. But to say that there are five compartments, to add to the words of the Sages, he is liable. 
They do not put him to death in the Beis Din in his city or in the Beis Din in Yavneh, but rather they bring him up to the Great Beis Din in Jerusalem, and they guard him until the festival and put him to death on the festival, as it is written, (Devarim 17:13) "And all the nation shall hear and see and they will no longer sin," these are the words of Rebbe Akiva. Rebbe Yehuda says, they do not delay the judgement of this one, rather they kill him immediately, and they write and send messengers in every place, this man son of that man was liable to death by Beis Din. 
A false prophet that prophecies on what he did not hear and what was not said to him, his death is by man. But a person that hides his prophecy, and one who disregards the word of a prophet, and a prophet that transgresses his own words, his death is by heaven, as it is written "Devarim 18:19) "I will require it from him".
One who prophesies in the name of idolatry and says, so says the idolatry, even if followed the law to make the impure impure and the pure pure. One that comes upon a married woman, since she has entered the domain of her husband for nisuin, even though he has not consummated her, the one who has come upon shall be put to death by strangulation. False witnesses of a daughter of a Kohen and a man that has relations with her, that all false witnesses receive the same type of death penalty, except for false witnesses of a daughter of a Kohen and a man that has relations with her.