Orlah, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
Our mishnah deals with orlah or a vineyard into which seeds had been planted which then become mixed up with non-prohibited plants or produce. The question is: does this mixture become nullified if the prohibited part is less than 1/200 of the permitted part?
 
Mishnah Six
If a shoot of orlah or a vineyard in which seeds had been planted (kilayim), became mixed up with [other] shoots, behold one may not gather [the fruit].
But if one has gathered [it], it is neutralized in two hundred-and-one, provided that he did not act deliberately.   
Rabbi Yose says: even if he acted deliberately, it becomes neutralized in two hundred-and-one. 

Explanation
Section one: A person has a bunch of plants in his backyard, or a few vineyards. Some of the plants are orlah, or some of the vineyards have seeds of grain planted in them (kilayim). These plants or vineyards are prohibited. However, he doesn’t know which plants are orlah or which vineyards are kilayim (the grain is assumedly gone). If he has not yet gathered the fruit, he cannot gather any of the fruit from any of these plants. While some times prohibited things can become nullified if they are small enough percentages of a mixture, this is the case only if the produce is already detached from the ground. Since this produce is still attached to the ground, he cannot even pick it.
Section two: If he gathered it already without realizing that some of the produce was prohibited, then as long as there is not more than 1/200 part orlah or kilayim, the prohibited stuff is nullified. However, if he deliberately picked the produce, knowing that this would allow it to be nullified, he is penalized and it is prohibited. The rule is that one is not allowed to intentionally nullify a prohibited substance.
Rabbi Yose says that this is not really a case of intentionally nullifying a prohibited substance. When he picks the produce he is not yet nullifying the prohibited plants, because the stuff still attached to the ground can’t be nullified. It is only nullified when the produce is picked and it turns out that less than 1/200 of it is prohibited. Therefore, he can deliberately pick the produce so that the prohibited plants will be nullified.  
  

