Orlah, Chapter One, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the subject of what parts of a vine are prohibited because of orlah.

Mishnah Seven 
Leaves, sprouts, sap of vines, and vine-buds are permitted in respect of orlah and the laws of the fourth year, and to a nazirite, but are prohibited if they come from an Asherah [tree].   
Rabbi Yose says: vine-buds are prohibited because they are fruit.   
Rabbi Eliezer said: if one curdles [milk] with the resinous substances of [a tree liable to] orlah, it is prohibited.   
Rabbi Joshua said: I have received an explicit tradition that if one curdles [milk] with the resinous substance of the leaves, or with the resinous substance of the roots, it is permitted, but with the resinous substance of the unripe berries, it is prohibited, because these are fruit.

Explanation
Section one: The laws of orlah and fourth year produce do not apply to the non-edible parts of the tree—only to the fruit. So if one wants to derive benefit from these parts during the first four years of the tree’s existence, he may do so. When it comes to the vine, these parts are permitted to a nazirite, since he is prohibited from consuming only the grapes and the parts of the grapes (see Numbers 6:3-4). However, when it comes to an Asherah tree, which is a tree used in idolatry, then every part of the tree is prohibited.   
Rabbi Yose considers the vine-buds to be food, even though most people wouldn’t eat them before they fully ripen. Therefore, the laws of orlah and fourth year produce and the Nazirite prohibitions apply to them. 
Section two: This section deals with the resin that comes from the tree and is used to curdle milk and make cheese. Rabbi Eliezer says that the laws of orlah apply to this substance and therefore if one uses it to curdle milk, the cheese will be prohibited. 
Rabbi Joshua disagrees based on a received oral tradition that the laws of orlah do not apply to the resin that comes from the tree and is used to curdle the milk. This is true as long as the resin comes from the leaves or roots, parts of the tree to which the laws of orlah never apply. However, if he uses the resin that comes from the unripe berries, the cheese is prohibited because these unripe berries are, according to Rabbi Yose, subject to the laws of orlah. And even according to the opinion that disagrees with Rabbi Yose, although the unripe berries are not subject to orlah, when they ripen they will be subject to orlah. Therefore, this cheese will be prohibited. 

