Orlah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven
 
Introduction
In this mishnah we finally hear the basis for the disagreement between Rabbi Meir and the other sages.

Mishnah Seven
For Rabbi Meir used to say: anything that is normally [sold] by counting causes [a mixture] to become consecrated [in even the smallest amount].
But the sages say only six things consecrate [a mixture in even the smallest amount], and Rabbi Akiba says seven [things].
And these are they: Nuts with soft shells; badan pomegranates; stopped-up casks; beet shoots; cabbage-heads; Greek pumpkins. 
Rabbi Akiba says: also loaves [baked by] a householder.   
To those to which orlah applies [they prohibit the mixture] as orlah, [to those of which] kilayim of the vineyard apply [they prohibit the mixture as] kilayim of the vineyard.

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Meir anything that is sold by being counted out at the marketplace (as opposed to being sold by weight or volume) is an important item and therefore it prohibits a mixture no matter how little of the prohibited item is in the mixture. This would explain why bundles of orlah fenugreek cause a mixture to be prohibited no matter how small the ratio of prohibited fenugreek to permitted fenugreek.
The word “consecrated” in this mishnah is used synonymously with “prohibit” because oftentimes things that are “consecrated” become prohibited from use. This was the same verb used in mishnah three.  
Section two: The sages agree that some items cause mixtures to be prohibited in even the smallest ratios. However, they limit this to only six items, to which Rabbi Akiva adds a seventh. These items seem to have been more valuable than general items that are sold by count, such as bundles of fenugreek. Since these items are of great significance, the laws are stricter with regard to them.
Section three: This is a list of the six items. The stopped up casks contain orlah wine.
Section four: Rabbi Akiva adds in bread baked by a householder which is more valuable than bread baked by a professional baker.
Section five: Orlah applies to only some of the above items, namely pomegranates, nuts, and wine. So if the mixture contains even the smallest amount of one of these items and it is orlah, the whole mixture is prohibited. Kilayim in the vineyard applies to the other items in the list, so if one of them is kilayim and it becomes mixed in with other permitted items it prohibits the mixture even if it is only a very small amount. 

