Shevuoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter five discusses the oath of deposit.  The scenario in which this type of oath would be taken is one where Reuven requests of Shimon to return to him something he (Reuven) left in his (Shimon’s) guard.  If Shimon denies having accepted the item as a deposit and takes an oath that he did not do so, and then admits that the oath was false, he is liable.  This oath is referred to in Leviticus 5:21-26.  An oath of deposit need not only be on a deposit but may be on any item that one person claims from the other.  
The first mishnah is similar to those that we have learned previously. It categorizes when and to whom this type of oath is applicable. 

Mishnah One
The oath of deposit applies to men and women, to non-relatives and relatives, to those qualified [to bear testimony] and those unqualified; before the court and not before the court, [if uttered] from his own mouth.
And [if adjured] by the mouth of others, he is not liable unless he denies it before the court, according to the words of Rabbi Meir.
But the Sages say, whether [uttered] from his own mouth or [adjured] by the mouth of others — since he denied it, he is liable. 
And he is liable for intentional transgression of the oath, and for its unintentional transgression coupled with intentional [denial of having received the] deposit, but he is not liable for unintentional transgression.  
And what is he liable for the intentional transgression of the oath? A guilt offering of [the value of] two shekels of silver.   

Explanation
Section one:  This section is similar to the mishnayoth learned at the end of chapter three and the first mishnah of chapter four, which discussed the same regulations with regards to other types of oaths.  The oath of deposit applies to anyone (as did the oath of utterance and the vain oath, but not the oath of testimony).  Again, there is a dispute between the Sages and Rabbi Meir with regards to whether or not the person must state the oath in front of the court in order to make it valid.  According to Rabbi Meir if the person utters the oath himself, he need not do it in front of a court.  If, however, he is adjured, meaning the claimant asks him “Do you swear?” and he answers “Amen”, then it must be done in front of the court.  According to the Sages, whether the person utters the oath on his own, or is adjured by others, he need not do so in front of a court.   
Section two:  A person is liable whether he intentionally swears a false oath or even unintentionally swears a false oath, meaning he didn’t know that one who swears falsely is liable to bring a sacrifice, but did know that he had the object being claimed.  If he didn’t know that he had the object and then swore falsely, he is not liable.  If he has intentionally violated either of these (the oath or the knowledge of the deposit) he must bring a guilt offering which is worth at least two shekels.  This is the amount mentioned in Leviticus 5:15.


Questions for Further Thought:
Compare this mishnah with the first two mishnayoth of chapter four.  What are the differences and why are they different?
