Shevuoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six continues to discuss land, which as we learned in the previous section, is not subject to the laws of oaths.  Finally, in the last section of the mishnah, after several mishnayoth in which we learned when oaths are not taken, the mishnah states when oaths are taken.  

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Meir says: “There are things which are [attached] to land, but are not like land.”
But the sages do not agree with him. 
How so? 
[If one says,] “Ten vines laden with fruit I delivered to you” — and the other says, “There were only five”; Rabbi Meir makes him take an oath; 
But the Sages say:  “All that is attached to land is like land.”
An oath is imposed only for a thing [defined] by size, weight, or number. 
How so? 
[If one says,] “A store room full [of produce] I delivered to you,” or “A purse full [of money] I delivered to you” – and the other says, “I do not know; but what you left you may take,” he is exempt.   
If one says, “[I gave you produce reaching] up to the moulding [above the window],” — and the other says, “Only up to the window,” he is liable. 

Explanation
Section one:  After we stated in the previous mishnah that oaths are not imposed on claims of land, our mishnah discusses the status of things attached to the land, such as grapevines.  According to Rabbi Meir grapevines are like land, and if a person admits to owing part of a claim of grapevines, he is exempt from swearing.  The Sages say that grapevines are independent of land, and therefore one swears on them.
Section two:  In order for an oath to be imposed in defense of a claim, what was claimed and what was admitted must be measurable, by size, weight or number.  In the first scenario in our mishnah, Shimon responds to Reuven that he doesn’t know how much Reuven gave him, but that Reuven can take whatever is left.  Shimon’s admission was not phrased as a measurable amount.  Therefore he does not have to take an oath regarding that which he denied.  The second scenario is a case where the claim and admission were measurable amounts.  Reuven claims that the house full of produce that he left for Shimon was full up to the top moulding over the window. Shimon admits that the store room was full only up to the window.  Although it may seem that this is not a claim nor an admission of a measurable amount, the mishnah rules that it is, and Shimon must swear to Reuven.     



