Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four discusses how many of the witnesses deny knowledge such that they become liable for swearing a false oath of testimony.  

Mishnah Four
If both [persons] denied [knowledge] together, they are both liable. 
If one after another, the first is liable, and the second exempt.   
If one denied, and the other admitted, the one who denied is liable. 
If there were two sets of witnesses, and the first denied, and then the second denied, they are both liable, because the testimony could be upheld by [either of] the two.

Explanation
In order to understand this mishnah it is important to remember that in Jewish law two witnesses are needed to prove a case.  A single witness’s testimony is not acceptable in court.
Section one: If both witnesses deny knowledge at the same time then they are both liable for false oaths.  Since they both equally have caused the litigant to lose his case, they are both liable. 
Section two:  If one denies knowing testimony and then the second witness also denies, the first witness is liable and the second is not.  Since, when the second witness was asked to testify, the only other witness had already sworn that he had no knowledge, the second person’s testimony would not have been accepted in any case.  In other words, by denying knowledge he did not cause any loss to the litigant, and he is therefore not liable.
Section three:  If one person denies knowledge and the other person admits to knowing testimony, the first person is liable since he caused the litigant to lose his case.  If he had admitted, there would have been the sufficient two to prove the case.
Section four:  If two sets of two witnesses deny knowledge, one after the other, both sets, meaning all four witnesses, are liable.  Since the testimony could have been established by either set of witnesses, they have all caused a loss to the litigant by denying knowledge, and they are therefore, all liable.

Questions for Further Thought:
What is the difference between the scenario in section two and the scenario in section four?

