Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
Leviticus 5:1 states, “If a person incurs guilt, when he has heard a public imprecation and—although able to testify as one who has seen or learned of the matter—he does not give information, so that he is subject to punishment.”  In simple English this verse refers to one who has sworn that he does not know information regarding another person’s case in court.  The Mishnah refers to this as an oath of testimony.  Our entire chapter discusses the rules and regulations of this type of oath.  The mishnah which we learn today and the one we will learn tomorrow serve as a contrast to the last two mishnayoth of chapter three, which discussed oaths of utterance and vain oaths.

Mishnah One
The oath of testimony applies to men and not to women, to non-relatives and not to relatives, to those qualified [to bear witness] and not to those unqualified.  And it applies only to those eligible to bear witness.
 Whether [uttered] in front of the court or not in front of the court, if [uttered] with his own mouth; [but if adjured] by the mouth of others he is not liable unless he denies it before the court, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the Sages say:  “Whether [uttered] with his own mouth or [adjured] by the mouth of others he is not liable unless he denies it before the court.” 

Explanation
Section one:  The oath of testimony only applies to those who are allowed to testify.  In other words, if a person adjures another person to testify on his behalf, and they know testimony, and they are qualified to testify, and they swear that they do not know any information, then these witnesses have made a false oath of testimony.  If they were not qualified to testify then they have not made a false oath of testimony, even if they knew information.  Therefore the rules of oaths of testimony do not apply to women, to relatives or to otherwise unqualified individuals (see Sanhedrin 3:3-4).  
In the last clause of this mishnah it is not entirely clear to whom the mishnah refers when it states that the oath of testimony applies only to those qualified to testify.  The Talmud interprets this clause to mean the King, who according to Sanhedrin 2:2 does not testify.  
Section two:  According to Rabbi Meir, when an oath of testimony is sworn by the witness himself it can be done either before or not before a court  However, if the litigant adjures the witness to take an oath, then the witness is not obligated for making a false oath of testimony unless he denies knowing information while in front of the court.  The Sages say that in both the case of a witness swearing on his own and the case of the litigant adjuring the witness, the witness is not liable until he denies knowing information in front of a court.  One who swears a false testimony while not in front of the court is not liable.

Questions for Further Thought:
Why does Rabbi Meir require denial in front of the court in a case where the litigant adjured the witness but not in a case where the witness himself swore?  Why do the Sages always require denial in front of a court? 
