Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Mishnah seven lists cases where although the person falsely testifies, since the case did not concern money, he is not guilty of a false oath of testimony.

Mishnah Seven
“I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that I am a priest, or, that I am a levite, or, that I am not the son of a divorced woman, or, that I am not the son of a halutzah;  
That so-and-so is a priest, or, that so-and-so is a levite, or, that he is not the son of a divorced woman, or, that he is not the son of a halutzah; 
That so-and-so violated his daughter, or seduced his daughter; 
That my son injured me;  
That my neighbor injured me, or set fire to my haystack on the Sabbath”:
[And they deny knowledge of testimony] they are exempt.

Explanation
This mishnah is a contrast to mishnah six.  In it a person adjures witnesses to testify in non-monetary cases, or at least in cases in which the one adjuring does not stand to gain money by the testimony.
Section one and two:  In all of these cases the testimony is about the status of either the person who adjures the witnesses or about a third party.  There is no monetary suit.  The son of  priest and divorcee or a priest and a halutzah (one rejected by the levir) are considered disqualified priests and they do not retain their priestly status.    
Section three:   A person who rapes or seduces his own daughter is liable for the death penalty and not for a fine, as is one who rapes or seduces another person’s daughter.
Section four:  A child who strikes his parent and inflicts a wound is liable for the death penalty.  Since he will be executed he is exempt from paying a financial penalty, and therefore this case is not a monetary suit.
Section five:  One who injures another person on the Sabbath or burns a haystack is liable for the death penalty.  Although these cases also involve financial damage, since a person cannot be obligated for death and payment for the same act, the criminal would be liable for death and not payment.   This is not, therefore, a monetary suit.


Questions for Further Thought:
Sections one and two:  Why might you have thought that these cases were monetary suits?
