Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six continues to discuss the oath of the shopkeeper.  

Mishnah Six 
If he said to a shopkeeper, “Give me fruit for a denar,” and he gave him, and then the shopkeeper said to him, “Give me the denar”, and he replied to him, “I gave it to you, and you placed it in the till”, the customer takes an oath.   
If he gave him the denar, and said to him, “Give me the fruit,” and the shopkeeper says to him, “I have given it to you, and you took it to your house,” the shopkeeper takes an oath.   
Rabbi Judah says: “He who has the fruit in his possession, has the advantage.”   
If he said to a money-changer, “Give me change for a denar,” and he gave him; and said to him, “Give me the denar,” and the other said, “I have given it to you, and you placed it in the till,” the customer takes an oath. 
If he gave him the denar, and said to him, “Give me the small change,” and the other said to him, “I have given it to you, and you threw it in your purse,” the money -changer takes an oath. 
Rabbi Judah says:  “It is not usual for a money-changer to give [even] an issar until he receives the denar.”

Explanation
Section one:  Reuven asks Shimon the shopkeeper to sell him a denar’s worth of fruit, and Shimon gives him the fruit.  When Shimon claims the denar from Reuven, Reuven responds that he has already paid him, and that Shimon put it in into the till.  The mishnah rules that Reuven may swear that he gave Shimon the denar and be exempt from paying.  Since Shimon cannot prove that he did not receive the denar, he cannot recover the alleged debt. 
In the second scenario in this section, Reuven gives the denar before getting the fruit.  When Reuven claims the fruit, Shimon responds that he has already paid him and that Reuven put the fruit into his house.  In this case Shimon is allowed to swear that he has already paid, for the same reason that Reuven was allowed to swear in the first case. 
Rabbi Judah says that whoever holds the fruit has the advantage.  According to Rashi, Rabbi Judah disagrees with the ruling in section one.  Since the customer already has possession of the fruit he is believed when he says that he gave the denar without taking an oath.  Even though it is not unusual for shopkeepers to give their produce on credit, Rabbi Judah still believes the customer who claims to have paid since he has possession of the goods. 
Section two:  This section is basically the same as the previous one, accept that it discusses a money-changer and not a shopkeeper.  Rabbi Judah’s opinion differs slightly, at least in the way he phrases it.  Rabbi Judah again disagrees with the first part of the section (according to Rashi).  When the customer has already received the change and the money-changer claims that he has not received the denar, the customer is believed to have given the denar even without taking an oath.  Since money-changers generally do not give coins without having received other coins, we can assume that the other person did indeed give the coin.    

Questions for Further Thought:
How are the two scenarios in the two halves of this mishnah different?    

