Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first six mishnayoth of our chapter discuss the exceptional cases in which a person takes an oath and thereby collects money from another person.  All of the cases that we have seen in the mishnah until now have been examples of people who take oaths and are thereby exempt from paying.  

Mishnah One
All whom the Torah obligates to take an oath, take an oath, and do not pay.   
But these take an oath, and receive [payment]: the hired laborer, he who has been robbed, he who has been wounded, and he whose opponent is suspected of taking a false oath, and the shopkeeper with his account book.   
“The hired laborer” — How so? 
[If] he says to him [his employer], “Give me my wages which you owe me,” and he replies, “I have given,” and the other says, “I have not received it,” he [the laborer] takes an oath and collects his wages. 
Rabbi Judah says:  “[There is no oath] unless there is partial admission:   How so? If he says to him, “Give me my wages, fifty denarii, which you owe me,” and the other says, “You have received a gold denar (25 silver denar).” 

Explanation
Section one:  Under most circumstances the one who takes an oath is the defendant or the one who would potentially owe money.  Usually he swears and is thereby believed and does not have to pay the claimant.  However, there are five cases in which a claimant takes an oath and thereby collects.  This section briefly lists these five cases.  The mishnah through mishnah six will explain these cases one at a time.
Section two:  The first person who takes an oath and is thereby able to collect a debt is a hired laborer.  If a hired laborer claims his wages and his employer claims to have already paid him, the laborer may take an oath and collect his wages.  The Talmud explains that since employers have many employees, they may tend to forget whom they have paid and whom they have not.  It is not unlikely that they have indeed forgotten to pay their employees.  Therefore, the hired laborer is allowed to swear that he has not been paid, and thereby collect his wages.
According to Rabbi Judah, the hired laborer is allowed to collect by swearing only if the employer admitted to owing him part of his wages.  In the scenario that he presents, the employer admitted to owing him 25 denarii but denied owing him an additional 25 denarii.  The laborer may swear that the employer owes him 25 and collect.  If the employer had denied the entire debt the employee would not be able to take an oath and collect.


Questions for Further Thought:
Why does Rabbi Judah believe there needs to be a partial admission in order for the claimant to swear and then collect?  

