Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses combining several oaths into one oath or separating one oath into several oaths.  

Mishnah Five
“I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that there are of mine in the possession of so-and-so a deposit, a loan, a stolen object, and a lost object”;
[And they respond]:  “We swear we know no testimony for you”, they are liable only once.  
“We swear we know not that there are of yours in the possession of so-and-so a deposit, a loan, a stolen object, and a lost object”, they are liable for each one.  
“I adjure you that you bear testimony for me that there is of mine in the possession of so-and-so a deposit of wheat, barley, and spelt”;
[And they respond]:  “We swear we know no testimony for you”, they are liable only once.  
“We swear we know no testimony for you that there is of yours in the possession of so-and-so a deposit of wheat, barley, and spelt”, they are liable for each one. 

Explanation
Section one:  In the scenario in this section a person adjures witnesses to testify that another person has in his possession a deposit, a loan, a stolen object and a lost object that belong to him (the first person).  If the witnesses swear falsely that they know no testimony, they are only obligated for having sworn one false oath of testimony.  Since they made only one oath they can be obligated only once.  
If however, they swear four different oaths, by separately mentioning the deposit, loan, stolen object and lost object, then they are obligated for four false oaths.  Since they separated their response into four details they have sworn four oaths and they are obligated for each one.
Section two:  The scenario in this section is similar to the scenario in the previous section.  The only difference is that here at issue are three different kinds of grain.  Again, if the witnesses combine their denial into one oath, then they are obligated only once.  If they separate the oath into three different details they will be obligated for each detail. 


Questions for Further Thought:
Why does the mishnah need to teach section two after having already taught section one?  Would you have been able to learn the ruling with regards to section two from having known only section one?
