Shevuoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah begins to discuss oaths, the main topic of the tractate.  The oaths discussed in the beginning of this chapter are oaths of utterance, whereby one swears that he has or has not done something, or that he will or will not do something.  One who breaks such an oath is liable for a sliding scale sacrifice, described in chapters one and two and in Leviticus 5:6-13.

Mishnah One 
Oaths are two, subdivided into four.
“I swear I shall eat”, and “[I swear] I shall not eat”; “[I swear] I  have eaten”, and “[I swear] I have not eaten”.  
“I swear I shall not eat”, and he ate [even] a minute quantity, he is liable, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
They [the Sages] said to Rabbi Akiva:  “Where do we find that he who eats a minute quantity is liable, that this one should be liable?”  
Rabbi Akiba said to them:  “But where do we find that he who [merely] speaks brings a sacrifice, that this one should bring a sacrifice?”  
[If a man says,] “I swear I shall not eat” and he ate and drank, he is liable only once.   
“I swear I shall not eat and I shall not drink,” and he ate and drank, he is liable twice.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  The first line of this mishnah is a quote of the first mishnah of the tractate.  After two chapters of digression, we return to the main topic at hand, oaths.  Our mishnah lists all four types of oaths of utterance, two with regards to the past and two with regards to the future, two negative and two positive.  Eating is just an example of a common oath.  An oath can involve most types of actions.
Section two:  According to Rabbi Akiva, one who swore not to eat and then ate is liable to bring a sacrifice even if he ate the most minute amount of food.  The Sages raise a difficulty on this Rabbi Akiva’s position.  Generally, a person is not obligated for having eaten a forbidden food unless he ate a minimum measure of the food, usually the size of an olive.  Rabbi Akiva responds that we cannot compare the laws of oaths of utterance to any other laws, for an oath of utterance can obligate a person to bring a sacrifice of atonement just by his having said something.  In all other realms of law in order to be liable to bring a sacrifice of atonement one has to actually perform a sin.  Only with regards to oaths of utterance can a person merely retract on his words, and thereby be obligated for a sacrifice. Since the laws of oaths of utterance are already different, there is no room, according to Rabbi Akiva, to compare them to other laws.  
Section three:  This section deals with the question is drinking subsumed under the category of drinking.  According to the mishnah, generally drinking is considered a form of eating and therefore, if after having sworn not to eat, he eats and drinks, he is liable for only one sacrifice.  Drinking is considered a separate violation from eating only if he specifically swore not to eat or drink.  In this case if he ate and drank he would be obligated to bring two sacrifices.

Questions for Further Thought:
What might be other reasons behind Rabbi Akiva’s opinion?
What would be the ruling if someone swore not to eat and then drank but did not eat?  Would he be liable to bring a sacrifice for having violated his oath?      
