Shevuoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses which goat offerings atone for which sins.  There are three goat offerings discussed in this mishnah, all of which are sin-offerings (hatat):  1)  Those offered on festivals; 2)  Those offered on the first of the new month; 3)  The goat offered on the outer altar on Yom Kippur.  The Sages all agree in general that these sin-offerings atone for one who imparts impurity either to holy food or to the Temple. However, they disagree as to which goat atones for which specific sin.

Mishnah Four 
Where there is no knowledge [of the impurity] either at the beginning or at the end, the goats offered as sin-offerings on festivals and new months bring atonement, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Shimon says:  “The festival goats atone [for such sins] and not the new moon goats.   And for what do the new month goats bring atonement?  For a pure man who ate impure holy food.” 
Rabbi Meir says:  “All the goats have equal powers of atonement— for imparting impurity to the Temple and holy food.  
Rabbi Shimon used to say:  “The new month goats bring atonement for a pure man who ate impure holy food; and the festival goats atone for transgression of the laws of impurity where there was no knowledge either at the beginning or at the end; and the ‘outer’ goat of the Day of Atonement atones for transgression of these laws where there was no knowledge at the beginning but there was knowledge at the end. 
They  said to him: “Is it permitted to offer up the goat set apart for one day on another?”  
He said to them: “Let it be offered.” 
They said to him: “Since they are not equal in the atonement they bring how can they take each other's place?” 
He replied: “They are all at least equal [in the wider sense] in that they bring atonement for transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  According to Rabbi Judah, the goats offered on the holidays and on the new months atone for sins of impure people who entered the Temple or ate holy food, in cases where their impurity never became known to them.  In the previous two mishnayoth we learned the procedures of atonement in cases where their impurity did become known to them, either in the beginning in the end.  
Section two:  According to Rabbi Shimon, the goats offered on the festival atone for sins of pure people eating holy food or entering the Temple.  The goats offered on the new month atone for sins whereby a pure person unintentionally ate impure holy food.   
Section three:  According to Rabbi Meir all three of the goats mentioned here atone for all three of the crimes mentioned in this mishnah and in the previous one:  1)  An impure person who entered the Temple or ate holy food and only realized that he had been impure after the fact; 2)  An impure person who entered the Temple or ate holy food and never realized that he had been impure; 3)  A pure person who unintentionally ate impure holy food.
Section four:   This section reviews Rabbi Shimon’s opinion with regards to the three goats and the three sins.  According to his opinion each goat atones for its own sin.  1)  The goat offered on new months atones for a pure person who unintentionally ate impure holy food.  2)  The goat offered on festivals atones for an impure person who entered the Temple or ate holy food and never realized that he had been impure.  3)  The goat offered on the outer altar on Yom Kippur atones for an impure person who entered the Temple or ate holy food and only realized that he had been impure after the fact.
Section five:  The Rabbis ask Rabbi Shimon what happens in a situation where one of the goats set aside to be offered on one of these occasions is lost and then found on a different occasion.  Since all three of the goats are all sin-offerings can the goat set aside for one occasion be offered on another?  Rabbi Shimon answers that it can.  The other Rabbis then raise a difficulty on Rabbi Shimon’s response.  Since according to Rabbi Shimon each goat atones for its own sin, it would seem that each goat is different from the other goats.  Therefore, how could a goat intended for example for a new month be offered on a festival?  Rabbi Shimon responds that they all have a common denominator in that they atone for sins of imparting impurity to the Temple and to holy food.  Since they are all means of atonement for similar types of sins, each can replace the other.

Questions for Further Thought:
Section five: Why is this question asked of Rabbi Shimon and not of Rabbi Meir or Rabbi Judah?  What might these other Sages have responded to this question?  
