Shevuoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah distinguishes between cases where a person has taken one oath of deposit and cases where a person has taken more than one oath of deposit.  Similar mishnayoth were taught in 4:5, and 3:2-3 with regards to the other types of oaths. 

Mishnah Three
If five claimed from him, and said to him: “Give us the deposit that we have in your possession,” [and he replied:] “I swear that you have nothing in my possession,” he is liable only once. 
[If he said:] “I swear that you have nothing in my possession, nor you, nor you,” he is liable for each one. 
Rabbi Eliezer says:  “Only if he says, ‘I swear’ at the end.”   
Rabbi Shimon says: “Only if he says, ‘I swear’ to each one.” 
“Give me the deposit, loan, theft, and lost object that I have in your possession,” [and he replied], “I swear that you do not have these in my possession,” he is liable only once. 
“I swear that you do not have in my possession a deposit, a loan, a theft, and a lost object,” he is liable for each one. 
“Give me the wheat, barley, and spelt that I have in your possession”, [and he replied], “I swear that you do not have these in my possession,” he is liable only once. 
“I swear that you do not have in my possession wheat, barley, and spelt,” he is liable for each one. 
Rabbi Meir said:  “Even if he said, ‘... A grain of wheat, barley and spelt,’ he is liable for each one.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  In this scenario five people at the same time claim from one person an object that they say is in his possession.  If he takes one oath denying that he has the object, he will be liable for one sacrifice, if the oath was false.  
There are three different opinions as to how he can make his statement into five different oaths and thereby be liable for each one.  According to the first opinion each time he repeats “you” he is swearing a new oath, and will therefore be liable for another sacrifice.  According to Rabbi Eliezer, in order to make all of the subsequent “you”s into new oaths, he must repeat the word “oath” at the end of the statement.  If he does not it still counts as one oath.  According to Rabbi Shimon he must repeat the word, “I swear” to each individual who makes a claim against him.  If he does not it will count as one oath.
Section two:  In this scenario a person claims four different categories of things from another person.  These four are patterned after the language of the Leviticus 5:21.  If the person responds with one oath of denial without specifying what he is denying, he will be liable for only one sacrifice.  If he mentions all four things which he is denying, he will be obligated for four sacrifices.
Section three:  This same rule applies if the claimant claims different types of the same item.  Again, if he mentions each type individually, he is liable for multiple sacrifices. If he groups them together in one general statement, then he is liable for only one sacrifice.  Rabbi Meir adds that even if he slightly changes the language of the claim, from plural to singular, he is still liable.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Why does the mishnah need to teach section three after having taught section two?  In other words, why would you have thought that the case of wheat, barley and spelt was different from the case of deposit, loan, theft and lost object?  

