Shevuoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Mishnah eight defines a vain oath

Mishnah Eight
What is a vain oath? 
If he swore that which is contrary to the facts known to people, saying of a pillar of stone that it is of gold; or of a man that he is a woman; or of a woman that she is a man. 
If he swore concerning a thing which is impossible, [for instance if he said,] “If I have not seen a camel flying in the air”,  or “If I have not seen a serpent as thick as the beam of the olive press”. 
If he said to witnesses, “Come and bear testimony for me”, [and they replied,] “We swear that we will not bear testimony for you”.
If he swore to annul a commandment, [for example] not to make a sukkah,  or not to take a lulav,  or not to put on tefillin.  
These are vain oaths, for which one is liable, for intentional transgression, lashes, and for unintentional transgression one is exempt. 

Explanation
At the end of the previous mishnah we were introduced to the concept of a vain oath, which is forbidden in Exodus 20:7, one of the verses of the Ten Commandments.  The punishment for intentionally swearing in vain is lashes and for unintentional swearing in vain there is no punishment.  Our mishnah lists four different types of vain oaths.
Section one: If one swears about something that is obviously false, for instance if he looks at a pillar of stone and swears that it is gold, then he has taken God’s name in vain by swearing in vain.  
Section two: Similarly, if he swears by something that cannot happen, for instance he swears that he saw a camel fly in the air, he has also sworn in vain.
Section three:  According to Leviticus 5:1, if a person has been witness to an event he is obligated to testify.  If a person asks another person to testify and he has testimony to give, and he swears that the he will not testify, then he has sworn in vain.  This example actually can fit into the example in the next section, one who swears not to observe one of the commandments.  Since testifying is a positive commandment one who swears not to do so has sworn in vain.
Section four:  One who swears not to observe one of the commandments has sworn in vain.  

Questions for Further Thought: 
Why does the mishnah consider all of these oaths to be in vain?  
What is the difference between a false oath and a vain oath?
