Shevuoth, Chapter Six, Mishnayoth Four, Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses cases where no oath is imposed because of the nature of the object in dispute.  

Mishnah Five
And these are the things for which no oath is imposed: slaves, bonds, lands, and dedicated objects.   
[The law of] paying double, or four or five times the value, does not apply to them. 
An unpaid guardian does not take an oath, and a paid guardian does not pay.
Rabbi Shimon says:  “For dedicated objects for which he is responsible an oath is imposed and for [dedicated objects] for which he is not responsible an oath is not imposed. 

Explanation—Mishnah Five
A person does not have to take an oath over any of the objects that are listed in this section.  This means that if Reuven claims that Shimon owes him slaves, bonds or land, and Shimon admits to part of the claim, he need not swear over the rest.  The laws of paying double, or four of five times the value also do not apply to these things.  These are the penalties for one who steals, or one who steals and then sells or slaughters that which he stole.  If Reuven steals a bond from Shimon and then sells it, Reuven is only obligated to restore the value of the slave, but not the double payment.  If Reuven steals a sheep that had been dedicated to the Temple, and then sells the sheep, he is not liable to pay back to the Temple four times the value of the sheep.  The laws of guardianship also do not apply to these things.  If an unpaid guardian is watching a slave, and the slave runs away, the unpaid guardian need not swear that he was not negligent.  A paid guardian does not have to pay if, while watching one of these objects, it is stolen or lost. 
Rabbi Shimon distinguishes between dedicated objects for which a person is responsible and those for which he is not responsible.  If a person says, “I dedicate this sheep to the Temple” and the sheep dies, he is not responsible to replace the sheep.  Since this sheep is already considered Temple property, it is not subject to the laws of oaths and guardianship.  If a person says, “I dedicate a sheep to the Temple” and he sets aside a sheep to bring to the Temple, and the sheep dies, he must replace the sheep with another sheep.  Since the first sheep is still under his responsibility, and is therefore still his sheep, it is subject to the laws of oaths and guardianship.


