Keritot, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Keritot opens with a list of thirty-six transactions for which one is liable karet if one commits the transgression intentionally, but without prior warning.

Mishnah One 
There are in the Torah thirty-six [transgressions which are punishable with] karet:  
When one has intercourse with his mother,  
His father's wife;
Or his daughter-in-law; 
When a man has intercourse with a male, 
Or with a beast, 
Or when a woman brings a beast upon herself; 
When one has intercourse with a woman and her daughter;
Or with a married woman;
Or with his sister;
Or with his father's sister;
Or his mother's sister;
Or his wife's sister;
Or his brother's wife;
Or the wife of his father's brother;
Or with a menstruating woman; 
One who blasphemes [the Lord];
One who worships idols;
Or dedicates his children to Molech;
Or has a ba’al ov;  
Or desecrates the Shabbat;
When an unclean person eats of sacred food;
Or when one enters the precincts of the Temple in an unclean state;   
When one eats forbidden fat,   
Or blood;
Notar;
Or piggul;   
When one slaughters 
Or offers up [a consecrated animal] outside [the Temple]; 
One who eats anything leavened on Pesah;   
One who eats 
Or works on Yom Kippur;  
One who compounds the oil [of anointing];
Or compounds incense;
Or uses [unlawfully] oil of anointing;   
And [when one transgresses the laws of] the pesah, 
And circumcision — from among positive commandments.

Explanation
This is not really the place to explain each of these transgressions. Rather I will give brief biblical references for each and explain anything that I feel is a bit more complicated. 
I have merely duplicated each section below for ease of reference. Sorry if this is a bit long…
When one has intercourse with his mother; Leviticus 18:7.
His father's wife; ibid: 8.
Or his daughter-in-law; ibid: 15.
When a man has intercourse with a male: ibid: 22. 
Or with a beast: ibid: 23. 
Or when a woman brings a beast upon herself: ibid.  
When one has intercourse with a woman and her daughter: ibid: 17.
Or with a married woman: ibid: 20.
Or with his sister; ibid: 9.
Or with his father's sister: ibid: 12.
Or his mother's sister: ibid: 13.
Or his wife's sister: ibid: 18.
Or his brother's wife: ibid: 16.
Or the wife of his father's brother: ibid: 14.
Or with a menstruating woman; ibid: 19. 
One who blasphemes [the Lord]: Numbers 15:30. 
One who worships idols: No shortage of references in the Tanakh. 
Or dedicates his children to Molech; Leviticus 18:21.
Or has a ba’al ov; Leviticus 19:31. 
Or desecrates the Shabbat: Many references, see for instance, Exodus 31:24.
When an unclean person eats of sacred food: Leviticus 7:20.
Or when one enters the precincts of the Temple in an unclean state:Numbers 19:13.   
When one eats forbidden fat: Leviticus 7:25.  
Or blood; ibid, 27.
Notar: Leviticus 19: 6-8.
Or piggul; Leviticus 7:18.   
When one slaughters: Leviticus 17:4. 
Or offers up [a consecrated animal] outside [the Temple]; ibid, 8-9. 
One who eats anything leavened on Pesah; Exodus 12:19.  
One who eats: 
Or works on Yom Kippur;  Leviticus 23:28-30 (this and the previous transgression).
One who compounds the oil [of anointing]; Exodus 30: 32-33.
Or compounds incense; Exodus 30: 37-38.
Or uses [unlawfully] oil of anointing; ibid, 32-33.   
And the pesah: Deuteronomy 16: 2; Numbers 9:13. 
And circumcision are positive commandments: Leviticus 12:3; Genesis 17:14. 
