Nazir, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
In this mishnah we learn that under certain circumstances, a man may use for himself money that his father set aside to purchase his own nazirite sacrifices.  However, a woman cannot do so, even though she can potentially inherit her father.  This difference mirrors the difference in the previous mishnah, where a man can impose a nazirite vow on his son but a woman cannot do so.

Mishnah Seven
A man can shave [with offerings set aside for] his father’s naziriteship but a woman cannot shave [with offerings set aside for] her father’s naziriteship.
How so?
If a man’s father had been a nazirite, and had set apart a lump sum of money for [the sacrifices of] his naziriteship and died and [the son] said, “Behold, I am a nazirite on condition that I may shave with my father’s money.” 
Rabbi Yose said: this money is to be used for freewill-offerings, this man cannot  shave [with offerings set aside for] his father’s naziriteship. 
Who is the one who can shave [with offerings set aside for] his father’s naziriteship? He who was a nazirite together with his father, and whose father had set apart a lump sum of money for his nazirite [sacrifices] and died.  This one can shave [with offerings set aside for] his father’s naziriteship.

Explanation
Section one:  The introduction to the mishnah establishes that a man may sometimes use money that was set aside by his father for his own nazirite offerings.  This contrasts with the cases in mishnayoth four and six, in which the money which was set aside for sacrifices before the vow was annulled cannot be used by anyone else, but rather must be used for freewill offerings.  
Section two:  The mishnah now explains how this can happen.  If the father was a nazirite and set aside money to be used for his sacrifices, and then died before he completed his term of naziriteship, the son may use the money set aside, provided he stipulate that he will do so.  
Section three:  Rabbi Yose disagrees and holds that in such a case the money must be used for freewill-offerings, as was instructed in mishnayoth four and six, in cases where the money had not been directed toward specific sacrifices.  The reason why this doesn’t work in this case is that the son was not a nazirite while the father was still alive. The only time that he can use his the money that his father had set aside is when his father and he were both nazirites at the same time.  

