Nazir, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that a person can become a nazirite by seeing his friend take a nazirite vow and saying “I too.”  The Talmud teaches that in order for this to be effective he must state “I too” as soon as he hears his friend vow, for only in such a way is it clear that he has vowed.

Mishnah One
One who said, “Behold, I am a nazirite”, and his friend overheard and said “I too,” [and another one said] “I too”, all are nazirites. 
If the first one is released [from his vow], all are released.
If the last one is released, he alone is released, and the others remain bound [by their vows]. 
If he said, “Behold, I am a nazirite”, and his companion overheard and said, “My mouth shall be as his mouth and my hair as his hair”, he becomes a nazirite. 
[If he said,] “Behold, I am a nazirite,” and his wife overheard and said, “I too,” he can annul her vow, but his own remains binding. 
[If a woman says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite”, and her husband overhears and adds, “I too,” he cannot annul her vow.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah teaches that it is effective to state “I too” when one hears another take a nazirite vow.  In this case, each person who took a later vow is dependent upon the earlier vows.  If the first person asks a sage to release him from his vow, a process which we learned about in chapter nine of Nedarim, the latter are also released from their vows.  In contrast, if the latter nazirites are released, those who vowed earlier are not released.
Section two:  Besides saying “I too” he may also employ other hints that he wishes his status to be like that of the one who vowed.  He may say that just as the other’s mouth cannot taste wine, so too my mouth cannot taste wine, or just as the other does not cut his hair, so too I won’t cut my hair.  These are all clear enough statements in order to make him a nazirite.
Section three:  A wife can make her nazirite vow depend on her husbands by saying “I too.”  Should he annul her vow, since this is a vow that has in it the element of self-denial.  If he annuls her vow, his is still valid because his does not depend on hers.  However, if he makes his vow dependent on hers, he cannot annul her vow.  This is because saying “I too” is a means of affirming her vow, and once a husband affirms his wife’s vow he can no longer annul it.  

