Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Numbers 6:17-20 read:  “He shall offer the ram as a sacrifice of well-being to the Lord, together with the basket of unleavened cakes; the priest shall also offer the meal offerings and the libations.  The nazirite shall then shave his consecrated hair…The priest shall take the shoulder of the ram when it has been boiled, one unleavened cake from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and place them on the hands of the nazirite after he has shaved his consecrated hair.  The priest shall wave them as a wave-offering before the Lord… After that the nazirite shall drink wine.”  
Our mishnah discusses this process and contains a dispute over exactly when the nazirrite shaves his head.

Mishnah Nine
He would then boil or completely boil the peace-offering. 
The priest then took the boiled shoulder of the ram, an unleavened cake from the basket, and an unleavened wafer, placed them on the nazirite’s hands and waved them. 
After this, the nazirite was allowed to drink wine and defile himself for the dead.
Rabbi Shimon says:  as soon as one kind of blood had been sprinkled on his behalf the nazirite could drink wine and defile himself for the dead. 

Explanation
Section one:  To the biblical requirements quoted above, the mishnah adds that the well-being offering may either be boiled or completely boiled, such that the meat falls of the bone extremely easily.  
Section two:  These actions are prescribed by verse 19.
Section three:  According to the first opinion, only after the priest has completed these actions can the nazirite drink wine and defile himself for the dead.  This is a simple reading of the order of the activities prescribed in the above verses.  
Rabbi Shimon says that as soon as one of the sacrifice’s blood is sprinkled on the altar on behalf of the nazirite, he may drink wine and defile himself for the dead.  This is so even though he has not yet shaved or offered the other sacrifices.  In the Talmud midrashic proof is brought for Rabbi Shimon’s position.  
