Nazir, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with a person who tries to take upon himself a partial naziriteship.  
The second section deals with one a person who vowed a nazirite vow but did not have full comprehension of the prohibitions involved.

Mishnah Four
[If one says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite, on condition that I can drink wine, or can have contact with the dead”, he becomes a nazirite, and all these things are forbidden him. 
[If he says,] “I knew that there is such a thing as naziriteship but I did not know that a nazirite is forbidden to drink wine”, he is bound [to his vow].  
Rabbi Shimon releases him. 
[If he says,] “I knew that a nazirite is forbidden to drink wine,  but I imagined that the sages would give me permission, since I cannot do without wine”, or “since [my profession] is to bury the dead”,  he is released.  
Rabbi Shimon binds him [to his vow].

Explanation
Section one:  This person makes a nazirite vow on condition that some of the prohibitions would not apply to him.  There is a rule that a person may not make a condition against what is written in the Torah.  Hence the condition is invalid and he is a full nazirite, forbidden to shave his hair, drink wine or have contact with the dead.
Section two:  In this case, a person takes a nazirite vow and afterwards claims that he didn’t know that nazirites could not have wine.  According to the Sages, his lack of knowledge does not exempt him and he is a full nazirite.  Rabbi Shimon holds that he is not a nazirite because it was a mistaken vow.  Alternatively, Rabbi Shimon holds that one is not a nazirite unless he accepts upon himself all of the minutiae of being a nazirite.
Section three:  In this case, when the person vowed he knew that wine and coming into contact with the dead were prohibited to a nazirites.  Nevertheless, he thought that the sages would allow him to either drink because he can’t live without wine or bury the dead because that is his profession.  The Sages consider his vow to be mistaken vow, and therefore he is released.  Rabbi Shimon does not consider this a mistaken vow. Alternatively, Rabbi Shimon agrees that this was a mistaken vow, but holds that he must first ask to be released by a Sage.  
