Nazir, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah continues to bring cases that involve the concept of “there are grounds for the assumption.”  The first section discusses doubtful skin afflictions. The second case involves doubtful cases of “zivah”, usually translated as flux, an unusual genital emission.  The third case involves estimating the cause of death of a person struck by his fellow.  

Mishnah Four
Any matter of doubt regarding [leprous affliction] at the outset is clean before a decision is made [to declare it] unclean.  
Once a decision has been made [to declare it] unclean, any matter of doubt is regarded as unclean.
A person suffering from gonorrhea (a zav) is examined regarding seven things,   before it has been decided that it is gonorrhea:
With regard to food, drink, carrying things, jumping, sickness, something seen, or an impure thought.   
Once gonorrhea is established, he is no longer examined. 
[Any flux resulting] from an accident to him, doubtful [flux] and his semen are unclean, for there are grounds for this assumption.  
If a one strikes his fellow, and they expected him to die and he partially recovered and then grew worse and died [the other] is liable [for murder]. 
Rabbi Nehemiah exempts him, for there are grounds for this assumption.  

Explanation
Section one:  If something is seen on a person’s skin that may be the sign of an unclean skin affliction, he is still considered clean until the priests decide that it is an unclean skin affliction.  However, once he has been declared to be unclean, any further doubtful matters are ruled as if they too render him unclean.  In other words, he remains in his presumed assumption.  
Section two:  For a person to be considered a full zav (one suffering a certain type of sexually transmitted disease), he must see flux (unusual genital emission) three times with no more than one day between each emission.  After his first two emissions, he is still not a full zav.  Furthermore, for the emission to be legally considered flux it must be from this disease and not as a result of something else.  Therefore, after the first and second emissions he is checked to make sure the emission was not caused by something else.  Our mishnah teaches the questions that he is asked.  All of these were considered potential causes of emissions.  However, once he has been declared a zav, a sufferer of this disease, he is not asked these questions concerning further emissions.  Rather they are all considered to be flux.  Again, the person remains in his currently assumed status unless it can be proven otherwise.  The mishnah continues that even if he were to have his third emission as an accident resulting from one of the above causes, or there is a doubt whether he had a third emission, or it is unclear whether it was a seminal emission or a gonorrheal emission, he is still ruled to be a zav, for there are grounds to assume that after the first two emissions of flux, the third one is flux as well.
Section three:  According to the first opinion, even though the injured person partially recovered and only after his recovery again grew ill and died, it is clear that he died from the blows of the first person.  Hence the one who struck him is considered to be a murderer.  Rabbi Nehemiah disagrees and holds that it can be presumed that he died of other causes, and therefore the one who struck him cannot be considered a murderer.  Others interpret the final words of this mishnah “for there are grounds for this assumption” to relate to the words of the first opinion. Since there are solid grounds to assume that the person died from the blows, he is deemed to be a murderer.  
