Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah compares different stringencies that exist for each of the three nazirite prohibitions:  ritual defilement, shaving and the consumption of things which come from the vine.

Mishnah Five
Three things are forbidden to a nazirite: — ritual defilement, shaving and products of the vine. 
Defilement and shaving have a stringency that products of the vine do not have, in that defilement and shaving annul [the period of naziriteship already observed], whereas [partaking of] products of the vine does not do so. 
Products of the vine have a stringency that defilement or shaving do not have, in that products of the vine permit of no exception from the general prohibition, whereas defilement and shaving are allowed as exception from the general prohibition in the case where shaving is a religious duty, or where there is a neglected corpse. 
And defilement has a stringency that shaving does not have, in that defilement annuls the whole [period of naziriteship already served], and [a nazirite who is defiled] is liable for a sacrifice, whereas shaving annuls only thirty days and he is not liable for a sacrifice.

Explanation
Section one:  This section was taught above in mishnah one.  It is repeated here as an introduction to the rest of this mishnah.
Section two:  If a nazirite is defiled through contact with the dead, or shaves (intentionally or unintentionally) he annuls at least part of the period of naziriteship that he has already served.  However, if a nazirite partakes of a product which comes from the vine, he does not annul any of the period of naziriteship which he has already served.
Section three:  Under no circumstances may a nazirite eat of a product of the vine.  Certainly he cannot drink wine for kiddush or havdalah, for these are both considered rabbinic commandments, whereas his nazirite obligations are toraitic in origin.  Even if he swears to drink wine, thereby creating a toraitic obligation for him to drink wine, he may not do so.  
In contrast, under certain circumstances a nazirite may intentionally defile himself or cut his hair.  A person with scale disease (tzaraat, often called leprosy) shaves as part of the ritual to complete his purification process (see Leviticus 14:9).  If this person was also a nazirite, he is allowed to shave his hair.  If a nazirite came across a corpse which no one else is taking care of in order to bury it, he is allowed to defile himself in order to bury the corpse.  I should note that although I have translated the Hebrew into “neglected corpse”, a more literal translation would be “a commanded corpse”, meaning a corpse which all Jews, no matter their status, are commanded to bring to proper burial.  From here we can see how important proper burial and respect for a person’s body is in Judaism.
Section four:  In section two the mishnah noted that both defilement and shaving one’s hair annul at least part of the term of naziriteship already served.  Here the mishnah notes that defilement is more stringent in that a nazirite who is defiled must begin his entire naziriteship again, whereas a nazirite who shaves only loses thirty days of his term.   
