Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who offered one (or more) of his sacrifices, then shaved and then discovered that his sacrifice had been improperly offered.  When offering a sacrifice, the priest must have the correct intention in mind.  When offering a sin-offering he must intend to offer a sin-offering and follow all of that specific offering’s regulations. A wrong intention invalidates the sacrifice.  It turns out that this person has shaved before he offered his sacrifice.  Therefore, the shaving is invalid and he must add on another thirty days of naziriteship.  

Mishnah Ten
If he shaves after one of the sacrifices and the sacrifice is found to be invalid, his shaving is invalid and his sacrifices do not count: 
If he shaves after the sin-offering, which was not offered for its correct designation and then he brought the other sacrifices under their correct designations, his shaving is invalid and [none of] his sacrifices counts for him. 
[Similarly], if he shaves after the burnt-offering or the wellbeing offering, which have not been offered for their correct designation, and then he brought the other sacrifices under their correct designation, his shaving is invalid and [none of] his sacrifices counts for him. 
Rabbi Shimon says: that particular sacrifice does not count, but his other sacrifices do count.
If he shaved after all three sacrifices and one of them was found to valid, his shaving is valid and he has [only] to bring the other sacrifices.

Explanation 
Section one:  According to some commentators, after the sacrifice was offered he shaved, and then the sacrifice turned out to be in some way invalid.  Rashi, however, explains that this section is an introduction to the next section, and in both it turns out that the sacrifice itself was valid, but that it was offered with improper intent.  In any case, since it turns out that he shaved before he had offered any valid sacrifices, he must go back, serve another thirty days of naziriteship and then re-offer all of his sacrifices.
Section two:  A sin-offering must be offered with the proper intent.  Since it was not, it is invalid, and again none of his sacrifices count.
Section three:  Unlike the sin-offering, the burnt offering and the wellbeing offering are valid, even if offered with improper intent.  Nevertheless, they do not count as nazirite offerings and therefore, the nazirite has again shaved his hair before offering any of his mandatory sacrifices.  Again, he must serve another thirty days of naziriteship and then offer all three sacrifices.  
Rabbi Shimon holds that since the burnt or wellbeing offerings are valid, even though it doesn’t count toward his nazirite obligations, they do not invalidate the offering of the other properly-offered sacrifices.  He must merely bring another of the same type of sacrifice that did not count for him.
Section four:  If, however, he sacrificed all three sacrifices, and only then shaved, and only one of them was found to be invalid, the shaving was not improper.  As we learned above in mishnah seven, a nazirite can shave even after bringing one sacrifice.  Therefore, all he must do in this case is bring another one of the sacrifices which was invalidated. 
 
