Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Every time that a person breaks a commandment s/he incurs a penalty.  A question can be asked about a prohibition that can be broken continuously for an extended period of time, such as the Sabbath.  For instance, writing is prohibited on Shabbat.  If I write a letter that has five hundred words, how many times have I broken the Shabbat?  What if I do so in two sittings?  What if I do so over two Shabbatot?  
Our mishnah teaches that what divides actions into separate prohibitions is awareness of the prohibition itself.  This awareness is established by another person relating to the transgressor that s/he is transgressing. 

Mishnah Four
A nazirite who drank wine all day long is liable for only a single penalty. 
If they said to him, “do not drink,” “do not drink” and he drank, he is liable for a penalty for each time [they warned him].
[A nazirite who was] shaving all day long is liable for only a single penalty. 
If they said to him, “do not shave,” “do not shave” and he shaved, he is liable for a penalty for each time [they warned him].
[A nazirite who was] defiling himself with the dead all day long is liable for only a single penalty. 
If they said to him, “do not be defiled,” “do not be defiled” and he was defiled, he is liable for a penalty for each time [they warned him].

Explanation
The ruling in all three sections is nearly identical.  As long as he has not been warned by others that what he is doing, drinking wine, shaving or becoming defiled, is prohibited to a nazirite, he is considered as having transgressed once.  In such a case he will receive one set of lashes, the punishment for breaking any negative commandment that is not punishable by death. 
However, if after taking one sip of wine, or after cutting one hair or after defiling himself once, they warn him that what he has done is prohibited and he continues to do so, he is liable for each time he transgresses.  In such a case he will receive multiple sets of lashes. 
	
