Nazir, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Yesterday’s mishnah ended with the phrase, “for there are grounds for such an assumption” (raglayim ledavar).  This can be translated literally as “the matter has legs”, but it means that an assumption is probably correct.  The following two mishnayoth are brought here in this tractate because they too contain that phrase.  
Specifically, today’s mishnah deals with a person who finds a body or more than one body buried on his property.  The question is, was his property a cemetery or not.  Note that normally speaking Jewish law forbids the moving of a corpse.  However, in certain circumstances it is permitted.  In our mishnah the owner of the property wants to prevent his property from being unclean and therefore the mishnah allows him, under certain circumstances, to remove the body.

Mishnah Three
If a man finds a corpse for the first time lying in a typical position, he may remove it together with the soil that it occupies.   
[If he finds] two, he may remove them together with the ground they occupy. 
If he finds three, then if the distance between the first and the last is from four to eight cubits, this is a graveyard site.  
He [must] check from that point twenty cubits in all directions.
If he finds one twenty cubits away, he must check from it another twenty cubits, for there are grounds [that it is a graveyard].
For if he had found it at the outset he would have removed it and the soil that it occupies.

Explanation
Section one:  A person finds a single corpse on his property and he has never found one there before.  The corpse is lying in a position typical for the burial of Jews.  If it had been a non-Jewish body, there would be no concern for impurity since non-Jewish corpses do not defile.  The mishnah rules that he may move it, together with the soil surrounding it.  The soil must be removed for it has soaked up some of his blood and moisture and hence may be impure.  
Section two:  If he finds two bodies, he may proceed in the same manner.  Two bodies is not enough for us to begin to be concerned about it being a cemetery.
Section three:  However, if he finds three bodies and there are no more than eight cubits separating the two furthest apart, he must assume that he has stumbled upon a cemetery.  In this case he cannot move the corpses.  He must look around in a twenty cubit radius to see how large the cemetery is.  If he finds another corpse even twenty cubits away, he must treat the entire area as a cemetery.  He may not remove this single corpse, even though it is a large distance away from the others, for there are grounds (no pun intended) to assume that the entire area was used as a cemetery.  In contrast, if he had found a single corpse there before finding others, it would not have been considered part of the cemetery, and he would have been allowed to remove it with its soil.  
