Nazir, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
There is a good deal of background information that will help (some) in understanding this mishnah. 
The topic of the mishnah is someone who is not only a doubtfully defiled nazirite, but a doubtful metzorah, one who has scale disease (which I will, for convenience sake, call leprosy).  The process of the “leper” is as follows.  When the priest checks him and decides that he does have the disease, he sits outside of the camp for seven days.  Afterwards, he offers two bird sacrifices, shaves and bathes, and then may enter the camp.  On the seventh day he again shaves, then goes to the mikveh and on the eighth day brings more sacrifices.  He may not eat consecrated food until he brings these last sacrifices.  
We have already learned two things regarding the leper and the nazirite.  First of all, the nazirite is allowed to shave if he has to do so to be purified from leprosy.  Second, if a nazirite becomes a leper the days of his leprosy do not count toward his naziriteship, but neither does his becoming a leper overturn his entire naziriteship.  
Our mishnah also holds that shaving for leprosy cannot at the same time count for shaving for a naziriteship.

Mishnah Two
A nazirite who was in doubt whether he had been defiled and in doubt whether he had been a confirmed leper, may eat consecrated food after sixty days, and drink wine and come into contact with the dead after one hundred and twenty days, since shaving on account of leprosy overrides [the prohibition against] the shaving of the nazirite only when [the leprosy] is certain, but when it is doubtful it does not override it.  

Explanation
The mishnah explains what is to happen in this situation.  First of all, he must wait thirty days after he has been purified from having potentially come into contact with the dead and then he may shave his first shaving for leprosy.  He could not shave earlier for he may not have been a leper and he may have been a pure nazirite in which case the leprosy shaving would not override the prohibition for a nazirite to shave, as the mishnah states at the end.  Then he counts another seven days at which point he normally could shave his second leprosy shaving, but he cannot for the same reason.  If he is a pure nazirite, he would need to wait thirty days in between each shaving.  His second leprosy shaving is therefore at sixty days.  At this point he may eat consecrated food.  However, he may still be a nazirite, for if he was really a leper then those days did not count towards his naziriteship and he has not served thirty days after shaving.  Therefore he cannot drink wine or come into contact with the dead. Thirty days later he again shaves, but this shaving may be for becoming defiled as a nazirite, if he was indeed unclean, or it may be for completion of his naziriteship.  Since he may still not have served a nazirite term in purity, even after this shaving, he waits another thirty days, shaves again only then is he allowed to drink wine and come into contact with the dead.  
While this mishnah is difficult, one thing is sure:  the barber will be getting a lot of work!
