Nazir, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The first section of our mishnah contains a discussion related to the categories of impurity explained in the previous two mishnayoth.  
The second section contains a debate over whether a quarter-log of blood forces the nazirite to shave. This section contains an interesting insight into the tension between two primary sources of halakhah:  tradition and logical reasoning.    

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Joshua:  for every defilement [conveyed] by a corpse on account of which a nazirite must shave, people are liable for entering the sanctuary, and for every defilement [conveyed] by a corpse on account of which a nazirite does not shave, people are not liable for one entering the sanctuary.
Rabbi Meir said: such [defilement] should not be less serious than [defilement through] a dead creeping thing.  
Rabbi Akiba said: I argued in the presence of Rabbi Eliezer:  Now if on account of a barley-corn’s bulk of bone which does not defile a man by overshadowing, a nazirite shaves should he touch it or carry it, then surely a quarter-log of blood which defiles a man by overshadowing, should cause a nazirite to shave should he touch it or carry it?   
He replied: What is this Akiva! We do not make here an ‘all the more so’ (a kal vehomer) argument. 
When I afterwards went and recounted these words to Rabbi Joshua, he said to me, “You spoke well, but thus they have ruled the halakhah.”

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Elazar correlates the two categories of corpse defilement explained in the previous mishnah to another halakhah, that of entering the sanctuary while defiled, punishable by kareth if done intentionally or a sacrifice if done unintentionally. According to Rabbi Elazar, those categories of defilement for which a nazirite does not shave, a person is also not liable for entering the sanctuary while defiled by them.
Rabbi Meir argues that defilement contracted through these things for which a nazirite does not shave should not be considered less serious than defilement contracted by contact with a dead creeping thing.  Since a person who enters the sanctuary after contracting defilement from a dead creeping thing is liable (see Leviticus 5:2), so too is one who contracted defilement from one of the impurities in mishnah three above.
Section two:  This section deals with the teaching in mishnah three, according to which a nazirite who was defiled by contact with a quarter-log of blood does not have to shave.  Rabbi Akiva argues against this position in front of Rabbi Eliezer, one of his teachers.  Rabbi Akiva’s argument is based on the precedent of a barley corn’s bulk of bone.  Such a small piece of bone does not defile through overshadowing, and yet nevertheless a nazirite who comes into contact with it or carries it must shave, bring a sacrifice and begin counting his naziriteship.  If so, a quarter-log of blood, which does defile through overshadowing should all the more so make a nazirite shave, bring a sacrifice and start his naziriteship over.  This type of formal argumentation is called an a “kal vehomer” in Hebrew, which I translate as an “all the more so” argument.  Others use the term “a fortiori”.  The reasoning here is that if a lesser thing (the tiny piece of bone) carries a certain power, all the more so should the greater thing (the small amount of blood).   Rabbi Eliezer responds to Rabbi Akiva by telling him that we don’t make this type of argument here.  Rabbi Eliezer is known as being an arch-conservative in halakhic matters.  He typically rejects reason as a source of new halakhot, relying strictly on tradition.  
Rabbi Joshua, on the other hand, is known more typically as the innovator, ready to modify traditions if so persuaded.  However, over here, he too does not feel able to modify the halakhah that a quarter-log of blood does not make a nazirite liable to shave.  While he accepts Rabbi Akiva’s reason, he says that since the Sages ruled based on their traditions, this halakhah cannot be changed.  
