Nazir, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah is very similar to the first mishnah of nedarim, indeed the first line of our mishnah is quoted there.  The mishnah discusses vow substitute formulas.  People were afraid to mention the entire vow formula because of the awe they had in the power of a vow.  Hence they used substitutes.  The rabbis teach that substitutes are just as valid as the full formula.  The mishnah continues to discuss other statements that make one into a nazir.  

Mishnah One
All the substitutes for vows have the validity of vows.  
If one says, “I shall be [one]” he is a nazirite. 
“I shall be comely”, he is a nazirite. 
“A nazik”, “a naziah”, “a paziah”, he is a nazirite. 
[If one says,] “Behold I shall be like this one,” or “Behold I shall curl [my hair]” or “Behold, I shall tend [my hair]” or “Behold, I shall grow my hair long,” he is a nazirite. 
[If one says] “Behold, I shall [bring] birds [as offerings]”—Rabbi Meir says he is a nazirite, but the sages say he is not a nazirite.

Explanation
Section one:  This is an introduction to the rest of the mishnah.  One need not state the full nazirite formula in order to become a nazirite.
Section two:  According to the simple reading of this section, all one needs to say to become a nazirite is “I shall be”, with the direct object “a nazirite” understood.  The Talmud says that in order for this to be a valid nazirite formula, he must state it while a nazir is walking by.
Section two:  Nazirites, who grew their hair long, were considered to be comely.  Therefore, one who says “I shall be comely” has taken a nazirite vow.
Section four:  These words all sound close enough to “nazir” that it is clear that by using them, the person intends to take a nazirite vow.  
Section five:  The first statement “I shall be like this one” must have been made while a nazirite was walking by, as we explained in section two.  The other statements, references to growing beautiful, long hair, are also references to becoming a nazir.  As we can see, nazirites were distinguished by their growing their hair long.
Section six:  A nazirite who became impure must bring two birds as sacrifices (Numbers 6:10).  According to Rabbi Meir, if one says, “I shall bring bird offerings”, his intention is to make himself a nazirite.  The Sages hold that he has not vowed a nazirite vow.  However, he would have to bring two birds as offerings.    
