Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
If a nazirite contracts ritual impurity, he must count seven days, shave his head on the seventh, bring two sacrifices on the eighth day, one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering, and then begin to count his naziriteship again.  This is spelled out in Number 6:9-12.  Our mishnah describes this ritual.

Mishnah Six
Shaving on account of defilement:  How was it done? 
He would sprinkle [with purification water] on the third and seventh days, shave on the seventh day and bring his sacrifices on the eighth day. 
If he shaved on the eighth day, he would bring his sacrifices on that same day, the words of Rabbi Akiva.  
Rabbi Tarfon said to him: what difference is there between this one and a person with scale disease?  
He said to him: the purification of this one depends on his days, whereas the purification of one with scale disease depends on his shaving, and he cannot bring a sacrifice unless the sun has set upon him [after his purification]. 

Explanation
Section one:  Numbers 19:19 states that a person who has become ritually defiled by contact with a corpse must have purification water sprinkled on him on the third and seventh days.  Our mishnah adds this information into the procedure clearly stated in Numbers 6, that a nazirite who has become impure shaves on the seventh day and brings his sacrifices on the eighth.
Section two:  According to Rabbi Akiva, if he shaved on the eighth day, he may bring his sacrifices that very same day.  Rabbi Akiva reasons that a nazirite may always bring his sacrifices the day after he has become pure, regardless of when he shaves.
Rabbi Tarfon raises a difficulty on Rabbi Akiva.  When a person with scale disease becomes pure, he too must shave on the seventh day and bring his sacrifices on the eighth day (see Leviticus 14:9-10).  However, in that case, Rabbi Akiva agrees that if he shaves on the eighth day, he may not bring his sacrifices until the ninth.  
Rabbi Akiva responds that a nazirite’s purity depends on the seven days and not on his having shaved.  This is demonstrated by the fact that the nazirite goes to the mikveh on the seventh day, even if he doesn’t shave until the eighth.  Therefore, once he has become pure on the seventh day, he may bring his sacrifices on the eighth, even if he also shaves that day.  In contrast, a person with scale disease cannot go to the mikveh, until he shaves.  He cannot bring his sacrifice, therefore, until the sun sets on the day that he has become pure by going to the mikveh, which if he shaves on the eighth will not be until the ninth.  Therefore, the person with scale disease is not analogous to the nazirite.  
