Nazir, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a person who makes a nazirite vow on his own behalf and promises to serve another naziriteship if he has a son.  The question is, if he has a son, in which order does he serve the naziriteships?

Mishnah Nine
[If one says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite [now] and a nazirite when I shall have a son”, and begins to count his own [naziriteship] and then a son is born to him, he completes his own [naziriteship] and then counts the one on account of his son. 
[If one says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite when I shall have a son, and a nazirite [on my own account]”, and begins to count his own [naziriteship] and then a son is born to him, he interrupts his own [naziriteship], counts the one on account of his son, and then complete his own.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case, the person first accepted upon himself to be a nazirite and then to be a nazirite when a son is born to him.  He therefore immediately begins to serve his own naziriteship.  If he has a son while he is still serving his own naziriteship, he nevertheless completes his own naziriteship and only then begins one on account of his having had a son.  Since he mentioned his own naziriteship first, the naziriteship for his son does not begin until he has completed his own.  In this case he will shave and bring sacrifices after his own naziriteship has been completed and then again when the naziriteship for his son is completed.
Section two:  In this case, he stated first the naziriteship for his son and then his own.  He starts to count his own immediately, because a son has not yet been born to him.  If he has a son before his own naziriteship has been completed, he interrupts his own naziriteship and starts to count that which he is serving on account of his son.  When he has completed his son’s naziriteship, he returns to complete his own.  However, since he already started to serve his own, he does not shave and bring sacrifices for his son’s naziriteship.  Rather he waits and at the end shaves and brings a double set of sacrifices.  
