Nazir, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with a person who says that he is nazirite but says also that he will abstain from figs, which are normally permitted to a nazirite.  The Talmud understands the tannaitic dispute on this debate to be about a larger issue of how to interpret self-contradictory language.  When a person makes a statement where the two parts of his statement contradict one another, how are we to interpret his statement.

Mishnah One
[If one says,] “Behold I am a nazirite [and abstain] from dried figs and pressed figs”: 
Beth Shammai says: he is an [ordinary] nazirite.  
Beth Hillel says: he is not a nazirite. 
Rabbi Judah said: even though Beth Shammai did say [that his formula is effective] they meant only one who says, “They are [forbidden] to me, as is a sacrifice.”

Explanation
Beth Shammai takes seriously the first part of this person’s statement “Behold I am a nazirite”, and therefore holds that this person has indeed taken a nazirite vow.  Regarding the second half of his statement “and abstain from dried figs and pressed figs”, it is as if he tried to change his mind after he had already taken the vow.  Beth Shammai considers this change of mind to be irrelevant and therefore he is a nazir.
Beth Hillel considers his whole statement to be one integral statement, the end being inseparable from the beginning.  Since figs are permitted to nazirites, he has not made a valid nazirite vow.
Rabbi Judah reinterprets Beth Shammai’s statement.  Beth Shammai does not hold that he is an ordinary nazirite. Rather, they meant that if he thought to himself that this was a valid way of prohibiting figs, just as saying “they are forbidden to me, as is a sacrifice”, is a valid way of prohibiting figs, then the prohibition works, and he is forbidden to eat figs.  However, Beth Shammai would agree with Beth Hillel that if he intended by these words to take a regular nazirite vow, nothing is prohibited to him.  He is neither a nazirite, nor prohibited from eating figs.  
