Nazir, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to discuss the point until which a husband retains the right to annul his wife’s nazirite vow.

Mishnah Five
If one of the kinds of blood has been sprinkled on her behalf, [the husband] can no longer annul [the vow].   
Rabbi Akiba says: even if one of the animals has been slaughtered on her behalf, he can no longer annul [the vow]. 
When is this true?  If she is shaving [after observing the naziriteship] in purity, but if she is shaving after ritual defilement, he can [still] annul [the vow], because he can say, “I do not want a disgraced woman.”   
Rabbi says that he can annul [her vow] even if she is shaving [after observing the naziriteship] in purity, since he can say: “I do not want a woman who is shaved.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion, once the blood from one of the sacrifices which the woman set aside for the end of her naziriteship has been sprinkled on the altar, the husband can no longer annul her vow.  In other words, whereas the previous mishnah stated that even though she had set aside her sacrifices, he could still annul the vow, our mishnah teaches that once their blood has been sprinkled, it is too late.  
Rabbi Akiva sets the limit on the husband’s right to annul his wife’s vow slightly earlier.  Once the animal has been slaughtered, the husband may no longer annul the vow.
Section two:  This section limits that which was stated in the previous section.  What was stated above was with regard to the sacrifices offered at the end of a naziriteship.  However, if she was shaving and offering sacrifices after becoming impure, since she must go back and continue observing her naziriteship, he may still annul the vow.  The reason that he has a right to annul this vow is that he may say that he does not want a woman who distorts her own beauty by becoming a nazirite, or in this case, by continuing to observe the nazirite restrictions.  According to commentators, what makes her ugly is that she cannot drink wine or participate in many of life’s pleasures.  
Rabbi [Judah Hanasi] disagrees with the opinion in the beginning of section two, and also in section one.  He holds that even after the sacrifices have been offered, the husband may continue to annul his wife’s vow because he may claim that he does not want her to shave her head.  Only once she has shaven her head does he no longer have the right to annul the vow.  

