Mishnah. Samuel was a nazirite in the opinion of r. Nehorai, as it says, and there shall no razor [morah] come upon his head.   It says with reference to samson, and [no] razor [morah]   And it says with reference to samuel, and [no] razor [morah]; just as morah in the case of samson [is used of] a nazirite,   So [we should say] morah in the case of samuel [is used of] a nazirite. R. Jose objected: but has not morah referEnce to [fear   Of] a human being? R. Nehorai said to him: but does it not also say, and samuel said; ‘how can i go? If saul hear it he will kill me’   [Which shows] that he Was in fact afraid of a human being?  

Mishnah. If one warns  His wife [not to associate with a certain man]. R. Eliezer says: he warns her on the testimony of two witnesses,  And makes her drink [the water of bitterness] on the testimony of one witness  Or his personal testimony. R. Joshua says: he warns her on the testimony of two and makes her drink on the testimony of two.

   	How does he warn her? If he says to her in the Presence of two, do not converse with that man, and she conversed with him, she is still permitted to her husband  And permitted to partake of the heave-offering.  Should she have entered a private place with him and stayed with him a time sufficient for Misconduct to have occurred, she is forbidden to her husband  And forbidden to partake of the heave-offering. If [her husband] died,  She performs the ceremony of halizah  But cannot contract a levirate marriage.
Mishnah. The following  Are prohibited to Partake of the              heave-offering:   She who says, ‘i am un clean to thee’;   When witnesses came [and testified] that she had mlsconducted herself;   She who says, i refuse to drink [the water]’; when the husband is unwilling to make her drink [tHe water]: and when the husband cohabited with her on the journey.  
Mishnah. How does [the husband] deal with her? He brings her to the court of justice in the place where he resides, and they assign to him two disciples of the sages  Lest he cohabit witH her on the journey.  R. Judah says, her husband is trusted with her. 

Mishnah. They bring her up to the great court of justice which is in jerusalem, and [the judges] solemnly charge her in the same way that they charge witnesses in capital cases   And say to her,’ my daughter, wine does much, frivolity does much, youth does Much, bad neighbours do much.   Do it   For the sake of his great name which is written in holiness so that it may not be obliterated by the water.’   And they relate to her matters which neither she nor all the family of her father's house is worthy to hEar.   — If she said, ‘i have misconducted myself’, she gives a quittance for her marriage-settlement   And departs;   But if she says, ‘i am pure’, they bring her up to the east gate which is by the entrance of nicanor's gate   Where they give suspected wOmen the water to drink, purify women after childbirth and purify lepers.   A priest seizes her garments   — If they are rent they are rent, and if they become unstitched they are unstitched until he uncovers her bosom,   And he undoes her hair. R. Judah sAys: if her bosom was beautiful he does not uncover it, and if her hair was beautiful he does not undo it. — if she was clothed in white, he clothes her in black. If she wore golden ornaments
And necklaces, ear-rings and finger-rings, they remove them froM her in order to make her repulsive. After that [the priest] takes a common rope  And binds it over her breasts.  Whoever wishes to look upon her comes to look with the exception of her male and female slaves, because her heart is made defiant through theM. All women are permitted  To look upon her, as it is said, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness. 
Mishnah. In the measure with which a man measures it is meted out to him. She adorned herself for a transgression; the holy one, blessed be he, made her repulsive. She exposed herself for a transgression; the holy one, blessed be he, held her up for expoSure. She began the transgression with the thigh and afterwards with the womb; therefore she is punished first in the thigh and afterwards in the womb,   Nor does all the body escape.
	Mishnah. Samson went after [the desire of] his eyes; therefore the philIstines put out his eyes, as it is said, and the philistines laid hold on him, and put out his eyes.  Absalom gloried in his hair; therefore he was hanged by his hair. And because he cohabited with the ten concubines of his father, therefore he was stabbed With ten lances, as it is said, and ten young men that bare joab's armour compassed about.  And because he stole three hearts, the heart of his father, the heart of the court of justice, and the heart of israel, as it is said, so absalom stole the hearts Of the men of israel,  Therefore three darts were thrust through him, as it is said, and he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of absalom.   — It   Is the same in connection with the good. Miriam waited a short while for moses, As it is said, and his sister stood afar off;   Therefore israel was delayed for her seven days in the wilderness, as it is said, and the people journeyed not till miriam was brought in again.   Joseph earned merit by burying his father and there was none Among his brothers greater than he; as it is said, and joseph went up to bury his father, etc.,   And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen.   Whom have we greater than joseph since none other than moses occupied himself with his burial? Moses Earned merit through the bones of joseph and there was none in israel greater than he, as it is said, and moses took the bones of joseph with him.   Whom have we greater than moses since none other than the omnipresent occupied himself [with his burial], As it is said, and he buried him in the valley?   Not only concerning moses did they say this, but concerning all the righteous, as it is said, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the lord shall be thy rearward.  
	Mishnah. [the husband] brings her meal-offering   In a basket of palm-twigs and places it upon her hands in order to weary her. With all other meal-offerings, the beginning and end of their [sacrifice] are in ministering vessels; but with this, its beginNing is in a basket of palm-twigs and its end in a ministering vessel. All other meal-offerings require oil and frankincense, but this requires neither oil nor frankincense. All other meal-offerings consist of wheat, but this consists of barley. The meal-oFfering of the ‘omer,   Although consisting of barley, was in the form of groats; but this was in the form of coarse flour. Rabban gamaliel says: as her actions were the actions of an animal, so her offering [consisted of] animal's fodder.
	Mishnah. [the pRiest] takes an earthenware bowl and pours half a log of water into it from the laver. R. Judah says: a quarter [of a log]. Just as [r. Judah] reduces the amount of writing,  So he reduces the quantity of water. [the priest] enters the temple and turns rigHt. There was a place there a cubit square in extent with a marble tablet, to which a ring was attached. He lifts this out, takes some dust from beneath it which he puts [into the bowl] just sufficient to be visible above the water; as it is said, and of tHe dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the water. 
Mishnah. When he comes to write the scroll, from what place does he write? From if no man have lain with thee  . . . But if thou hast gone aside, being under thy husband etc.  He does not, however, include, then the priest shall cause the woman to swear,  But continues with, the lord make thee a curse and an oath . . . And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels and make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to fall away.  He does not, however, include, and the woman shall say, amen, amen. R. Jose says, he makes no omissions.  R. Judah says, he writes none of all this except, the lord make thee a curse and an oath etc. And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels etc. And does not include, and the woman shall say, amen, amen.
	Mishnah. He writes neither on a [wooden] tablet nor on papyrus nor on Diftera  But on a [parchment] scroll, as it is said, in a book.  Nor does he write with a [preparation of] gum or vitriol  Or with anything which indents [the parchment] but with ink,  As it is said, and blot out  — Writing which is capable of being blotted out.
Mishnah. To what does she respond ‘amen, amen’? An ‘amen’ over the curse and an ‘amen’ over the oath; an ‘amen’ wiTh respect to this man  And an ‘amen’ with respect to any other man;  An ‘amen’ that i did not go astray as a betrothed maiden or married woman Or [a childless widow] waiting for my brother-in-law's [decision whether he would marry me] or taken to his house,  And an ‘amen’ that i have not misconducted myself and if i have may [the curses] befall me. R. Meir says: one ‘amen’ is that i have not miscOnducted myself and the other ‘amen’ that i will not misconduct myself.

   	All agree that a man cannot make a stipulation with her in respect of the time before she was betrothed  Or after she is divorced. If she secludes herself with another man  And miSconducts herself and subsequently [her husband] takes her back, he cannot make a stipulation with her [in respect of this].  This is the general rule: he cannot make a stipulation with her in respect of any act of cohabitation which does not render her prOhibited to him.
	Mishnah. He  Takes her meal-offering out of the basket of palm-twigs and places it in a ministering vessel and sets it upon her hand; and the priest places his hand under hers and waves it. 

   	Having waved it, he brought a handful [to The altar], fumigated it, and the remainder was eaten by the priests. He [first] gives [her the water of bitterness] to drink, and then sacrifices her meal-offering. R. Simeon says: he sacrifices her meal-offering and then gives her to drink, as it is saiD, and afterward shall make the woman drink the water;  But if he gave her to drink and then sacrificed her meal-offering it is valid.
	Mishnah. If, before [the writing on] the scroll had been blotted out, she said ‘i refuse to drink’, her scroll is stored away  And her meal-offering is scattered over the ashes.  Her scroll is not valid to be used in giving another suspected woman to drinK. If [the writing on] the scroll has been blotted out and she said ‘i am unclean’, the water is poured away and her meal-offering is scattered in the place of the ashes.  If [the writing on] the scroll had been blotted out and she said ‘i refuse to drink’, They exert influence upon her and make her drink by force.

   	She had scarcely finished drinking when her face turns green, her eyes protrude and her veins swell;  And it is exclaimed, remove her that the temple-court be not defiled’.  If she possessed A merit, it [causes the water] to suspend its effect upon her. Some merit suspends the effect for one year, another for two years, and another for three years. Hence declared ben azzai, a man is under the obligation to teach his daughter torah, so that if She has to drink [the water of bitterness], she may know that the merit suspends  Its effect. R. Eliezer says: whoever teaches his daughter torah teaches her obscenity. R. Joshua says: a woman prefers one kab  And sexual indulgence to nine kab  And continEnce. He used to say, a foolish pietist, a cunning rogue, a female pharisee, and the plague of pharisees   Bring destruction upon the world.
Mishnah r, simeon says: merit does not cause the water of bitterness to suspend its effect, and if you say that mErit does cause the water of bitterness to suspend its effect, you discredit the water in the case of all the women who drink it and defame the pure woman who drank it, since people will say, they were unclean, only their merit caused the water to suspend Its effect upon them. Rabbi says: merit causes the water of bitterness to suspend its effect, and she never bears a child or thrives, but she gradually grows ill and finally dies through that death.  

   	If her meal-offering became defiled before it becaMe hallowed in the [ministering] vessel, behold it is like all meal-offerings [similarly defiled] and can be redeemed;   But if [it became defiled] after it had been hallowed in the [ministering] vessel, behold it is like all meal-offerings [similarly defiLed] and is destroyed. The following have their meal- offerings destroyed:
She who says, ‘i am unclean to thee’,  When witnesses came [and testified] that she had misconducted herself, she who says i refuse to drink, when the husband refuses to let her drink, and when her husband cohabited with her on the journey [to jerusalem]. Furthermore, the meal-offerings of all Women married to priests are destroyed.  The meal-offering of the daughter of an israelite  Who is married to a priest is destroyed. But the meal-offering of a priest's daughter who is married to an israelite is eaten. What [differences are there in law] Between a priest and a priest's daughter? The meal-offering of a priest's daughter is eaten but the meal-offering of a priest is not eaten.  A priest's daughter may become declassed,  But a priest does not become declassed.  A priest's daughter may render Herself unclean by contact with the dead, but a priest may not render himself unclean by contact with the dead. A priest eats of the most holy [class of offerings],  But a priest's daughter may not eat of the most holy.

   	What [differences are there in Law] between a man and a woman? A man rends his clothes and loosens his hair,  But a woman does not rend her clothes and loosen her hair. A man may vow that his son will become a nazirite, but a woman may not vow that her son will become a Nazirlte.  A man May be shaved on account of the naziriteship of his father,   But a woman cannot be shaved on account of the naziriteship of her father. A man may sell his daughter,   But a woman may not sell her daughter. A man may give his daughter in betrothal,   But A woman may not give her daughter in betrothal. A man is stoned naked, but a woman is not stoned naked.   A man is hanged,   But a woman is not hanged. A man is sold for his theft,   But a woman is not sold for her theft.
	Mishnah. A betrothed maiden and A childless widow waiting for her brother-in-law [to decide whether he will marry her] do not drink [the water of bitterness]   And do not receive what is due under the marriage-settlement; as it is said, when a wife, being under her husband, goeth aside,   Thus excluding a betrothed maiden and a childless widow waiting for her brother-in-law. A widow who had married a high priest,   A divorced woman or a haluzah   Who had married an ordinary priest, an illegitimate
Or a nethinah  Who had married an israelIte, and an israelite's daughter who had married an illegitimate or a nathin do not drink [the water of bitterness] and do not receive what is due under the marriage-settlement.

   	The following do not drink and do not receive the marriage-settlement: shE who says ‘i am unclean when witnesses came [and testified] that she had misconducted herself, and she who says ‘i refuse to drink’. When her husband is unwilling to let her drink, or when her husband cohabited with her on the journey [to jerusalem]. She Receives the marriage-settlement but does not drink. If the husbands died before [the women] drank, beth shammai declare that they receive the marriage-settlement but do not drink, and beth hillel declare that they either drink or do not receive the marriaGe-settlement.

   	[A wife] who was pregnant by a former husband or was suckling a child by a former husband  Does not drink and does not receive the marriage-settlement. Such is the statement of r. Meir; but the rabbis declare that he is able to separate From her and take her back after the period [of two years]. A woman incapable of conception,  One too old to bear children, and one who is unfit to bear children  Do not receive the marriage-settlement and do not drink.  R. Eliezer says: he is able to marRy another wife  And have offspring by her. As for all other women, they either drink or do not receive the marriage-settlement.

   	The wife of a priest drinks and is permitted to her husband.  The wife of a eunuch  Drinks. Through [seclusion with] all pErsons forbidden to her in marriage  Jealousy [necessitating the ordeal] is established with the exception of a minor   And one not a man.  

   	In the following cases a court of law can give warning:   When the husband is a deaf-mute or has become insane Or is imprisoned. Not for the purpose of making her drink did they say this, but to disqualify her in connection with the marriage-settle ment. R. Jose says: also to make her drink; when her husband is released from prison he makes her drink.
Mishnah. Just as the water proves her so the water proves him;  As it is said, ‘and shall enterנ Twice.  Just as she is prohibited to the husband  So is she prohibited to the paramour;  As it is said, defiled . . . And is defiled.  This is the statement oF r. Akiba. R. Joshua said: thus used zechariah b. Hakazab to expound.  Rabbi says: the word defiled occurs twice in the scriptural portion,  One referring [to her being prohibited] to the husband and the other to the paramour.

   	On that day,   R. Akiba Expounded, and every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean,   It does not state tame [is unclean] but yitma’,   I.e. to make others unclean. This teaches that a loaf which is unclean in the second degree,   MaKes [whatever it comes in contact with] unclean in the third degree. R. Joshua said: who will remove the dust from thine eyes, r. Johanan b. Zakkai, since thou sayest that another generation is destined to pronounce clean a loaf   Which is unclean in the tHird degree on the ground that there is no text in the torah according to which it is unclean!   Is not r. Akiba thy pupil?   He adduces a text in the torah according to which it is unclean, viz., ‘whatsoever is in it shall be unclean’.

   	On that day r. Akiba expounded, and ye shall measure without the city for the east side two thousand cubits etc.   But another text states, from the wall of the city outward a thousand cubits round about.   It is impossible to say that it was a thousand cubits since it Has been already stated two thousand cubits’; and it is impossible to say that it was two thousand cubits since it has been already stated ‘a thousand cubits’! How was it then? A thousand cubits for the suburb   And two thousand cubits for the sabbath-limiT.   R. Eliezer the son of r. Jose the galilean says: a thousand cubits for the suburb and two thousand cubits for fields and vineyards.  

   	On that day r. Akiba expounded, then sang moses and the children of israel this song unto the lord and spake, saYing,   There was no need for the word ‘saying’, so why was it added? It teaches that the israelites responded to every sentence after moses, in the manner of reading hallel,   ‘I will sing unto the lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously,   On that account Is the word ‘saying’ mentioned. R. Nehemiah says: in the manner of reading the shema’   And not hallel.

   	On that day r. Joshua b. Hyrcanus expounded: job only served the holy one, blessed be he, from love: as it is said, though he slay me, yet will i Wait for him.   And should it be still doubtful whether the meaning is ‘i will wait for him’ or ‘i will not waitנ,   There is another text to declare, till i die i will not put away mine integrity from me.   This teaches that what he did was from love. R. Joshua [b. Hananiah] said: who will remove the dust from thine eyes, r. Johanan b. Zakkai, since thou hast been expounding all thy life that job only served the all-present from fear, as it is said, that man Was perfect and upright, and one that feared god. And eschewed evil!   Did not joshua, the pupil of thy pupil,   Teach that what he did was from love?  
	Mishnah. If a man warned his wife and she secluded herself [with another man], even if he heard [thaT she had done so] from a flying bird,   He divorces her and gives her the marriage-settlement.   Such is the statement of r. Eliezer. R. Joshua says: [he does not do this] until women who spin by moonlight discuss her.  

   	If one witness said, i saw that she committed misconduct, she does not drink the water.   Not only that, but even a slave, male or female,   Is believed also to disqualify her for the marriage-settlement. Her mother-in-law, her mother-in-law's daughter, Her associate-wife,   Her sister-in-law   And her stepdaughter   Are believed, not to disqualify her for the marriage-settlement but that she should not drink.

   	It   Is a proper conclusion that if the first evidence [that the woman had secluded herseLf with the man], which does not prohibit her [to her husband] for all time,   Is not established by fewer than two witnesses, is it not right that the final evidence [that she had misconducted herself] which prohibits her to him for all time, should not bE established by fewer than two witnesses! Therefore there is a text to state, and there be no witness against her,   I.e., whatever [evidence] there may be against her [is believed, even if it be only one witness]. And with respect to the first evidence [About her seclusion with the man, that one witness suffices may be argued by] a fortiori reasoning as follows if
The final evidence [regarding misconduct], which prohibits her to her husband for all time, is established by one witness, is it not proper that the first evidence, which does not prohibit her to him for all time, should be established by one witness! TherEfore there is a text to state, because he hath found some unseemly matter in her,  And elsewhere it states, at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a matter be established;  As the ‘matter’ mentioned in this latter case muSt be confirmed by the testimony of two witnesses, so also here [in the case of the suspected woman] the ‘matter’ must be confirmed by the testimony of two witnesses.

   	If one witness says that she misconducted herself and another witness says that she Did not,  Or if a woman says [of her] that she misconducted herself and another woman says that she did not, she drinks the water. If one witness says that she misconducted herself and two say that she did not, she drinks the water. If two say that she misConducted herself and one says that she did not, she does not drink it.
	Mishnah. The following may be recited in any language: the section concerning the suspected woman,  The confession made at the presentation of the tithe,  The shema’,  The ‘prayer’,  The grace after meals,  The oath concerning testimony  And the oath concerning a deposit.  

   	The following are recited in the holy tongue:   The declaration made at the offering of the firstfruits,   The formula of halizah,   The blessings and curses,   The priestly benediction,   The benediction of the high priest,   The section of the king,   The section of the calf whose neck is broken,   And the address to the people by the priest anointed [to accompany the army] in battle.  

   	Whence is it that The declaration made at the offering of the first-fruits [must be in hebrew]? [it is stated]. And thou shalt answer and say before the lord thy god,   And elsewhere it is stated, and the levites shall answer and say;   As the latter must be in the holy toNgue,   So must the former be in the holy tongue. Whence is it that the formula of halizah [must be in hebrew]? [it is stated]. And she shall answer and say,   And elsewhere it is stated, and the levites shall answer and say’; as the latter must be in the Holy tongue. So must the former be in the holy tongue. R. Judah says: [it is derived from the text], and she shall answer and say thus   — I.e., she must say it in this language.

   	How were the blessings and curses [pronounced]? When israel crossed the Jordan and came to mount gerizim and mount ebal which are by samaria, (this is in the vicinity of shechem which is in the vicinity of the terebinths of moreh, and it is said, are they not beyond jordan etc.   And elsewhere it states, and abram passed throuGh the land unto the place of shechem unto the terebinth of moreh;   As the terebinth of moreh mentioned in this latter verse is shechem, so the terebinth of moreh mentioned in the former verse is shechem.) Six tribes ascended the summit of mount gerizim, Six tribes ascended the summit of mount ebal, and the priests and levites with the ark were stationed below in the centre, the priests surrounding the ark, the levites [surrounding] the priests, and all israel on this side and that side; as it is said, and All israel, and their elders and officers, and their judges stood on this side the ark and on that side etc.   They turned their faces towards mount gerizim and opened with the blessing:blessed be the man that maketh not a graven or molten image’,   And bOth parties   Respond amen. They then turned their faces towards mount ebal and opened with the curse: cursed be the man that maketh the graven or molten image’, and both parties respond ‘amenנ. [So they continue] until they complete the blessings and cursEs. After that they brought the stones,   Built the altar and plastered it with plaster, and inscribed thereon all the words of the torah in seventy languages,   As it is said, very plainly.   Then they took the stones   And went
And spent the night in their place. 
Mishnah. How was the priestly benediction [pronounced]? In the province   It was said as three blessings,   But in the temple as one blessing.   In the temple the name was uttered
As written,  But in the province in its substituted name.  In the province the priests raise their hands in a line with their shoulders, but in the temple above their heads, except the high priest who does not raise his hands higher than the plate.  R. Judah says: alsO the high priest raises his hands higher than the plate, as it is said, and aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them. 
	Mishnah. What was the procedure with the benedictions of the high priest?  The synagogue attendant takes a torah-Scroll and hands it to the synagogue-president. The synagogue-president hands it to the deputy  And he hands it to the high priest. The high priest stands, receives [the scroll] and reads [therein] after the death  And howbeit on the tenth day.  Then he roLls the torah-scroll together, places it in his bosom and exclaims, ‘more than i have read before you is written here!’ the passage ‘on the tenth day’, which is in the book of numbers, he reads by heart,  And he recites eight benedictions in connection theRewith, viz., Over the torah, for the temple-service, for the thanksgiving, for the pardon of sin, over the temple, over israel, over the priests, over jerusalem, and the rest of the prayer. 
	Mishnah. At the time when the anointed for battle  Addresses the people he speaks in the holy tongue, as it is said, and it shall be, when ye draw nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach   — I.e., the anointed for battle; and speak unto the people — i.e., in the holy tongue; and shall say untO them, hear, o israel, [ye draw nigh this day unto battle against your enemies]   — ‘Against your enemies’ but not against your brethren, not judah against simeon nor simeon against benjamin, so that if you   Fall into their hand they shall have mercy upoN you, as it is said, and the men which have been expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carrieD all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to jericho, the city of palm trees, unto their brethren; then they returned to samaria etc.   Against your enemies do you march, so that if you fall into their hand they will have no mercy upon you. Let Not your heart faint; fear not nor tremble etc.   — ‘Let not your heart faint’ at the neighing of the horses and the brandishing of swords; ‘fear not’ because of the crash of shields and the tramp of the soldiers’ footwear; — ‘nor tremble’ at the sound of Trumpets; ‘neither be ye affrighted’ at the sound of battle-cries. For the lord your god is he that goeth with you   They come [relying] upon the might of flesh and blood, but you come [relying] upon the might of the all-present. The philistines came [relYing] upon the might of goliath; but what was his fate? In the end he fell by the sword and they fell with him. The ammonites came [relying] upon the might of shobach;   But what was his fate? In the end he fell by the sword and they fell with him. But witH you it is otherwise; ‘for the lord your god is he that goeth with you to fight with you etc.’ [this alludes to] the camp of the ark.  
	Mishnah. And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, what man is there that hath built a new house, and haTh not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house — etc.   It is all one whether he built a barn for straw, a stable for cattle, a shed for wood, or a storehouse;   It is all one whether he built, purchased, inherited it or somebody had given it to hIm as a present.   And what man is there that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not used the fruit thereof? Etc.   It is all one whether he planted a vineyard or planted five fruit-trees   And even of five species;   It is all one whether he planted, bent   Or grafted it, or whether he purchased, inherited or somebody had given it to him as a present. And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife? Etc.   It is all one whether he had betrothed a virgin or a widow, or even a childless widow waiting for her Brother-in-law, or even if a man heard that his brother had died in battle,   He returns home. All these hear the priest's words concerning the war-regulations and return home; but they supply water and food and repair the roads [for the army].

   	The following do not return home: he who built a lodge,   A loggia or a verandah; he who planted four fruit-trees or five trees which are not fruit-bearing; he who took back his divorced wife. If a high priest married a widow, or an ordinary priest marRied a divorcee or a haluzah,   Or a lay israelite married an illegitimate or a nethinah,   Or the daughter of an israelite married an illegitimate or a nathin, he does not return home.   R. Judah says: also he who rebuilt a house upon its foundations does Not return home. R. Eliezer says: also he who built a brick-house in sharon   Does not return home.

   	The following do not move from their place:   He who built a new house and dedicated it, planted a vineyard and used its fruit, married his betrothed, Or took home his brother's childless widow; as it is said, he shall be free at home one year   — ‘At home,’ this refers to his house; ‘shall be’ refers to his vineyard; ‘and shall cheer his wife’ refers to his wife; which he hath taken’ is to include his Brother's childless widow. These do not supply water and food and rePair the roads [for the army]. 
	Mishnah. And the officers shall speak further unto the people etc.   R. Akiba says: ‘fearful and faintheartedנ Is to be understood literally viz., He is unable to stand in the battle-ranks and see a drawn sword. R. Jose the galilean says: ‘fearful and fainthearted’ alludes to one who is afraid because of the transgressions he had committed; therefore the torah conNected all these   With him that he may return home on their account.   R. Jose says: a high priest who married a widow, an ordinary priest who married a divorcee or haluzah, a lay israelite who married an illegitimate or nethinah, and the daughter of an iSraelite who married an illegitimate or a nathin-behold such an one is ‘fearful and fainthearted’.  

   	And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall appoint captains of hosts at the head of the people.   And at the rear of the people they station guards in front of them and others behind them, with iron axes in their hands, and should anyone wish to flee, they have permission to smite his thighs,
Because the beginning of flight is falling,  As it is saiD, israel is fled before the philistines, and there hath been a great slaughter among the people;  And further on it states, and the men of israel fled from before the philistines and fell down slain etc. 

   	To what does all the foregoing apply? To voluNtary wars, but in the wars commanded by the torah  All go forth even a bridegroom from his chamber and a bride from her canopy.  R. Judah says: to what does all the foregoing apply? To the wars commanded by the torah; but in obligatory wars  All go forth, Even a bridegroom from his chamber and a bride from her canopy.
Mishnah. [the declaration over] the heifer whose neck is to be broken must be in the holy tongue; as it is said, if one be found slain in the earth . . . Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth.   Three used to go forth from the supreme court in jeRusalem; r. Judah says: five, as it is stated, thy elders, i.e., two, ‘and thy judges’ i.e., two, and since a court of justice cannot consist of an even number, they add one more.

   	If [the corpse] was found hidden in a heap of stones, or hanging on a tRee, or floating upon the surface of the water, they do not break [a heifer's neck]. Because it is stated, ‘in the earth’ — and not hidden in a heap of stones, nor hanging on a tree in a field, nor floating upon the surface of the water. If it was found neAr to the frontier, or a city the majority of whose inhabitants were heathens, or a city in which there is no court of justice, they do not break [a heifer's neck]. They only measure   The distance to a city in which there is a court of justice.
Mishnah. [The declaration over] the heifer whose neck is to be broken must be in the holy tongue; as it is said, if one be found slain in the earth . . . Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth.   Three used to go forth from the supreme court in jerusalem; R. Judah says: five, as it is stated, thy elders, i.e., two, ‘and thy judges’ i.e., two, and since a court of justice cannot consist of an even number, they add one more.

   	If [the corpse] was found hidden in a heap of stones, or hanging on a tree, or fLoating upon the surface of the water, they do not break [a heifer's neck]. Because it is stated, ‘in the earth’ — and not hidden in a heap of stones, nor hanging on a tree in a field, nor floating upon the surface of the water. If it was found near to the Frontier, or a city the majority of whose inhabitants were heathens, or a city in which there is no court of justice, they do not break [a heifer's neck]. They only measure   The distance to a city in which there is a court of justice.
	Mishnah. If [the Corpse] was found exactly between two cities, both of them bring two heifers [between them]. Such is the statement of r. Eliezer;   But jerusalem does not bring a heifer whose neck is to be broken. If the head was found in one place and the body in anotheR place, they carry the head to the body. Such is the statement of r. Eliezer.   R. Akiba says: [they carry] the body to the head. From what part [of the body] do they measure? R. Eliezer says: from the navel; r. Akiba says: from the nose; r. Eliezer b. JaCob says: from the place where he was made a slain person, from the neck.
	Mishnah. When the elders of jerusalem   Had departed and gone away, the elders of that city   Take a heifer of the herd   Which has not drawn in the yoke, and a blemish does not disqualify it. They bring it down to a ravine which is stony   — ‘Ethan’ is tO be understood in its literal sense of ‘hard’ — but even if it be not stony, it is fit [for the ceremony]. They then break its neck with a hatchet from behind.   The site may never be sown or tilled, but it is permitted to card flax and chisel stones therE. The elders of that city then wash their hands with water in the place where the heifer's neck was broken and declare, our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.   But can it enter our minds that the elders of a court of justice aRe shedders of blood! [the meaning of their statement is], however, [the man found dead] did not come to us [for help] and we dismissed him without supplying him with food, we did not see him and let him go without escort.  
Then the priests exclaim, forgIve, o lord, thy people israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and suffer not innocent blood to remain in the midst of thy people israel.  There is no need for them to say, and the blood shall be forgiven them;  But the holy spirit announces to them, ‘when you aCt thus, the blood is forgiven you.’
Mishnah. If the murderer was discovered before the heifer's neck was broken, it goes free and feeds with the herd; but if after the heifer's neck was broken, it is buried in that place because it came there from the outset in connection with a matter of doUbt,   And atoned for the doubt which is now gone. If the heifer's neck was broken and afterwards the murderer is discovered, behold he is executed.

   	If one witness says ‘i saw the murderer’ and one witness says ‘you did not see him’;   Or if a woman says ‘i saw him’ and another woman says ‘you did not see him’, they break its neck. If one witness says ‘i saw him’ and two say ‘you did not see him’, they break its neck. If two say ‘we saw him’ and one says to them ‘you did not see him’, tHey do not break its neck.   When murderers multiplied the ceremony of breaking a heifer's neck was discontinued. That was when eliezer b. Dinai, also called tehinah b. Perishah, appeared;   He was afterwards renamed ‘son of the murderer — when adulterers Multiplied the ceremony of the bitter water was discontinued and it was r. Johanan b. Zakkai who discontinued it, as it is said, i will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your brides when they commit adultery, for they themselves etc.   When jose b. Joezer of zeredah and jose b. Judah of jerusalem died, the grape-clusters   Ceased, as it is said, there is no cluster to eat; my soul desireth the first ripe fig.  

   	Johanan the high priest   Brought to an end the confession made at thE presentation of the tithe.   He also abolished the wakers and the knockers  
Up to his days the hammer used to strike  In jerusalem, and in his days there was no need to inquire about demai. 
Mishnah. When the sanhedrin ceased [to function], song ceased from the places of feasting; as it is said, they shall not drink wine with a song etc.  

   	When the former prophets   Died, the urim and thummim   Ceased. When [the second] temple was destroyEd, the shamir and nopheth zufim   Ceased, and men of faith disappeared from israel; as it is said, help, lord, for the godly man ceaseth etc.   Rabban simeon b. Gamaliel says: r. Joshua testified that from the day the temple was destroyed, there is no day Without a curse, the dew has not descended for a blessing, and the flavour has departed from the fruits. R. Jose says: the fatness   Was also removed from the fruits. R. Simeon b. Eleazar says; [the cessation of] purity has removed taste and fragrance [frOm fruits]; [the cessation of] the tithes has removed the fatness of corn. But the sages say: immorality and witchcraft destroyed everything.
	Mishnah. During the war with vespasian   They [the rabbis] decreed against [the use of] crowns worn by bridegrooMs and against [the use of] the drum.   During the war of quietus   They decreed against [the use of] crowns worn by brides and that nobody should teach his son greek. During the final war   They decreed that a bride should not go out in a palanquin   In tHe midst of the city, but our rabbis decreed that a bride may go out in a palanquin in the midst of the city.

   	When r. Meir   Died, the composers of fables ceased. When ben azzai   Died, the assiduous students [of torah] ceased. When ben zoma   Died, tHe expositors ceased.   When r. Akiba   Died, the glory of the torah ceased. When r. Hanina b. Dosa died, men of deed   Ceased. When r. Jose ketanta died, the pious men ceased; and why was his name called ketanta? Because he was the youngest   Of the pious Men.   When r. Johanan b. Zakkai   Died, the lustre of wisdom ceased.   When rabban gamaliel the elder died, the glory of the torah ceased, and purity and abnegation perished. When r. Ishmael b. Fabi   Died, the lustre of the priesthood ceased. When rabbi Died, humility and fear of sin ceased.   R. Phineas b. Jair says: when [the second] temple was destroyed, scholars   And noblemen were ashamed and covered their head,   Men of deed were disregarded, and men of arm and men of tongue   Grew powerful. Nobody Enquires,   Nobody prays [on their behalf], and nobody asks.   Upon whom is it for us to rely? Upon our father who is in heaven. R. Eliezer the great says: from the day the temple was destroyed, the sages began to be like school-teachers,   School-teacherS like synagogue-attendants, synagogue-attendants like common people, and the common people


