Mishnah Bikkurim
משנה ביכורים
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

Some bring first fruits and recite (the biblical passage), some bring but do not recite, and some do not bring.  Those who do not bring are:  one who plants in his own property and (the tree) leans into (another) private or public property.  Similarly, if (the tree) leans from a private or public property into his.  Also private or public roads which are planted in the middle-- those do not bring.  Rabbi Judah says, those do bring.
Why does he not bring?  Because it says (Exodus 23:19), "The first fruits of your land"-- they must grow entirely from your land.  A sharecropper, a renter, an examiner, and a thief-- these do not bring for the same reason, because it says "The first fruits of your land."
One only brings first fruits from the seven species.  Not from the dates that grow in mountains or from fruits of the valley, nor from olives for oil which are not of the highest quality.  One does not bring first fruits before Shavuot and such fruits are not accepted, because the verse in the Torah states (Exodus 23:16) "... and the harvest festival, the first fruits of your labor which you plant in the field...."
These people bring, but do not recite: The convert brings but does not recite, for he is unable to say "...[the land] which God swore to our fathers to give to us."  And if his mother was from Israel, he brings and recites.  And when he prays by himself, he says "the God of the fathers of Israel."  And when he is in the synagogue, he says "the God of your fathers."  And if his mother was from Israel, he says "the God of our fathers."
Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says:  a woman who is the daughter of converts cannot marry a kohein, unless her mother is an Israelite.  (This is true of) both converts and freed slaves even ten generations later, unless their mother is an Israelite.  A trustee of an estate, a messenger, a slave, a woman, a Tumtum* and an Androgynos* (categories of intersex people) bring but do not recite, since they cannot say, "(the land) which You, God, have given me."
One who buys two trees in his fellows field, he brings but does not recite.  Rabbi Meir says:  he brings and recites.  If the spring dried or the tree was chopped, he brings but does not recite.  Rabbi Judah says: he brings and recites.  From Shavuot until Sukkot, he brings and recites.  From Sukkot until Hanukkah, he brings but does not recite.  Rabbi Judah ben Beteira says:  he brings and recites.
One who designated his first fruits and subsequently sold his field, he brings and does not recite.  He does not bring more from the same species.  From a different species, he brings and recites.  Rabbi Judah says: even from the same species he brings and recites.
One who designated his first fruits and they were looted or rotted or were stolen or lost or became ritually impure, he brings others in their place and does not recite.  The second ones are not obligated in the one fifth (tax).  If they became ritually impure within the Temple courtyard, they are destroyed and he does not recite....
And from where (do we know) that he liable for their safekeeping until they get to the Temple Mount?  Because it says (Exodus 23:19) "The first fruits of your land you must bring to the house of YHVH Your God."-- This teaches that he is liable for their safekeeping until they get to the Temple Mount.  If he brings from one species and recites and returns bringing another species, he does not recite.
These are brought and recited over:  from Shavuot until Sukkot, from the seven species, from fruit in the mountains, from dates in the valleys, from oil olives on the other side of the Jordan River.  Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: we do not bring first fruits from the other side of the Jordan since it is not "the land flowing with milk and honey."
One who buys three trees in his fellow's property, brings and recites.  Rabbi Meir says: even two.  If he bought the tree and the ground it is on, he brings and recites.  Rabbi Judah says:  even sharecroppers and renters bring and recite.

Chapter 2

For Terumah (tithes given to the priest) and Bikkurim (the First Fruit offering), [a non-priest who eats them on purpose] is liable to be killed, and [a non-priest who eats them by accident] is obligated to add a fifth of the value.  And they are forbidden to non-priests, and they are the property of the priest, and they are nullified in 101 [parts], and they require the hands to be washed and [a priest who became impure and then immersed himself to become pure again must wait until] sunset [to eat them].  This is all true for Terumah and Bikkurim, and not for Maaser (tithes given to a Levite).
Maaser(tithing) and Bikkurim (first fruit offering) share qualities which are lacking in Terumah; namely, that Maaser and Bikkurim must be brought to a specific place, require verbal recitation, and are prohibited to an immediate mourner (Rabbi Shimon permits in this case).  They both require removal (Rabbi Shimon doesn't require it).  Any bit of them [when mixed with normal food] eaten in Jerusalem is prohibited.  Any growth which comes from them may not be eaten in Jerusalem, nor by a non-Jew, nor an animal (Rabbi Shimon permits in these cases).  All these qualities are true for Maaser and Bikkurim, but not for Terumah.
Terumah and Maaser share qualities which are lacking in Bikkurim; namely, that Terumah and Maaser's threshing-floor remains are prohibited; they have a specified amount to be given; they are taken from all produce, both in Temple times and in post-Temple times; they are applied to produce of rentors, lessors, those who have seized property, and thieves.  All these qualities are true for Terumah and Maaser, but not for Bikkurim.
Bikkurim has qualities that neither Terumah nor Maaser have; namely, that Bikkurim can be designated while still in the ground; a person may make their entire field into Bikkurim; one would be liable for their replacements; they require a sacrifice, waving, and staying over in Jerusalem.
Terumat Maaser (the part of the tithe given to a Levite that the Levite must give to a priest) is similar to Bikkurim in two ways, and to Terumah in two ways.  It may be taken from pure produce to [permit] unpure produce [to be eaten], and [it may be taken] from produce that is not in proximity [to the produce it is making permissible], like Bikkurim.  And it makes what is on the threshing floor forbidden [before it is separated], and it has a required amount, like Terumah.
An Etrog is [halachically considered] like a fruit tree in three ways, and like a vegetable in one.  Its like a fruit tree in that it necessitates Orlah and the laws of the fourth year, as well as Shemitta.  Its like a vegetable in one way, in that its Maaser time is determined by when it is picked - these are the words of Rabban Gamliel.  Rabbi Eliezer says, its like a fruit tree in all ways.
Human blood is like animal blood regarding the laws of agricultural impurity, and like insect blood in that it doesn't render one impure [in the Temple].
A koy is like a wild animal in some ways, and like a domestic animal in other ways, and like both in some ways, and like neither in other ways.
How is it like a wild animal? [If slaughtered], its blood must be buried like that of a wild animal; it may not be slaughtered on Yom Tov - and if slaughtered then, the blood should not be covered.  Its prohibited fats cause impurity through "N'veila impurity" like a wild animal; its impurity is doubtful.  It cannot be redeemed through the redemption of a donkey.
How is it like a domesticated animal? Its prohibited fats are prohibited like that of a domesticated animal, while eating of it doesn't induce Karet; it cannot be purchased with tithe money to be eaten in Jerusalem; the Kohanim are entitled to its shank, cheeks, and stomach.  Rabbi Eliezer exempts this, due to the law that if one possesses an item, it is incumbent on the other [who desires it] to prove his claim to it.
How is it unlike both a wild animal and a domesticated animal?  It is forbidden to mate it or yoke it with a wild animal and with a domesticated animal (see Leviticus 19:19 and Deuteronomy 22:10).  If one writes that his wild animal or domesticated animal will pass to his son, he did not write over the Koy.  If one said "I shall be a Nazirite if it is a wild animal," or [he says "I shall be a Nazirite if it is] a domesticated animal," he becomes a Nazirite.  And in all other matters, it is equal to a wild animal and to a domesticated animal, and requires ritual slaughter like both of them, and its corps defiles (see Leviticus 11:8), and [one is liable for] eating a limb taken from it while it is still alive like both of them.

Chapter 3

How does one designate for first fruits?  A man goes to his field and sees a date which is bearing fruit, a bunch (of grapes) which is bearing fruit, or a pomegranate which is bearing fruit-- he ties it with a string and says, "This is first fruit."  Rabbi Shimon says: even still, he reiterates and declares them first fruits once they have been picked.
How do they bring the first fruits up?  All the cities around the big city would go into the big city and sleep in the streets of that city without going into the houses. When they arose the supervisor would say, "Arise!  Let us go up to Zion, to the house of YHVH our God!"
Those who were close would bring dates and grapes and the far ones would bring dried figs and raisins. A bull would go before them and its horns would be plated with gold and it would have a olive wreath around its head.  The flute would play before them until they got close to Jerusalem.  Once they got close to Jerusalem, they sent before them and arranged their first fruits.  The overseers and the officers and the treasurers would go out to greet them-- in accordance with the stature of those coming in would they go out.  All the artisans of Jerusalem would stand before them and greet them, "Our brothers from XYZ place, you have come in peace!"
The flute would continue playing before them until they arrived at the Temple Mount.  Once they arrived at the Temple Mount, even Agripas the King would carry his basket on his shoulder and enter until he reached the courtyard.  Once they got to the courtyard, the Levites would speak in poetry (Psalms 30:2): I will extol you, YHVH, because you have raised me and not allowed my enemies to rejoice over me.
The young birds on the baskets were olah offerings.  And what was in their hands, they gave to the kohanim.
With the basket still on his shoulder, he recites from "I declare today to YHVH my God" (Deuteronomy 26:3-10) until the end of the subject.  Rabbi Judah says until "My father was a wandering Aramean."  Once he gets to "My father was a wandering Aramean", he takes the basket off his shoulder and holds it by its lip.  The priest places his hand under it and waves it.  He then recites from "My father was a wandering Aramean" until the end of the subject and rests (the basket) beside the altar and prostrates and leaves.
In the beginning, anyone who knew how to read would read.  Anyone else would have it read for him.  People were reticent to bring and they declared that it would be read for those who know how to read and those who do not.
Wealthy people brought their first fruits in baskets of silver and of gold.  Poor people brought theirs in baskets of woven willow stems.  Both the baskets and the fruits were given to the priests.
Rabbi Shimon ben Nanas said, [one may] decorate the first fruits [with species] outside of the seven species.  Rabbi Akiva said, only decorate the first fruits with the seven species.
Rabbi Shimon says: there are three categories in first fruits; the first fruits, the addition to the first fruits, and the decoration of the first fruits. The addition to the first fruits are from the same species.  The decoration of the first fruits is from a different species.  The addition to the first fruits are eaten in ritual purity, and aren't obligated in 'damai'.  The decoration of the first fruits are obligated in 'damai'.
In what case do we say that the addition to the first fruits is like the first fruits?  When it comes from the land.  If it doesn't come from the land, it's not like the first fruits.
Why do we say that the first fruits are like the property of a kohen?  Because he can buy with them slaves, land, or an impure animal, and a creditor takes them to pay a debt, and a women takes them to pay her ketubah, like a Torah scroll.  And Rabbi Yehudah says they are only given to a friend as a gift.  The wisemen say they are given to the people of the watch, and they divide them amongst themselves, like the sanctified meat of the temple.