Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah begins by discussing a person who does not wish to redeem his first-born donkey by giving a lamb to the priest. It continues by dealing with a variety of other issues in which one way of performing a mitzvah takes priority over another way. 

Mishnah Seven
If he does not wish to redeem it, he breaks its neck from behind with a large knife and buries it. 
The mitzvah of redemption takes priority over the miztzah of breaking its neck, for it says: “And if you don’t redeem it, you must break its neck” (Exodus 13:13).  
The mitzvah of designation takes priority over the mitzvah of redemption, for it says: “Who has betrothed her to himself, he must let her be redeemed” (Exodus 21:8).   
The mitzvah of yibbum is prior to the mitzvah of halitzah.   
[This was so] at first when they intended to carry out the mitzvah.   
But now that they do not intend to carry out the mitzvah, the [rabbis] have said: the mitzvah of halitzah takes priority over the mitzvah of yibbum. 
The mitzvah of redemption [of an unclean animal whose value has been dedicated to the Temple] is upon the owner. He takes priority over any other man, for it says: “If it is not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to your evaluation” (Leviticus 27:27). 

Explanation
Section one: Exodus 13:13 states that if he doesn’t redeem the first-born donkey he must break its neck. This is done with a large knife. After he breaks its neck, he must bury it, because he may not derive any benefit from the corpse. 
Section two: Clearly, the Torah prefers that one redeem the first-born donkey, rather than break its neck. Associative thinking now brings the mishnah to discuss other cases where there is a preferred way of performing the mitzvah. 
Section three: When a man buys a young slave girl, he has an option of either betrothing her to himself, or letting her be redeemed from slavery. Priority is given to marrying her, rather than letting her be redeemed by someone else. Indeed, it seems likely that the sale of a young girl was meant to be a marital type arrangement and the master would allow her to be redeemed only if he did not want to marry her. Allowing her to be redeemed was, in essence, an annulment of the original agreement. 
Section four: Yibbum is levirate marriage, and halitzah is the release from levirate marriage. Clearly, the Torah prefers that the brother marry his dead brother’s wife, and only if he refuses to do so, is halitzah provided as an option. 
However, the priority of yibbum over halitzah is only in a case where the brother marries his widowed sister-in-law in order to have a child on behalf of his deceased brother. If he does so just because he wants to have relations with her, for his own enjoyment, then, the rabbis claim, it would be better for them to do halitzah. The mishnah presents this as a type of “good old days” scenario. In the “good old days” men had religious intentions when they performed yibbum. In those times, yibbum was preferable. Now they are just plain old sleeping with their dead brother’s wife, and therefore we should encourage halitzah. 
Section five: If one dedicates an unclean animal to the Temple, such as a horse, then the animal must be redeemed and the money goes to the Temple’s treasury. Anyone can redeem the animal and thereby it becomes his. However, the first right to redeem the animal belong to the owner who dedicated it in the first place. Only if he does not wish to do so, is someone else allowed to come along, redeem the animal and thereby acquire it for himself.   












