Bekhorot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction
The blemishes listed in this mishnah disqualify an animal from being valid as a sacrifice. However, they are not permanent blemishes and therefore if the animal is a first born, it may not be slaughtered. Basically, all the owner can do is wait until either the blemish goes away or a permanent blemish develops.

Mishnah Twelve 
And in consequence of the following blemishes one may not slaughter a first born either in the Temple or in the rest of the state:  
White spots on the cornea and water [dripping from the eye] which are not permanent, 
Or molars which have been broken but not torn out [completely]; 
Or [an animal] affected with garav, a wart, or hazazit.
An old [animal] or a sick one, [an animal] of offensive smell;
Or [an animal] which with a transgression has been committed or an animal which is known to have killed a human being on the testimony of one witness or of the owners.   
A tumtum or a hermaphrodite cannot be slaughtered, neither in the Temple or in the rest of the state.   
Rabbi Ishmael however says: there is no greater blemish than that [of a hermaphrodite].   
But the sages say: it is not considered a first-born and it may be shorn and worked with.

Explanation
Section one: This is an introduction to the rest of the mishnah.
Section two: These blemishes were listed in mishnah three. If they are not permanent, the animal may not be slaughtered, although it may not be sacrificed.
Section three: Problems with the molars were listed in mishnah four. Since they have not been torn out, the blemish is not permanent.
Section four: A garav and a hazazit are kinds of boil. Since boils and warts are impermanent, they do not allow the first born to be slaughtered.
Section five: An old, sick or foul-smelling animal cannot be sacrificed, but since these are not exactly blemishes, they also can’t be slaughtered.
Section six: If two witnesses see an animal commit a transgression, either having sexual relations with a human or killing a human, the animal must be executed and can obviously not be sacrificed. However, if there is only witness, or if the owners were the witnesses, then the animal need not be executed. However, since it did commit a capital crime, it cannot be sacrificed but neither can it be slaughtered to be eaten. 
Section seven: A tumtum is an animal (or human being) with neither male nor female genitalia, whereas a hermaphrodite has both sets of genitalia. There are three opinions as to the status of a first born that is a tumtum or a hermaphrodite. According to the first opinion, while it cannot be sacrificed, because it is blemished, it also cannot be slaughtered and eaten. Rabbi Ishmael holds that it is blemished and therefore it can be slaughtered and eaten. The other sages say that such an animal is not even considered a first born because it may not be a male. They too would hold that it can be slaughtered and eaten. 

