Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with animals that are exempt from the cattle tithe. 
Our mishnah mentions the “kalbon.” This is a surcharge that one has to pay when one pays the years half-shekel to the Temple. There are two relevant rules here: 1) if a father pays the ½ shekel for his son, he need not pay the kalbon. 2) If two people pay their ½ shekel together they pay only one kalbon and not two.  

Mishnah Three
An animal bought or given as a present is exempt from the law of cattle tithe.
If brothers became partners, though they are still bound to pay the kalbon [surcharge], they are exempt from the tithe of cattle.   
And when they become liable to tithe of cattle, they are exempt from paying the kalbon.
If they acquired from the estate, they are bound [to tithe them].   
But if not, they are exempt from tithing.
If they first divided up the estate and then again became partners, they are bound to pay the kalbon and are exempt from tithe of cattle.

Explanation
Section one: A person is liable to tithe only the animals that are born into his property, not those that he bought or was given as a present.
Section two: This section refers to two different types of partnerships between brothers who have inherited from their father.  The first type is when they have already divided up the inheritance and then pooled their money together to form a business partnership.  In such a case they are liable for the kalbon as are all partners who pay each other’s kalbon, but they are exempt from paying the tithe on animals since partners do not pay this tithe on their shared animals. 
The second partnership is one in which they have not yet divided up the inheritance. In such a case the money is treated as if it still belonged to the father.  They are liable for the cattle tithe but they are exempt from the kalbon, for a father who pays the half shekel for his son is exempt from the kalbon (for more information on the kalbon, see the first chapter of tracate Shekalim).
Section three: If the brothers bought animals from their father’s estate, when these animals give birth, they must tithe them. However, if they didn’t buy the animals from the estate, but rather shared the money from the estate and used it to buy animals, then the animals born to them are exempt, because they are owned by partners. 
Section four: Once the brothers divide their father’s estate, each piece becomes each brother’s own property. The property is disconnected from the father, and therefore they must pay the kalbon. But when they form a partnership they become exempt from the animal tithe. Note that this is a repeat of the halakhah found in section two.  


