Bekhorot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with a judge or other official who takes payment for performing his work.

Mishnah Six
If one takes payment to act as a judge, his judgments are void; to give evidence, his evidence is void; to sprinkle or to sanctify, the waters are considered cave waters and the ashes are considered burned ashes.   
If he was a priest and he was made unclean regarding his terumah, he must give him food and drink and rub him with oil. 
And if he was an old sage, he mounts him on a donkey. 
He also pays him as he would a workman. 

Explanation
Section one: If one takes payment in order to fulfill legal or ritual functions, his actions are void. To sprinkle refers to a priest who sprinkles the red heifer waters on an impure person. To “sanctify” means to place the ashes in water. “Cave waters” and “burned ashes” are the way that the mishnah says that the water and ashes are invalidated from purifying the impure. 
All of these are functions that people must perform without taking payment. 
Section two: The mishnah now notes that while a priest or sage should not take a wage for rendering their services, they are not obligated to incur a loss. We should note that there will be a fine line between preventing a loss and rendering payment. 
The first part is concerned with a priest who loses his ability to eat terumah. Normally, a priest eats terumah which he receives as a gift from Israelites. The fact that he receives terumah from Israelites seems to be, at least partially, a payment for his rendering priestly services. If while rendering one of the services mentioned in section one a priest becomes impure, the person who requested his services must provide him with food, drink and oil from his own expense. This is not payment for the services but rather compensation for the loss of the priest’s ability to eat, drink and anoint with terumah.
Section three: If an old sage comes to render any of these services, the person requesting his help must give him a donkey to ride around on. The old man doesn’t have to walk around himself if this would be difficult for him. Providing transportation is no considered paying for the sage’s services.
Section four: Finally, and quite importantly, the person requesting the judge or priest’s help must pay him the wages that he would have been earning in his regular profession had he not been rendering judgment etc. Thus if the priest/sage was a laborer making five dollars an hour, then he would have to be paid five dollars for every hour taken up with the person’s case. If he worked in a more lucrative profession, he would earn the higher wage. This is not considered to be paying him for services rendered, but rather compensating him for wages he cannot earn. 

