Bekhorot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the consequences of a judge who issues an errant ruling. 

Mishnah Four
If one who is not an expert sees a first born and it was slaughtered by his instructions, in such a case it shall be buried and he shall make reparation from his own pocket.
If a [non-expert] judge gave a judgment and declared innocent a person who was really liable or made liable a person who was really innocent, declared unclean a thing which was clean or declared clean a thing which was really unclean, his decision stands but he has to make reparation from his own pocket. 
If the judge was an expert [sanctioned by the] court, he is exempt from making reparation.
It happened once that a cow's womb was removed and Rabbi Tarfon gave it [the cow] to the dogs to eat.   
The matter came before the sages at Yavneh and they permitted the animal.
Todos the physician said: no cow or pig leaves Alexandria of Egypt before its womb is removed in order that it may not breed.   
Rabbi Tarfon said: “There goes your donkey, Tarfon.”   
Rabbi Akiva said to him: you are exempt, for you are an expert and whoever is an expert sanctioned by the court is exempt from reparation.

Explanation
Section one: A person who is not an expert has no business declaring a first born blemished such that it can be slaughtered. If he does declare that it is blemished and the animal is slaughtered, the meat is prohibited and it must be buried. [Rabbi Judah would allow an expert to see if it was blemished, see yesterday’s mishnah]. In addition, the non-expert who allowed the animal to be slaughtered must repay the owner from his own pocket. Clearly, this is meant to discourage a non-expert from declaring an animal blemished. 
Section two: The same is true in other cases of judicial decisions. If a non-expert judge renders a decision and later it is found that he made the wrong decision, he must make restitution from his own pocket. Non-experts should simply not make decisions, and if they do, they run the risk of incurring liability. 
Section three: The mishnah now brings an interesting story of a mistaken judgment. A cow is brought in front of the sages so that they can determine whether the cow is a terefah, an animal with a wound/disease that would cause it to die within a short period. Such an animal may not be eaten. The sages in Yavneh determined that the animal was indeed a terefah.  After making this determination, Todos, a doctor, testified that in Alexandria they would regularly remove the wombs from cows and pigs before they would allow the animal to leave the city. They would do this because they thought their cows and pigs were of superior breed and they didn’t want others to breed them. In any case, this proves that a cow with its womb removed is not a terefah. 
Rabbi Tarfon realizes that he has made a mistake and therefore, exclaims to himself, “Tarfon, there goes your donkey!” Rabbi Tarfon is now going to have to sell his donkey to pay back for the loss of the cow.
Rabbi Akiva assures Rabbi Tarfon that he has not lost his donkey, because he is an expert, and an expert doesn’t have to make restitution when he renders a mistaken judgment.
I don’t know whether the mishnah is intentionally being ironic, but I find it funny that Rabbi Tarfon is an expert, even though he doesn’t know that the halakhah is that he doesn’t have to pay back the loss. In other words, he is an expert despite the fact that he has made two mistakes in one mishnah. 
