Bekhorot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The first-born takes a double share in the inheritance. Our mishnah mentions several limitations on this halakhah.

Mishnah Nine
The first-born takes a double share of the father's estate but he does not take a double share of the mother’s estate.   
He also does not take a double share of the improvement in the value of the estate.   
Nor from what will fall due [to the estate] as he does of what is held in possession.
Nor can a woman claim with her ketubah [from these],  
Nor can daughters claim their support.
Nor can a yavam make a claim [from these].  
None of these take from the improvement in the value of the estate, nor of what will fall to the estate as they do of what is now held in possession.

Explanation
Section one: The first born takes a double share in his father’s estate, but not in his mother’s, should the sons inherit from their mother.
Section two: If the value of the father’s estate has gone up from the time of the father’s death before the division of the estate, the first born takes his double share only from the value of the estate at the time of death. For instance, if there are three sons, the first born will take half of the estate. If the estate is worth 1,000 at death, he takes 500 and the other sons take 250 each. But if the estate goes up 300 in value from death to division, he only takes 100 of the added value. 
Section three: If there is money or property that will eventually belong to his father but does not belong to the father at the time of his death, the first born son does not take a double share of it. For instance, let’s say the father dies before his own father dies. When the grandfather dies, the grandsons will inherit the part of the estate that their father would have inherited. Out of this part the first born grandson does not take a double portion.
Section four: There are three other instances where collection is limited in the same way that the first born’s collection is limited.
1: A woman collecting her ketubah payment from her husband’s estate.
2: Girls being maintained by the money left over from their father’s estate.
3: A man (yavam) who has performed yibbum (levirate marriage) with his dead brother’s wife. The yavam inherits all of his brother’s property. He would also inherit his brother’s portion of his father’s estate, but he would only take from his father’s estate and not his mother’s. Similarly, he would not take his brother’s share from the improvement. Finally, he would only take his brother’s share of his father’s estate if his father dies first, and they don’t have time to divide up the property before his brother dies and he does yibbum. 

