Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah introduces the complication of a donkey that gives birth to twins and it is unknown which came out first—the male donkey, in which case the owner would be liable to redeem the donkey, or a female donkey, in which case the owner would not be liable. In addition the mishnah presents scenarios where several donkeys give birth and it is unknown whether the donkey the first-borns were male or female.

Mishnah Three 
If a donkey that had never before given birth gave birth to two males, he gives one lamb to the priest.  
[If it gave birth to] a male and a female, he sets aside one lamb [which he keeps] for himself.
If two donkeys that had never before given birth gave birth to two males, he gives two lambs to the priest. 
[If they gave birth to] a male and a female or two males and a female, he gives one lamb to the priest.  
[If they gave birth to] two females and a male or to two males and two females the priest receives nothing.  

Explanation
Section one: In this case, while we don’t know which donkey was born first, it is certain that a male was born first. Therefore, he must give one lamb to the priest to redeem the donkey. 
Section two: Here he doesn’t know whether the first born was the male, in which case he must redeem it by giving a lamb to the priest, or if it was the female, in which case he is exempt. He must set aside a lamb to redeem the donkey, but he need not give the lamb to the priest. This is because the priest cannot prove that the owner was liable, and there is a rule in monetary matters—the burden of proof is upon the claimant. So the lamb stays with its owner.
Section three: In this case, even if we don’t know which donkey gave birth to which male offspring, we know that each one had a male. He must give two lambs to the priest.
Section four: If the two donkeys gave birth to one male and one female or two males and one female (one had twins) then we can be sure that at least one male was a first-born. The other male might be a first-born, or it might not. The mishnah teaches that since this other male is only doubtfully a first-born he can use one lamb to redeem both the certain first-born and the doubtful first-born. The lamb must be given to a priest.
Section five: If there were two females, then there is a possibility that the first born of each donkey was a female, no matter how many males were also born. Thus he need not give any lambs to the priest. However, the Tosefta notes that he must set aside one lamb and redeem the males that were born and might have been first-borns. He keeps this lamb for himself, as he did in section two. 
