Bekhorot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with the status of first borns who were intentionally blemished by their owners. It contains two very interesting stories. 

Mishnah Three 
If one makes a slit in the ear of a firstborn animal, he may never slaughter it, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
But the sages say: when another blemish appears, he may slaughter it on account of it.
It happened that a quaestor (a Roman official) saw an old male lamb with its long wool hanging down and asked: what is the meaning of this?  They replied: “It is a first born and is not to be slaughtered until it has a blemish,” [The quaestor] took a dagger and slit its ear. The matter came before the sages and they permitted it.  After they had permitted, he went and sliced the ears of other [first borns]. The [sages] forbade them. 
Once children were once playing in a field. They tied the tails of sheep one to the other and one tail which belonged to a first born was severed. The matter came before the rabbis and they permitted [the first born]. When the children saw that they had permitted [the first born to be slaughtered], they proceeded to tie the tails of other first borns. The [sages] forbade [the other first borns]. 
This is the rule: wherever the blemish is caused with the knowledge and consent [of the owner] it is forbidden, but, if it is not with his knowledge and consent, it is permitted. 

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Eliezer, if one intentionally blemishes a first born, he can never slaughter the animal. Even if it is subsequently blemished in another way, he is penalized and he still cannot slaughter it. The other sages adopt a more lenient position. The blemish that he put on the animal itself is not sufficient to allow him to slaughter it. However, he can slaughter and eat the animal when it is blemished in another way.
Section two: It is forbidden to shear first born animals, so if they are not blemished and they can’t be sacrificed because the Temple is no longer standing, they will grow very long hair. Upon seeing one such strange beast, a Roman official asked the Jews what is going on with their goat. The Jews explained that they could not slaughter the animal until it became blemished. The Roman official, being a very helpful non-Jew, proceeded to intentionally blemish the animal. When the Jews brought the animal to the sages, the sages permitted it. Seeing that he had been so helpful to the Jews, the Roman official decided to be even more helpful and he went and blemished other first borns (I never knew Romans were so interested in helping Jews—perhaps he just liked to slice the ears of goats?). This time the sages didn’t permit the first borns to be eaten. Once the Roman knew that by his blemishing them they could be eaten, his actions could no longer allow the first born to be eaten.  
Section three: A similar story is related concerning some children, who while playing a game, blemished a first born animal. Since they didn’t know that their actions would allow the animal to be eaten, the sages permitted it. However, when they began to intentionally blemish other animals, the sages did not permit them.
Section four: The general rule is that if the blemish was done without the knowledge or consent of the owner of the animal, the first born may be eaten. But if the owner knew that what he was doing was going to permit the animal to be eaten, or if he consented to someone else blemishing the animal, it cannot be eaten, at least not based on that particular blemish.  
