Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
The last chapter of Bekhorot deals with the laws of animal tithes. Leviticus 27:32 states: “All tithes of the herd or flock—of all that passes under the shepherd’s staff, every tenth one—shall be holy to the Lord.” The laws of animal tithes are in tractate Bekhorot because they are similar in many ways to the laws regarding an animal first born. The main difference is that while a first born pure animal must be given to the priest, animal tithes are brought to Jerusalem where they are eaten as sacrifices (shelamim) by their owners. 

Mishnah One 
The law concerning the tithe of cattle is in force in the Land and outside the Land, in the days when the Temple exists and when it does not exist, 
[It applies] to hullin (non-sacred) animals only but not to consecrated animals. 
It applies both to cattle and flock animals, but they are not tithed together. 
To lambs and to goats, and they are tithed together. 
To the new and the old, but they are not tithed together. 
Now it might be logical: seeing that new and old animals which are not treated as kilayim in regard to one another are yet not tithed one for the other, lambs and goats which are treated as kilyaim in regard to one another, all the more should not be tithed one for the other. Scripture therefore states: “And of the flock”—all kinds of flock are considered one [for purposes of tithing].

Explanation
Section one: The tithing of animals is in force at all times, and in all places. Once the Temple was destroyed, one would have had to wait until the animal became blemished, and then it could be eaten anywhere. We should note that from Talmudic times and onward the laws of animal tithes were no longer observed.
Section two: Only non-sacred animals must be tithed.
Section three: Both herd (cows) and flock animals (sheep and goats) must be tithed, but they cannot be tithed together. This is because the verse says “of the herd and of the flock,” thereby separating them into two categories. 
Section four: Different types of flock animals can be tithed together.
Section five: However, animals born in different years are not tithed together. We will learn more about how an animal’s year is determined in mishnayot five and six.
Section six: The mishnah now notes a discrepancy in logic. Goats and sheep are considered kilayim (mixed species) together, meaning they cannot be crossbred. In contrast, new and old animals of the same type are of course not kilayim and can be crossbred. It would therefore make sense for new and old animals to be tithed together but not for sheep and goats to be tithed together. Therefore, the Torah states “of the flock” thereby combining all flock animals into one category. 
 

