Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first part of this mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah. In these cases two animals give birth, one which had previously given birth and one which had not.
The second half of the mishnah begins to discuss the lamb used to redeem the donkey.
  
Mishnah Three
If one donkey had given birth before and one had not given birth before and they gave birth to two males, he gives one lamb to the priest. 
[If they gave birth to] a male and a female, he sets aside one lamb [which he keeps] for himself. 
For it says, “And the firstling of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb” (Exodus 34:20), [the lamb can come either] from the sheep or the goats, male or female, large or small, unblemished or blemished. 
He can redeem with the same lamb many times.   
[And the lamb] enters the pen to be tithed.   
If it dies [before he gives it to the priest], he can benefit from it.

Explanation
Section one: Since both donkeys gave birth to a male, it is certain that the donkey that had never given birth before gave birth to a male. So the owner is liable to give one lamb to the priest. 
Section two: If the two donkeys gave birth to a male and a female, then we don’t know whether the donkey which had never before given birth gave birth to the male, in which case it must be redeemed, or whether the other donkey gave birth to the male, in which case it is not a first-born. This is another case where there is doubt about whether the owner owes a lamb to the priest. As in the cases in yesterday’s mishnah, he sets aside a lamb to redeem the male donkey who might need to be redeemed, but he need not give the lamb to the priest, because the priest cannot prove that the male was a first-born. 
Section three: This verse is brought here not to prove the sections which immediately precede it, but to bring Scriptural proof that a first-born of a donkey must be redeemed with a lamb. As long as this lamb is from a sheep or a goat, it can be used, no matter what type of lamb it is.
Section four: He can use one lamb to redeem as many donkeys as he wants, and thereby derive benefit from the donkey by taking away its sacred status. In other words, if he doesn’t give the lamb to the priest, he can keep using it to redeem other donkeys. However, there is a mitzvah to give the priest a lamb for each donkey being redeemed. 
Section five: If an Israelite owns a lamb that he used to redeem a donkey, the lamb counts as far as tithing for that year goes. When he goes to count the lambs born in that year, this lamb too enters the pen to be counted. 
Section six: If the lamb dies he can derive benefit from its corpse. According to the Talmud, this means that the priest derives the benefit from the corpse, because from the time the lamb was set aside it belongs to the priest, even though it was still in the Israelite’s house.


