Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six 
If one sets aside [a lamb] for the redemption of the first-birth of a donkey and it died:
Rabbi Eliezer says: he is responsible as is the case with the five selas for the redemption of the first-born. 
But the sages say: he is not responsible, as is the case with the redemption of the second tithe.   
Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Zadok testified concerning the redemption of the first-born of a donkey which died that the priest receives nothing [in such circumstances].
If the first-born of a donkey died [after the lamb for redemption had been set aside]: 
Rabbi Eliezer says: it shall be buried, but the lamb may be used.
But the sages say: it does not need to be buried and the lamb belongs to the priest.

Explanation
Section one: In this case the lamb used to redeem the first-born of a donkey dies before it can be given to the priest. Rabbi Eliezer says that he must separate a new lamb and give it to the priest. This is the same rule as would apply if he lost the five selas that he must give to the priest in order to redeem his first-born son. To Rabbi Eliezer the donkey is not redeemed until the owner actually gives the lamb to the priest. Until that point the lamb belongs to the owner and if it dies, it is his loss. 
The other rabbis hold that once the lamb is set aside, the first-born of the donkey has been redeemed. The lamb has now taken the place of the donkey and the only thing missing is giving it to the priest. If the lamb dies now, it is the priest’s loss and he need not give another lamb to the priest. This is the same rule as applies to money used to redeem second tithe produce. Once the produce has been redeemed it is non-sacred and the money is holy. If the money is lost, he need not go back and redeem it again.
Section two: Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Zadok testify that the halakhah is in accordance with the sages. If the lamb dies after it has been set aside to redeem the first-born donkey, the priest doesn’t receive anything. However, it seems that the priest would receive the corpse, because after all, the lamb was already his. 
Section three: If the first born of the donkey dies after the lamb has been set aside, Rabbi Eliezer believes that the donkey was still holy. Therefore, it must be buried and one cannot derive any benefit from its corpse. However, the holiness of the donkey had not yet been transferred to the lamb, because this only happens when the lamb is given to the priest. Therefore, the lamb can still be used. Note that this is consistent with Rabbi Eliezer’s position above. 
The other rabbis hold that as soon as the lamb is set aside, it takes on the holiness of the donkey. Therefore, it the donkey dies it need not be buried. The lamb, however, must be given to the priest because as soon as he set it aside, it belongs to the priest. 

