Bekhorot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
There are two topics in our mishnah. The first section deals with a Jew sharing a blemished first born with a priest. The second section deals with blood letting a first born in order to heal it.  

Mishnah Two
Bet Shammai says: An Israelite must not be invited to share [a blemished first born] with a priest.
But Bet Hillel permits this, even in the case of a non-Jew.
If a first born has a blood attack, even if it is going to die, its blood may not be let, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
But the sages say: he may let its blood, as long as he does not make a blemish.   
And if he made a blemish, he must not slaughter it on account of this.   
Rabbi Shimon says: he may let blood, even though he makes a blemish.

Explanation
Section one: According to Bet Shammai, if a priest owns a blemished first born which he can eat, he should not invite an Israelite to share it with him. The mishnah does not explain why Bet Shammai prohibits this and the Talmud gives a midrashic reasoning. Perhaps Bet Shammai fear that the priest may be bribing the Israelite to give him the blemished first born. To prevent bribes, Bet Shammai prohibits this.  
Bet Hillel permits, and they even allow a non-Jew to share in eating the first born. The reason to mention that a non-Jew can share in eating the first born is to teach that the priest can do with it as he pleases, as long as he doesn’t shear it or sell its meat in the market (as we learned in yesterday’s mishnah).
Section two: It is prohibited to blemish a first born animal so that it can be eaten (see tomorrow’s mishnah). According to Rabbi Judah, even if the blemish is done through blood letting with the intention of saving the animal’s life, it is still prohibited. 
Section three: The sages permit the animal’s blood to be let, as long as he does it in a way that the animal will not be halakhically considered blemished. And if it does become halakhically blemished, he can’t count this blemish as grounds to slaughter the animal. Rather he would have to wait until the animal becomes blemished in another way and only then can he slaughter it. Note that he cannot sacrifice it after the first blemish because one can never slaughter a blemished animal.
Section four: Rabbi Shimon is even more lenient and allows one to let the blood of an animal, even if he does it in such a way that it will cause a blemish. According to the Talmud, Rabbi Shimon would also let him slaughter the animal based on this blemish. Since his intention was to save the animal’s life (so he could properly slaughter it and eat it) this is not considered intentionally blemishing an animal, a topic to be discussed in tomorrow’s mishnah.  
