Introduction to Tractate Bekhorot

Bekhorot means first-born (almost the same word as Bikkurim, first fruits). Our tractate deals with three different types of first-borns, each with their own particular rules.

1) The first-born of a donkey. Exodus 13:11-13 (full text below) says that the male first-born of a donkey must be redeemed with a sheep, meaning that the sheep becomes holy. According to Numbers 18:15-18 and other verses in Numbers (see below) the first born of every impure (non-edible) animal must be redeemed. This would include camels, horses and other domesticated but impure animals. There were some ancient Jews, including some rabbis, who thought that all impure animals must be redeemed. However, the halakhah dictated that only the first-born of donkeys needs to be redeemed.

2) The male first-born of a pure animal. This first-born as the status of a sacrifice, as we learned in Tractate Zevahim. If it is blemished it cannot be sacrificed, but it still must be given to the priest.

3) The male first-born of a human being. This first-born is redeemed by giving five shekels to the priest.

In addition, Bekhorot finishes with a chapter dedicated to the cattle tithe, the giving of the tenth-born of every domesticated animal to the priest. 

Below are the verses that are relevant to the topic of bekhorot. As you can see, this is a topic that receives quite a bit of “coverage” in the Torah.

Exodus 13  
2 "Consecrate to Me every first-born; man and beast, the first issue of every womb among the Israelites is Mine."

Exodus 13
11 "And when the LORD has brought you into the land of the Canaanites, as He swore to you and to your fathers, and has given it to you,
 12 you shall set apart for the LORD every first issue of the womb: every male firstling that your cattle drop shall be the LORD's.
 13 But every firstling ass you shall redeem with a sheep; if you do not redeem it, you must break its neck. And you must redeem every first-born male among your children.

Exodus 22
28 You shall not put off the skimming of the first yield of your vats. You shall give Me the first-born among your sons.
 29 You shall do the same with your cattle and your flocks: seven days it shall remain with its mother; on the eighth day you shall give it to Me.

Exodus 34
19 Every first issue of the womb is Mine, from all your livestock that drop a male as firstling, whether cattle or sheep.
 20 But the firstling of an ass you shall redeem with a sheep; if you do not redeem it, you must break its neck. And you must redeem every first-born among your sons. None shall appear before Me empty-handed.

Leviticus 27
26 A firstling of animals, however, which -- as a firstling -- is the LORD's, cannot be consecrated by anybody; whether ox or sheep, it is the LORD's.

Numbers 3
13 For every first-born is Mine: at the time that I smote every first-born in the land of Egypt, I consecrated every first-born in Israel, man and beast, to Myself, to be Mine, the LORD's.

Numbers 18
15 The first issue of the womb of every being, man or beast, that is offered to the LORD, shall be yours; but you shall have the first-born of man redeemed, and you shall also have the firstling of unclean animals redeemed.
 16 Take as their redemption price, from the age of one month up, the money equivalent of five shekels by the sanctuary weight, which is twenty gerahs.
 17 But the firstlings of cattle, sheep, or goats may not be redeemed; they are consecrated. You shall dash their blood against the altar, and turn their fat into smoke as an offering by fire for a pleasing odor to the LORD.
 18 But their meat shall be yours: it shall be yours like the breast of elevation offering and like the right thigh.

Deuteronomy 15
19 You shall consecrate to the LORD your God all male firstlings that are born in your herd and in your flock: you must not work your firstling ox or shear your firstling sheep.
 20 You and your household shall eat it annually before the LORD your God in the place that the LORD will choose.
 21 But if it has a defect, lameness or blindness, any serious defect, you shall not sacrifice it to the LORD your God.
 22 Eat it in your settlements, the unclean among you no less than the clean, just like the gazelle and the deer.
 23 Only you must not partake of its blood; you shall pour it out on the ground like water.







  
