Ein Yaakov (Glick Edition)

En Jacob, translated by SH Glick, 1916
http://www.worldcat.org/title/en-jacob-agada-of-the-babylonian-talmud/oclc/755720

masechet 1



chapter 1

FROM what time on may we read the Sh'm'a of the evening "From the time the priests enter to eat their Terumah until the end of the first watch, said R. Eliezer. But the other sages say "Until midnight," and Rabban Gamaliel says "Until the appearance of the morning star." It happened that the sons of Rabban Gamaliel came [very late at night] from a banquet and told Rabban Gamaliel that they had not yet read the Sh'm'a, whereupon he said to them : "If the morning star has not yet appeared you must read it." 
(Gemara) Let us see: when do the priests enter to eat the Terumah ? Is it not when the stars appear ? Let then the Mishnah say : "From the time the stars appear!" In using this expression, he lets us hear something by the way ; namely, that with the appearing of the stars, the priests are allowed to eat their Terumah, because the forgiveness-offering [which will be brought on the morrow] is not a hindrance, as we have been taught; "And when the sun hath set, he shall be clean. (Lev. 22, 7.) i. e., the waiting for the setting of the sun prevents him from eating the Terumah, but not his forgiveness-offering." 
(Ib. b) R. Jose said: "Twilight lasts as long as a twinkling ; this one comes and that one goes, and it is impossible to determine its exact time." 
(Fol. 3a) "Until the end of the first watch," said R. Eliezer. Let us see: with whom does R. Eliezer agree ? If he hold that the night is divided into three watches, then let him say "until the end of the fourth hour" ; and if he hold that the night is divided into four watches, then let him say "Until the end of the third hour?" He holds indeed that the night has three watches, but he intends to inform us that just as there exist watches in Heaven, so there exist watches here on the earth ; as we are taught that R. Eliezer says: "Three watches has the night; and at the beginning of every watch the Holy One, praised be He ! sits and roars like a lion, as it is said (Jer. 25, 30.) The Lord will roar from Heaven on high and from His holy dwelling shall He give forth His voice. Verily, He will roar over His habitation. And the divisions of the night are recognized by these signs: In the first watch the ass brays; in the second the dog barks; and in the third the baby nurses from its mother's breast and the wife converses with her husband." How does R. Eliezer arrive at these conclusions? Does he apply the signs to the beginning or to the end of each watch ? If lie applies his signs to the beginning of each watch, then it is unnecessary to have a sign for the first, as nightfall itself is a sufficient indication for it ! If, however, he applies his signs to the end of each watch then the sign for the last is unnecessary, for the dawn is then sufficient! He applies his signs to the end of the first watch, the beginning of the last and the middle of the second. And if you please, you may say that he applies his signs to the end of each watch. In answer to your question as to the necessity of a sign for the last, I say : It is necessary for a man who sleeps in a dark place and does not know the time for reading the Sh'm'a : as soon as he hears the wife conversing with her husband, and the baby nursing from its mother's breast, he may begin to read the Sh'm'a. R. Isaac b. Samuel in the name of Rab said : "Three watches has the night and at the beginning of every watch the Holy One, praised be He ! sits and roars like a lion and says 'Woe to the children that because of their sins I have destroyed my edifice, and burned my Temple, and exiled my children among the heathens.' " 
We are taught that R. Jose says: "Once upon a time I was walking on a road and I entered one of the ruins of Jerusalem to pray. Elijah, blessed he his memory! came and watched me at the door until I finished my prayer. After I had finished, he said to me: 'Shalom, (peace, unto thee), my teacher,' to which I answered, 'Shalom, my teacher and my guide.' 'My son,' said he, 'why did you enter this ruin?' 'To pray,' I replied. You could have prayed on the road ?' he said 'I was afraid lest I be interrupted by travelers.' 'You should then have prayed a short prayer.' From this conversation, I concluded three things: First: It is not safe to enter a ruin. Second: One is permitted to pray on the road, and third : A man on the road [having no place to pray] has the privilege of saying a short prayer. He then said to me: 'What voice did you hear in this ruin?' 'I heard,' I replied, 'a Bath-Kol (heavenly voice) which coos like a dove, saying, 'Woe to the children that because of their sins I have destroyed my edifice, burned my Temple, and exiled my children among the heathens.' 'My son,' said he again, '[I swear] by your life and the life of your head, that this occurs not only at that particular time, but thrice daily; furthermore, every time Israelites enter the Synagogues or places of learning and answer Let His great name be praised, the Holy One, praised be He! nods His head, and says, 'Happy is the king thus praised in his own house, but what availeth it a father who hath exiled his children among the heathens? Woe to the children who have been exiled from their father's table !' " 
Our Rabbis have taught : For three reasons shall no person enter a ruin ; because of suspicion (of an immoral intention) ; because the ruin may cave in; and on account of demons (dwelling in ruins). 
(Ib. b) Our Rabbis have taught: "The night has four watches," so says Rabbi. R. Nathan says "Three." What is R. Nathan's reason? It is written (Judges 6, 19.) And Gidon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the edge of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch. And we are taught that Tichon (middle) cannot be used unless something preceds and something follows it. But Rabbi disputes this and says that "by the middle is meant one of the two middles." R. Nathan says: "Is it then written one of the middles? Behold! It is written the middle!" What is Rabbi's reason? R. Zerika in the name of R. Ami, who speaks in the name of R. Joshua ben Levi, said: "One passage says (Ps. 119. 62.) At midnight do I constantly rise to give thanks unto Thee, etc., and another passage says (Ib. ib. 148.) My eyes are awake before the night watches. How is this possible? At midnight; because The night is divided into four watches, [midnight is therefore after two watches.]" But R. Nathan explains it by the statement of R. Joshua ; as we are taught that R. Joshua says: "It is the custom of kings to rise on the third hour of the day. [i.e.., six hours of the night and two hours of the day together make two night watches of four hours each]. R. Ashi said : "One watch and a half are also called watches (plural)." 
Another thing said R. Zerika, in the name of R. Ami. who speaks in the name of R. Joshua b. Levi: "In the presence of the dead it is not proper to speak of anything except things concerning the dead." R. Abba b. Cahana said: "This refers only to affairs of the Torah, but worldly affairs do not matter." Rut some say that R. Abba b. Cahana said : "This refers to affairs of the Torah and even more positively to worldly affairs." 
It is written (Ps. 119, 62.) At midnight do I constantly rise to give thanks unto Thee. Did David rise at midnight? Behold! He arose at the beginning of the night, for it is said, (Ib. ib. 147.) I came before thee in the twilight of night. And how do we know that the meaning of Neshef is the beginning of night? For it is written (Pr. 7, 9.) In the Neshef, in the evening of day. R. Oshiya said: "Thus [said David], 'I never passed half a night in sleep.'" R. Zerika said: "Until midnight he slumbered like a horse, thereafter he strengthened himself [fought sleep] like a lion." R. Ashi said: "Until midnight he was engaged in the study of the Torah ; after that [he spent his time] in songs and praises." And do you say Neshef means the beginning of night? Why do we find it used as the dawn of morning? For it is written (I. Sam. 30. 37.) And David smote them from the Neshef even unto the evening of the next day. Is it not meant from morning until evening? "Nay, from evening to evening." If so, then let it be written Me-haneshef Ad Haneshef or instead of Me-ha'ereb Ad Ha'ereb! [Why are the two words Neshef and Ereb, used for the same idea?] "But," says Raba, "Neshef means originally, 'The transition of anything' hence, night ends and day comes, the day ends and night comes." But how did David know the exact time at midnight? Behold! If Moses our teacher did not know it, for it is written (Ex. 11, 4.) Thus hath the Lord said, about midnight, etc. Why [does he come to say] about midnight? Should we say that he was told so by the Holy One, praised be He! Is there any possibility of God being in doubt? We must therefore explain it that Moses was told At midnight [as it really happened] ; but Moses [on his own recognizance] said About midnight; consequently we infer that Moses was in doubt. And how did David know it? David had a sign [which indicated the exact time at midnight to him], for R. Chana b. Bizna said in the name of R. Simon the Pious that: a harp was hanging over David's bed and, as soon as midnight arrived, a northerly wind blew in upon the strings of the harp and caused it to play. Thereupon, David arose and studied the Torah until dawn. At dawn the sages of Israel visited David and said to him : "Our Lord, O King! Israel, thy people need a living!" "Go and support yourselves by dealing with one another," replied David. "But," said they, "a handful does not satisfy the lion nor can a pit be filled with its own earth! [i. e., a community cannot live on its own resources]." Whereupon David said to them : "Go ye and stretch your hands out as a band [of warriors]. Immediately they held counsel with Achi'tophel and took advice from the Sanhedrin and inquired of the Urim and Tummim.
R. Joseph said: "What is the passage [that refers to this]? It is written (I Chr.27, 34.) And after Achi'tophel (came) Joho'yada, the son. of Bena'yahu, and Ebya'thar, and the captain of the king's army was Joab, i.e., 'Achi'tophel' is the adviser; as it is said (II Sam. 16, 23.) And the council of Achi'tophel, which he counseled in those (Fol. 4a) days was as if a man had asked advice of the word of God : 'Jehoyada the son of Bena'yahu,' refers to the Sanhedrin; 'Ebyathar' refers to the Urim and Tummim ; as the passage said (Ib. 20, 23.) And Bena'yahu, the son of Jeho'yada was over the Kareithi and Peleithi. But why are the Sanhedrin called 'Kareithi ?' Because they cut their words clearly; and 'Peleithi?' Because their acts were wonderful [predestined]. And why was the name Urim given to the stones? Because they enlightened their words ; 'Tummim?' Because they finished their words.' And after this, they applied to Joab, the king's captain." 
R. Isaac b. Ada said : "What biblical passage relates to this? [That the harp was hanging over David's bed.] Awake! my spirit, awake! my psaltry and harp; I will wake up the morning dawn! (Ps. 57, 9)." 
R. Zera said : "Moses, our teacher, knew very well [the exact time at midnight] and so did David; the harp was used not to tell him the time at midnight, but to awaken him from sleep. The reason for Moses' statement About midnight is that he feared lest the astrologers of Pharaoh might err in the time and would afterwards say that Moses lied ; as the master has said, Use thy tongue to say, I do not know lest you be found mistaken and deceived !' " 
R. Ashi said: "The time when Moses spoke was midnight (between the thirteenth and the fourteenth day of Nisan) and thus he said to Pharaoh: 'The Holy One, praised be He ! said, 'To-morrow, at this time, will I go out in the midst of Egypt.'"
[It is written] (Ps. 66, 1.) A prayer of David, preserve my soul, for I am pious. R. Levi and R. Isaac both explain this passage. One said : "Thus said David before the Holy One, praised be He! 'Sovereign of the universe, am I not pious? Whereas all the kings of the east and west sleep until the third hour of the day, I rise at midnight to praise Thee.'" And the other said : "Thus said David before the Holy One, praised be He! 'Sovereign of the universe, am I not pious, whereas all the kings of the east and west sit companies in their glory, my hands are soiled in blood, membraneous-bag and after-birth in order to decide questions pertaining to family life; and moreover, whatever I do, I first consult Mephi-bosheth my teacher, saving to him : Meplu-bosheth my teacher, have I properly convicted? Have I properly acquitted? Have I properly declared pure? Have I properly declared impure? And I do not feel degraded [asking this].'" R. Joshua, the son of Ide, said : "What is the Biblical passage [that refers to this]? It is written (Ps. 119, 46.) And I will speak of thy testimony before kings and will not he ashamed." We are taught that his name (David's teacher) was not Mephi-bosheth but Ish-bosheth. Why was he called Mephi-bosheth ? Because he insulted David during Halachic discussions ; therefore, [because David humbly accepted these reproaches,] David was rewarded and Kilab came forth from him and R. Jochanan said: "His name was not Kilab but Daniel ; why then was he called Kilab ? Because he reproached Mephi-bosheth in matters of Halacha, and concerning him (Kilab) Solomon said in his wisdom (Pr. 23, 15.) My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine. And it is also said (Ib. 27, 11.) Become wise, my son, and cause my heart to rejoice that I may give an answer to him that reproacheth me." 
Why, did David call himself pious? Is it not written (Ps. 27, 13.) Unless I had to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of life, and we are taught in the name of R. Jose, "Why is the word Lulei (unless) dotted? David said before the Holy One, praised be He ! 'Sovereign of the universe, I assuredly trust in Thee, knowing that Thou wilt properly reward the just when the time shall come [in the future world], but I doubt whether I shall have a share in them,' [Hence we infer that David did not consider himself a pious man.]" He was afraid because of the sin, as R. Jacob b. Ide said ; for R. Jacob b. Ide raised the following contradictory question: "It is written (Gen. 28, 15.) And behold, I, (God) am with thee, (Jacob), and will keep thee withersoever thou goeth. And it is written (Ib. 32, 8.) And Jacob was greatly afraid and he felt distressed. [Why was he afraid after the Lord promised to be with him?] Jacob said: 'Perhaps there is some cause of sin which will prevent the fulfillment of His promise;' as we have been taught: 'It is said (Ex. 15, 16.) Till thy people pass over, O Lord, till this people pass over, which Thou hast purchased. Till thy people pass over, O Lord: refers to the first entrance, [into the land of Israel] ; Till this people pass over which Thou hast purchased; refers to the second entrance [in the days of Ezra]. From this, declared the sages, it can be inferred that Israel was to be brought in [into the land of Israel] during the days of Ezra by the same miracles through which they entered the first time, in the days of Joshua ben Nun, but Israel's sins prevented the fulfillment of this." 
(Ib. b) We are taught: The sages made a fence to their words [to protect their ordinances], lest a man coming from the field in the evening, would say: "I will go home, eat a little, drink a little, and sleep a while and then I will read Sh'm'a and pray the evening service." In the meantime he will fall asleep and sleep through the whole night without having read the Sh'm'a or prayed. But [in order to prevent this they say:] "A man coming from the field in the evening shall enter the synagogue, and if he be accustomed to read the Scripture, let him do so ; or if he be able to study traditional law, let him do that. After this, he should read the Sh'm'a and pray ; then he can eat his meal and recite the Aftermeal Benediction. He who transgresses the words of the wise, deserves the penalty of death." Why docs the Baraitha use the expression here that "He who transgresses the words of the wise is worthy of the penalty of death," and not use it in any other place? If you wish, you may say, because here the force of sleep puts him beyond his own control [and if he is not strongly warned against it, he may transgress the command even though he really desires to fulfill it] ; and if you please, you may say, because it is the intention [of the Baraitha] to reverse the opinion of those who say that the evening service is only optional it tells us, therefore, [by its warning,] that it is obligatory. 
The master said [above] : "He reads the Sh'm'a and prays (the evening service)" This is in support of [the view of] R. Jochanan, who was accustomed to say: "Who is sure to have a share in the world to come? He. who, immediately after the benediction of Geula, says the prayer of the Eighteen Benedictions at the evening service." R. Joshua b. Levi said : "The Eighteen Benedictions were ordained to be said in the middle." On what do they base their difference of opinion? If you please, you may say on a Biblical passage, and if you please, you may say on common sense. As to reason, R. Joshua holds that the redemption (of Egypt) commenced on the evening (towards the fifteenth of Nisan) although the real redemption did not take place until the morning, [therefore the Ge-ula which indicates the redemption should be said immediately before the Eighteen Benedictions in the evening also] ; but R. Joshua b. Levi holds that as long as the real redemption did not take place until the morning then the redemption of the evening matters little. As to the Biblical passage *** in the interpretation of the passage. (Deu. 6, 7.) And when thou lieth down, and when thou riseth up, (referred to Sh'm'a) . R. Jochanan holds: "We compare Lying down [at evening] to arising [in the morning] for the reason that just as the reading of the Sh'm'a in the morning comes before the prayer, so, in the evening, the reading of the Sh'm'a comes first also, and then the prayer of the Eighteen Benedictions." R. Joshua holds: "We compare the reading of the Sh'm'a when lying down to the reading of the Sh'm'a when arising, for the reason that just as in the morning the Sh'm'a is read close upon rising so is the Sh'm'a of the evening read just before lying down." The following objection was raised by Mar b. Rabina: "We have learned (in a Mishnah) 'In the evening, he says two benedictions before the Sh'm'a and two after the Sh'm'a.' If the Eighteen Benedictions should be said immediately after Ge-ula, then the Benedictions of Hash-ki-benu, prevents his having the Ge-ula, (the first one after Sh'm'a) closely after the Eighteen Benedictions?" Since the Rabbis ordained that Hash-ki-benu is to be said [between Ge-ula and the Eighteen Benedictions] then it is considered as one long benediction ; for if we do not say so, then in the morning how can we say the Eighteen Benedictions immediately after the Ge-ula? Has not R. Jochanan said : "He should first say, O Lord, open Thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise (Ps. 51, 17), and then proceed with the Eighteen Benedictions; and at the conclusion he should say. May the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before Thee, O Lord, my rock and my redeemer, (Ib. 19, 15)." But since the Rabbis ordained that the passage [0 Lord, open my mouth, etc. ] be said, it is considered one long prayer (part of the eighteen benedictions), so in this instance also, since the Rabbis ordained that the Hash-ki-benu be said between Ge-ula and the Eighteen Benedictions, it is considered a part of Ge-ula 
R. Elazar b. Abina said : "He who recites Te-hila l' David (Ps. 145) three times a day may be sure of an inheritance in the world to come." What is the reason? Shall I say because that particular chapter is arranged alphabetically? Then why not prefer chapter 119 Ps., which has an arrangement of eight repetitions of each letter of the alphabet? Is it because it has the verse Thou openeth Thy hand and satisfieth the demands of all Thy creatures. [it influences men to be benevolent] ? If so, then why not the Great Hallel? in which also is written (Ib. 136, 25.) He giveth food to all flesh. Because Tehila l' David has the advantages of both; [is arranged alphabetically and influences men to be benevolent]. 
R. Jochanan said : "Why is the letter Nun missing in the [alphabetical course of] Ashrei? Because the letter Nun is used for bad tidings. It is said (Amos 5, 2.) She is fallen (Nafla) and will not rise again, the virgin of Israel." In Palestine they interpret [this prophecy of Amos as good tidings] thus: She is fallen and will not fall again! Rise! virgin of Israel! R. Nachman b. Isaac said: "Even so, David indicates [the prophecy of] the Nun for the purpose of strengthening Israel, through a holy vision; for he says (Ps. 145, 14.) The Lord upholdeth all who are fallen (Noflim)." 
R. Elazar b. Abina said further: "Much more is said [regarding the actions] of Michael than is said of Gabriel; for in describing Michael, it is written (Is. 6, 6.) Then flew unto me one of the Seraphim. Whereas in describing Gabriel it is written (Dan. 9, 21.) The man Gabriel whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, came flying swiftly." And whence do we know that the word Echad (one) [mentioned by Isaiah] refers to Michael ? R. Jochanan said : "We derive it from the word Echad which occurs in both passages; it is written here (Is. 6, 6.) One of the Seraphim and it is written there (Dan. 10, 13.) But Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me. [Just as in the latter case] the word Echad (one) is applied to Michael, so also in the former case does Echad (one) apply to Michael]." In a Baraitha it was taught : "Michael [reaches his destination] with one [flight] ; Gabriel with two; Elijah with four and the angel of death with eight ; but during an epidemic the angel of death reaches [his destination] with one [flight]." 
(Fol. 5a) R. Levi b. Chama, in the name of Simon b. Lakish said: "At all times let man stir up his good inclination against the evil inclination), for it is said (Ps. 4, 5.) Tremble, and sin not. If he conquers it (the evil inclination) it is well, but if he does not, then he should study the Torah ; for we read, (Ib.) Commune with your heart. If it goes away, then it is well, but if not he should then read the Sh'm'a; for it is said (Ib.) Upon your bed. If he conquers it, then it is well, but if not, he should then remind himself of the day of death, for it is written. And be still Selah (to the end)." 
R. Isaac said : "Whoever reads the Sh'm'a when on his bed is considered [protected] as if he were holding a two-edged sword in his hand, for it is written (Ps. 149, 6.) The exalted praises (of God) are in their mouths and the two-edged sword in their hands." How does he infer this? Mar Zutra and according to others, R. Ashi, said : "From the beginning of that passage (Ib. ib. 5.) Let the pious be joyful in glory; let them, sing aloud upon their beds; and it is written after this The exalted praise of God is in their mouths and a two-edged sword in their hands." 
Furthermore, said R. Isaac: Whoever reads the Sh'm'a on his bed [before sleep], will cause the departure of all evil spirits; for it is said (Job 5, 7.) And the sons of fire take up their flight. By Uf (flight) is meant nothing else but the Torah, as it is said (Pr. 23, 5.) When thou letteth merely thine eyes fly over it (i. e., if thou learneth the Torah superficially), it is no more. And reshef (fire) means nothing else but evil spirits; as it is said (Deu. 32, 24.) Devoured with burning heat and with bitter deadly disease."  
Furthermore, said R. Levi b. Cbama, in the name of Resh Lakish : "What is meant by the passage (Ex. 24, 12.) And I will give thee the tablets of stone, with the law and the Commandments, which I have written to teach them? i.e, the tablets of stone, refers to the ten commandments; the Torah, refers to the Bible; the commandments, refers to the Mishnah; which I hare written, refers to the Prophets and Hagiographa ; to teach them, refers to the Gemara ; whence we infer that — all were given unto Moses on Mt. Sinai." 
R. Simon b. Lakish said : "Whoever studies the Torah will prevent affliction from coming upon him, for it is said (Job 5, 7.), And the sons of fire take up their flight. By Uf (flight) is meant nothing else but the Torah, as it is said (Pr. 23, 5.) When thou letteth merely thine eye fly over it (i.e., if you study the Torah by merely glancing over it with your eyes), it is no more, (you will easily forget it). And Reshef (fire) means nothing else but affliction, as it is said (Deu. 32, 24.) Devoured with evil spirits." "Aye." exclaimed R. Jochanan, "even the school children know this! for it is said, (Ex. 15. 2.5.) And he said, if thou wilt deligently hearken unto the voice of the Lord and wilt do what is riqht in His eyes, etc. But it means thus: Upon him who is capable of studying the Torah, but does not do so the Holy One, praised be He ! will bring repulsive suffering which will greatly disturb him ; for it is said (Ps. 39, 3.) I was dumb in deep silence, I was quite still even from speaking good, but my pain greatly disturbed me. By tob (good) is meant nothing else but the Torah, for it is said (Pr. 4, 2.) For good doctrine do I give, etc." R. Zeira, and some say, R. Chanina b. Papa, said : "Come and see that the custom of the Holy One. praised be He! is not like the custom of mortal men. The custom of mortal men is that if a man sell a valuable thing to his fellow-man, the seller is sorry and only the buyer is happy; but the custom of the Holy One, praised be He! is not so. He bestowed the Torah on Israel and He rejoiced, for it is said (Ib. 4, 2.) For good doctrine do I give thee." 
Raba, and according to others R. Chisda, said: "If a man see that troubles are coming unto him, let him search his deeds, for it is said, (Lam. 3, 40) Let us search through and examine our ways and let us return unto the Lord. If he has investigated and found nothing wrong, then let him attribute it to a neglect of the study of the Torah. for it is said (Ps. 94, 12.) Happy is the man whom Thou admonisheth, O Lord, and teacheth out of Thy Torah. But if he investigated and did not find [neglect of the study of the Torah] then it is known that his affliction is the cause of God's love, for it is said (Pr. 3, 12.) Because whomsoever the Lord loveth He admonisheth." 
Raba, in the name of R. Sechorah, who quoted R. Huna, said : "Whomsover the Holy One, praised be He! loveth. He afflicteth, for it is said (Is. 53, 10.) But the Lord was pleased to crush him through disease. We might think that, even if he does not accept the affliction with resignation. It is therefore said (Ib.) When his soul hath brought the trespass-offering, i. e., just as a guilt offering must come with his acknowledgement, so also must this be accepted with resignation. And if he accept it with love what will be his reward? Then shall he see (his) seed live many days, (Ib.) and moreover his learning shall endure with him, as is said (Ib.) And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." As to affliction, there is a difference of opinion between R. Jacob b. Ide and R. Acha b. Chanina. One holds that all such affliction which does not prevent one from studying the Torah is one of love, for it is said (Ps. 94, 12.) Happy is the man whom Thou admonisheth, O Lord, and teacheth from Thy Torah; and the other holds that such affliction which does not prevent one from praying is one which comes from love, for it is said (Ps. 66, 20.) Blessed he God who hath not removed my prayer nor His kindness from me. 
R. Abba, the son of R. Chiya b. Abba, said : "Thus said my father (R. Chiya) in the name of R. Jochanan; 'Both of these afflictions are the kind which come from love, for it is written (Pr. 3, 12.) Because whomsoever the Lord loveth He admonisheth; But what do we learn [from the passage] Thou teacheth him of the Torah. Do not read Tlamdenu (that he should be able to study the Torah) ; but read it Tlamdainu (Out of Thy Torah, Thou teacheth us) i. e., we learn from thine Torah [that one who is punished by God should be happy] namely, through the rule of a fortiori concerning the tooth and the eye ; that if the loss of a tooth or an eye [stricken out by the master] which affects only one member of the human body, frees the slave, how much more then are afflictions, which affect the whole human body, capable of cleaning one of evil.'" And that is meant by R. Simon b. Lakish, for he said: "It is said Convenant (Brith) in connection with the word salt, and it is said Convenant (Brith) in connection with the word affliction. Covenant by salt — as it is written (Lev. 2, 13.) Thou shalt not suffer the salt of the covenant (Brith) ! Covenant by affliction — as it is written (Deu. 28, 49.) These are the words of the covenant. (Brith) Just as the covenant of the salt was made to sweeten meat, so the covenant of affliction was made to cleanse man of all iniquities." 
We are taught that R. Simon b. Jochai said: "Three precious gifts the Holy One, praised be He! bestowed on Israel, and none of them was bestowed without affliction. The gifts are, the Torah, Palestine and the world to come. How do we learn that the Torah was given with affliction? It is written (Ps. 94, 12.) Happy is the man whom Thou admonisheth, O Lord, and from Thy Torah, Thou teacheth him. Whence do we learn that Palestine was given with affliction? It is written (Deu. 8. 5.) Thou shalt consider in thy heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord, thy God, chasteneth thee. Immediately following are the words For the Lord, thy God, bringeth thee into a good land, Whence do we learn the world to come was given with affliction ? It is written (Pr. 6, 23.) For the commandment is a lamp, and the Torah is a light, and the way of life is to administer correction." 
A disciple recited before R. Jochanan: "Whoever occupies himself with the study of the Torah and with the practice of loving kindness and (Ib. b.) buries his children [during his life] will have all his sins forgiven." "It is right," said R. Jochanan to him, "in the cases of the Torah and of charity ; for it is written (Pr. 16, 6.) Through kindness is iniquity atoned for. Chesed (Kindness) means the practice of loving kindness as it is said (Ib. 21, 21.) He that pursueth righteousness and Kindness (Chesed). Emeth (Truth), means the Torah, for it is said (Ib. 23, 23.) Buy the truth (emeth) and sell it not) but as to the one, who buries his children whence do we learn it ?" An old gentleman taught R. Jochanan, in. the name of R. Simon b. Jochai : "We infer this [through the rule of analogy] from the word, 'iniquity' (Avon). It is written here: Through kindness and truth is iniquity (Avon) atoned for, and it is written (Jer. 32, 18.) Inflicts the iniquities (Avon) of the fathers unto the bosoms of their children after them. [Just as the former Avon refers to atones, so does the latter]." 
R. Jochanan said : "Leprosy and [burying] children are not to [be considered among] the afflictions which come from love [of God]." And is not leprosy an affliction which comes from love? Have we not been taught: "Whoever is afflicted with one of these four forms of leprosy should deem it nothing else but an altar of forgiveness." "Aye," R. Joachanan answered, "it is true that it is an altar of forgiveness, but it is not an affliction which comes from the love of God; and if you wish, you may say that one statement refers to those who dwell in Babylon, and the other refers to those who dwell in Palestine ; and if you wish, you may say that one statement deals with leprosy in a hidden place, and the other deals [with leprosy] in an open place." And [death of] children, you say, is not from the affliction of love ? How shall we construe this case ? Shall we say that he had children but they died, then my objection is, that R. Jochanan himself said, "This is the bone of my tenth son whom I have buried." [Should we then believe that the affliction of such a great man as R. Jochanan was not affliction caused by the love of God ?] But the statement of R. Jochanan refers to the case where there were no children born, and the latter deals with a case where there were born, but died during the parents' lifetime. 
R. Jochanan once became ill, and R. Chanina came to visit him. "Do you love these afflictions?" R. Chanina asked him. "I desire neither them nor their rewards," he answered. R. Chanina then said "Give me your hand." Thereupon R. Jochanan gave him his hand and he [R. Chanina] made him well. Why did not R. Jochanan make himself well without the aid of R. Chanina? [Did it not happen that] when R. Chiya b. Abba once became sick, he was visited by R. Jochanan, who asked him, "Do you love the afflictions," and when the answer came, "[I love] neither them nor their rewards," R. Jochanan asked for his hand and made him well. [Why could he not do the same for himself?] I will tell thee. A prisoner cannot liberate himself from his prison. 
R. Elazar once became sick. R. Jochanan came to visit him and saw that he was sleeping in a dark room. Whereupon R. Jochanan uncovered his own arm and immediately the room grew light. R. Jochanan then noticed that R. Elazar was weeping. "Why art thou weeping?" asked R. Jochanan. "Is it because thou hast not learned sufficiently of the Torah? Behold we are taught (in a Mishnah) 'No matter whether one [offers] much or little, only the intentions of his heart shall count for the sake of Heaven.' Is it because you are in need and poor? [Do you know that] not everyone deserves two tables (in this world and the world to come). Is it because of trouble from your children? Here is a bone of my tenth son [whom I have buried — hence you are not the only one who has such troubles]." "I weep," said R. Elazar to him, "for that beauty which will decay in the earth." "For that," said R. Jochanan, "you really ought to weep," and both wept. "Do you love the afflictions?" R. Jochanan meanwhile asked of him. "[I love] neither them nor their rewards," answered R. Elazar. "Then give me your hand." R. Elazar did so and was made well. 
R. Huna had four hundred barrels of wine which had turned into vinegar. On hearing of his misfortune, R. Juda, brother of R. Sala the pions, accompanied by Rabbis, or as some say, R. Ada b. Ahaba, accompanied by Rabbis, came to visit him. "Let the master," said they, "investigate his affairs." "What !'" said he. "Do you believe me to have been guilty of wrong-doing ?" "Shall we then," responded they, "suspect the Holy One. praised be He ! of executing judgment unjustly?" R. Huna then said, "If you have heard aught against me [don't conceal it] tell it to me." So they said to him, "We heard that the master allows his tenant no share in the wines [when they are pruned]." "Ave,' said R. Huna, "he has stolen all the produce of my vineyards and has left nothing for me." "There is a maxim." they replied, "that whoever steals from a thief smells of theft." "If so," said he, "I promise to give him his share." Thereupon according to some the vinegar turned to wine again, and according to others, the price of vinegar rose to the price of wine. 
It is taught that Abba Benjamin says: "I was always sorry for two things, that my prayer should be in front of my bed, and my bed should be placed between the north and the south." My prayer should be in front of my bed. What is meant by 'in front of my bed' ? Shall I say it means to pray near the bed? Has not R. Juda said in the name of Rab, and according to others it was R. Joshua b. Levi who said: "Whence do we learn that he who prays shall have nothing between him and the wall? It is said (Is. 38, 2.) Then did Hezekiah turn his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord." [Hence we see, that a man ought not to pray before his bed.] Do not say 'Before the bed,' but say 'Immediately after rising.' And what does he mean by 'My bed shall be placed between the north and the south'? This refers to what R. Chama the son of R. Chanina and according to others R. Isaac said: "He who places his bed between the south and the north will have male children ; as it is said (Ps. 17, 14.) And whose belly thou fillest with thy hidden treasury they will be satisfied with sons." Rab. Nachman b. Isaac said: "It will also prevent his wife from having a mis-carriage ; for it is written here. Thou fillest their belly, and it is written there (Gen. 25, 24.) And when her days to he delivered were fulfilled." It was taught that Abba Benjamin says: "Two entered the synagogue to pray; one of them finished his prayer first and went out without waiting for his friend ; will his prayer be torn to pieces, as it is said (Job 18, 4.) He teareth himself in his anger: shall for thy sake the earth be forsaken? And moreover he causes [by his action] the Shechina to depart from Israel, as it is said (Ib. ib. ib.) And shall the Tzur move away out of His place? And the word Tzur, refers only to the Holy One, praised be He! as it is said (Deu. 32, 18.) Of the Rock (Tzur) that begot thee thou wast unmindful." And if he waits for his friend what shall his reward be? (Fol. 6a) R. Jose the son of R. Chanina said : "He will be worthy of the following blessings which are said (Is. 48, 18.) Oh, that thou hadst but listened to my commandments! Then would have been as a river thy piece. and as the waves of the sea, thy prosperity." 
We are taught that Abba Benjamin says : "The prayers of men are not heard [by God] save only when they come from the synagogue, for it is written (I Kin. 8, 28.) To listen, unto the song of Thy praise and unto Thy prayer, i.e., in the place where songs of praise are said, there should be the place of prayer." 
Rabin b. R. Ada said in the name of R. Isaac: "Whence do we learn that God frequents the synagogue? It is said (Ps. 82, 1.) God standeth in the Congregation of God; whence do we learn that when ten men are praying together the Sheehina rests with them? It is said (Ib.) God standeth in the congregation of God; whence do we learn that when three are sitting and discharging judgment, the Sheehina rests with them? It is said (Ib.) In the midst doth He judge. And whence do we learn that when two are sitting together and studying the Torah. the Sheehina is with them? It is said (Malachi 3, 16.) Then conversed they that feared the Lord, one with another; and the Lord listened and heard it, and there was written a book of remembrance before him for those who feared the Lord and for those who respect his name." What should be understood by the words. And for those who respect His name? R. Ashi said: "Even when one intended to observe a commandment but was accidentally prevented from doing so, it is credited to him as if he had actually observed it." And whence do we learn that even if one sits and studies the Torah, the Sheehina is with him? It is said (Ex. 20, 24.) In every place where I shall permit my name to be mentioned, I will come unto thee and I will bless thee. Now let us see, since we know that the Sheehina is even with one, why is it necessary to infer that it rests with two? Because if two study together the Sheehina inscribes their words in the book of remembrances ; for one, however, it does not inscribe his words in the book of remembrances. Since we know that when two study, the Sheehina is with them, why do we need any inference for three? Because we should not think that discharging judgment is merely bringing peace and nothing else, and the Sheehina therefore is not with them. It informs us then that discharging judgment is as important as the Torah : and since we know that the Sheehina is with three, why do we need the inference concerning ten? Because in the case of ten people, the Sheehina precedes, but for three, the Sheehina does not appear until the three are together. 
R. Abin b. R. Ada, in the name of R. Isaac, said: "Whence do we learn that the Holy One, praised be He! lays Tephilin? It is said (Is. 62, 8.) Sworn hath the Lord by His right hand and by the arm of His strength. By His right hand, is meant the Torah, for it is said (Deu. 33, 2.) From His right hand, He gave a fiery law unto them; and by His strength, is meant Tephilin; as it is said (Ps. 29, 11.) The Lord will give strength unto His people. How do we know that the Tephilin are a strength to Israel ? It is said (Deu. 28, 10.) And all the nations of the earth shall see, that Thou art called by the name of the Lord, and they shall be afraid of Thee; and we are also taught that R. Eliezer, the Great, says 'This (the above verse) means the Tephilin of the head.'' R. Nachman b. Isaac said to R. Chiya b. Abin : "What is written in the Tephilin of the Sovereign of the universe ?" "It is written," he answered, "Who is like thy people Israel, the only nation." (I Chr. 17, 21.) "And does the Holy One, praised be He ! praise himself with the glory of Israel?" "Yea, for it is written (Deu. 26, 17.) Thou hast this day acknowledged the Lord, etc., and the Lord hath acknowledged thee, this day, i.e., the Holy One, praised be He! said unto Israel 'You have made me the only object of love in the world — as it is written (Deu. 6, 4.) Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, is one God; I will therefore make you the only object of love in the world — as it is written (I Chr. 17, 21.) And who is like thy people, Israel the only nation'" R. Acha, the son of Raba, said to R. Ashi : "You may be right concerning one section of the Tephilin, what about the remaining sections ?" "In the remaining sections," [said R. Ashi] "are. For what great nation is there (Deu. 4, 7) ; And what great nation (Ib. ib.) ; Happy art thou, O Israel! (Ib. 33, 29) ; Or hath a God essayed, (Ib. 4, 34.) So that he may set thee, the highest (Ib. 26, 19)." "If so then there are more than four sections?" "But," [said he], "Or what great nation is there. And what great nation, both being practically [in meaning] alike, are one section; Happy art thou Israel, and For what part of a nation, are another section ; Or hath a God essayed, is the third section; and So that He may set thee the highest, is the fourth section; and all these verses are written and [put together into one section which is] placed also in the Tephilin of the hand. 
Rabin b. R. Ada in the name of R. Isaac said: "Whoever frequents the synagogue [daily] and misses one day, the Holy One, praised be He ! inquires about him ; for it is written (Is. 50, 10.) Who is among you, that feareth the Lord, that hearkeneth to the voice of His servant? Though he has walked in darkness and had no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord; i.e., if he went to perform a meritorious deed [and was therefore absent from synagogue] there will be light unto him ; but if his absence is due to personal business, then there will be no light unto him for he should have placed his trust in God." 
R. Jochanan said : When the Holy One, praised be He ! enters the synagogue and does not find ten [men] present, His anger is immediately stirred, as it is said (Is. 50, 2.) Why did I come and no man was there, did I call with none to answer." 
R. Chelbo said, in the name of R. Huna: "The God of Abraham will help him who chooses a regular place for his prayers and when he dies, people will say of him, 'Woe, humble one ! Woe pious ! one of the real disciples of our father Abraham !' And whence do we know that Abraham had appointed a certain place [for his prayers] ? For it is written (Gen. 19, 27.) And Abraham rose early in the morning to the place where he had stood before the Lord. And the word Omad (stood) refers to prayer, as it is said (Ps. 106, 30.) And Phineas stood and prayed." R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai said: "He who designates a certain place for prayer, will cause all his enemies to fall before him. for it is said (II Sam. 7, 10.) I have procured a place for my people, Israel, and I have planted them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and be no more troubled; and that the children of wickedness shall not afflict them any more as heretofore." R. Huna raised the following contradictory question: "It is written (in them), and it is written (Chr. 17, 9.) [of the same thing] Lechalotho (to destroy them). At the beginning the wicked merely afflicted Israel but later they tried to destroy Israel." 
R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna said : "He who leaves the synagogue should not hurry." "This," says Abaye, "is only When he leaves, but on going to [the synagogue] it is meritorious to hasten, as it is said (Hos. 6, 3.) Let us know and hasten to serve the Lord." R. Zeira said: "At first when I saw the Rabbis hurrying to the session [of learning] on the Sabbath I thought to myself, 'The Rabbis profane the Sabbath.' But after I heard of what R. Tanchum said in the name of R. Joshua b. Levi : 'Always shall a man run to study, even though on the Sabbath, as it is said (Ib. 11, 10.) They shall follow after the Lord when, He will roar like a lion,' I, too, began to run." 
R. Zeira said: "The [chief] reward for attending a lecture lies in running" [to it, i.e., anxiety to hear it]. Abaye said: "The [chief] merit in attending the public lecture before a holiday [when the laws concerning the holidays are explained] lies in being pressed [on account of the crowd]." Raba said: "The [chief] merit for studying Halacha is in obtaining a full explanation of it." R. Pappa said: "The [chief] merit of attending a funeral is the silence." R. Zutra said: "The [chief] merit for observing a feast day is charity." R. Shesheth said: "The [chief] merit of a funeral address is in the lifting up [the voice in lamentation]." R. Ashi said: "The [chief] merit in attending a wedding festival is the words [of entertanment] ." 
R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna said : "Whoever prays with his back turned to the synagogue is to be called wicked, as it is said (Ps. 12, 9.) On every side do the wicked walk." Abaye said: "This refers only to one who does not turn his face towards the synagogue but if he does turn his face towards the synagogue it does not matter even if his back is towards the worshipers." 
There was one man who prayed with his back turned to the synagogue; Elijah happened to pass by. It seemed to Elijah that the man prayed in the manner of an Arabian merchant, and he said to him: "Art thou standing before thy Master as if there were two dominions?" Thereupon Elijah drew his sword and killed the man. 
R. Jochanan and R. Elazar both said: "When a man must apply for help to his fellow-men, his face changes like [the worm called] Kerum; as it is said (Ps. 12, 9.) Like a worm, so is the cheapness of the sons of men." What is Kerum? When R. Dimi came he related that among the sea-coast towns, there is a certain worm, the name of which is 'Kerum', and when the sun shines upon him, he changes into various colors. R. Ami and R. Ashi both say: "He [who has to apply for charity] is as if two judgments were passed upon him — those of fire and water, as it is said (Ps. 66, 12.) Thou hast caused man to ride on our heads; we entered into fire and into water." 
R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna said further: "A man shall always be strict in the observance of the Mincha service, for Elijah, the Prophet, was answered only at the Mincha service, as it is said (I Kin. 18, 36-37.) And it came to pass at (the time of) the offering of the perpetual evening sacrifice (Mincha) that Elijah the Prophet came near, and said: Answer me, O Lord, answer me, i. e., answer my prayer that a fire descend from Heaven, and answer me that they shall not say it was an act of magic." R. Jochanan said: "In the evening service also [shall a man pay heed], for it is said (Ps. 141, 2.) May my prayers be valued as incense before Thee; lifting up of my hands as the evening offering." R. Nachman b. Isaac said: "To the morning service also [shall a man pay heed,] for it is said (Ps. 5, 4.) O Lord, in the morning do Thou hear my voice." 
Further said R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna: "He who does not cheer the bridegroom, whose wedding feast he has enjoyed, transgresses against the five voices (the passage where voice is mentioned five times) (Jer. 33, 11.) The voice of gladness, the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those who say Praise ye the Lord of Hosts." And if he does cheer him, what will his reward be? R. Simon b. Lakish said: "He will merit the Torah, which was given with five voices, as it is said (Ex. 19, 16.) And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders, and the voice of the cornet, etc.. And the voice of the cornet was, etc., And God answered him with a loud voice." R. Abuhu said: ["To cheer the bridegroom is considered meritorious] as if he brought a thanksgiving offering; for it is said (Jer. 33, 11.) Of those that bring thanksgiving offering unto the house of the Lord." R. Nachman b. Isaac said: "It is as if he had rebuilt one of the ruins of Jerusalem, for it is said (Ib.) For I will cause their captivity to return, as at the first, saith the Lord." 
R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna also said : "Whoever has fear of God, his words will be heard;" as it is said (Ecc. 12, 13.) The end of the matter is, let us sum up the whole; fear God, and keep His commandments, for this is the whole [duty of] man." What is meant by For this is the whole duty of man. R. Elazar said: "The Holy One, praised be He ! said 'The whole world would not have been created if not for him [who fears God].'" R. Abba b. Cahana said: "This [fear of God] is equal in importance to that of the whole world put together." R. Simon b. Azai, and according to some, R. Simon b. Zoma said: "The whole world would not have been created if not for the purpose of being host to him (who fears God)." 
R. Chelbo in the name of R. Huna further said: "He who knows that his friend is accustomed to greet him, shall try to greet him first, for it is said (Ps. 34, 15.) Seek peace and pursue it, and when one responds not to a greeting he receives, he is to be called robber, as it is said (Is. 3, 14.) But ye who have eaten up the vineyard; the plunder of the poor is in your houses." [What have the poor that they were plundered of? Nothing but their greeting.] 
(Fol. 7a) R. Jochanan said in the name of R. Jose b. Zimra : "Whence do we know that the Holy One, praised be He! prayeth? It is said (Is. 56, 7.) Even these will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer. It does not say in their [house of] prayer, but in my [house of] prayer. We learn from this that the Holy One, praised be He! prays." What doeth He pray? R. Zutra b. Tubia, in the name of Rab, said: "[Thus He prayeth] 'May it be my will that my mercy overcome my anger; and let my compassion rule over my attributes [of Justice] that I may deal with my children in attributes of kindness; and out of regard to them may I overlook Judgment.' " It is taught that Rabbi Ishmael b. Elisha said: "Once, when I entered tlie Holy of Holies to burn the incense, I saw the Lord of all Hosts sitting on a high and exalted throne, and He said to me 'Ishmael, my son, bless me!' I replied, 'Sovereign of the Universe ! may it be Thy will that Thy mercy overcome Thy anger, and Thy compassion may overrule Thy other attributes ; let Thy conduct toward Thy children be with the attribute of loving kindness and enter inside the line of justice; and, out of regard to them mayest Thou overlook Judgment !' The Lord shook His head at me" [as a sign confirming my prayer] . By this R. Ishmael wants to teach us that the blessing of a common man shall not be lightly esteemed. R. Elazar said in the name of R. Chanina: "Never shall the blessing of even a common man be considered insignificant in your eyes; for two great men of their generation were blessed by simple men and their blessings were fulfilled. They are: David and Daniel — David was blessed by Aravnah, as it is written (IE Sam. 24, 23.) And Aravnah said unto the king. May the Lord thy God receive thee favorably. Daniel was blessed by King Darius; as it is written (Dan. 6, 17.) May thy God whom thou dost worship continually, truly deliver thee." 
R. Jochanan in the name of R. Jose said: "Whence do we learn that we must not attempt to appease a man at the moment of his excitement? It is written (Ex. 33, 14.) My presence shall walk before you, and I will give thee rest, i.e., the Holy One, praised be He! said unto Moses. "Wait for me until my excitement shall subside and I shall then give thee rest.' " Is wrath [to be ascribed] to the Holy One — praised be He ? Yea ! As it is taught; And a God who is angry every day (Ps. 7, 12). And how long does His anger last? For a moment. And how long lasts a moment? One fifty-eight thousand eight hundred and eighty-eighth part of an hour; and this is meant by the word Regga (moment) ; and no creature is able to determine that exact moment [when the anger arises] except Bilam the wicked, for it is written (Num. 24, 16.) And knoweth the knowledge of the most High. How is it possible? If he did not know even the temperament of his animal, how could he acquire a knowledge of the Most High ? We must therefore say that he knew how to determine the exact hour in which the Holy One, praised be He! is angry. And this is meant by the prophet who said to Israel (Micha 6, 5.) O my people, do but remember what Balak the king of Moab resolved in order to know the gracious benefits of the Lord. What is meant by The gracious benefits of the Lord. R. Elazar said: "Thus said the Holy One, praised be He ! unto Israel. 'Do but remember how many gracious benefits I bestowed unto ye, that I kept myself back from becoming angry during all the days of Bilam, the wicked; for my anger might have inflicted a great misfortune upon them [in that generation].' And this is meant by Bilam when he said. (Xum. 23, 8.) How shall I denounce, whom God hath not denounced? And how shall I defy, when the Lord hath not defied?" And how long endureth His anger? A Regga (moment). How long does a Regga last? R. Abin and according to some R. Abina said : "A Regga lasts as long as it takes to utter it." And whence do we learn that God is angry? It is said (Ps. 30, 6.) For His anger is momentary, (but) life rests upon his favor. And if you wish I say from this (Is. 26, 20.) Hide thyself but for about a moment, until anger passeth away. And when is He angry ? Abaye said : "During the first three hours of the day, when the crest of the cock becomes white and he stands on one leg." But the cock stands like that all the time? At all times it has red stripes [in the white crest], but in that particular hour there are no red stripes whatsoever. 
A certain heretic was in the neighborhood of R. Joshua b. Levi, and annoyed him exceedingly, questioning him about various passages. One day R. Joshua b. Levi took a cock, tied it to his bed and watched it, thinking that as soon as he would notice the sign, he would curse the heretic. But before the time came, sleep overtook him. So he said: "I learn from this [incident] that it is not proper to do such a thing: And he is beneficent in all His work, it is written (Ps. 145, 17.) and it is also written (Pr. 17, 26.) Punishment, even to the just, is not good." It was taught in the name of R. Meier: "At the time when the sun rises and all the heathen Kings of the East and West, with their crowns upon their heads, prostrate themselves before the sun, there-upon the Holy One, praised he He! immediately becomes angry." 
Further said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Jose: "One chastisement in the heart of man (self reproach) is better than many lashes, as it is said (Hos. 2, 9.) And she will pursue her lovers, then will she say, 'I will go and return to my first husband; for if was better with me then than now.'" Resh Lakish said: "It is better than one hundred stripes, as it is said (Pr. 17, 10.) A reproof penetrateth more deeply into a wise man than a hundred lashes into a fool." 
Further, said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Jose : "Three things did Moses request of the Holy One, praised be He! and they were all granted unto him. He asked that the Sheehina shall dwell in Israel and it was granted, as it is said (Ex. 33, 16.) Is it not in that because Thou goest with us? He asked that the Sheehina might not dwell with heathens and it was granted to him, as it is said (Ib.) So shall we be distinguished, I and thy people. He asked that the Holy One, praised be He ! make known His ways , and it was granted to him, as it is said (Ib, ib. 18.) And he said, let me see, I beseech Thee, Thy glory, i. e., he said before the Holy One, praised be He! 'Sovereign of the universe, why is there a righteous man who prospers while another righteous person suffers? Some wicked person prospers while another wicked person suffers?' He answered him: 'Moses! the righteous person that prospers is righteous himself, and the son of a righteous one; the righteous one that suffers" is righteous himself but the son of a, wicked one [he suffers for the sins of his parents] ; the wicked person who prospers is wicked himself but the son of a righteous person, and the wicked person who suffers is wicked himself and the son of a wicked one.'" The Master said above, "The righteous person that prospers is righteous himself and the son of a righteous one; the righteous one that suffers is righteous himself but the son of a wicked one." Is this so? Behold! It is written (Ex. 20, 5.) Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children; and it is written (Deu. 24, 16.) Fathers shall not be put to death for the children, and we have asked the question as to the contradiction of these two passages, and answered; there is no difficulty. One passage refers to those who continue the [wicked] deeds of their parents, and the other passage refers to those who do not continue the [wicked] deeds of their parents. [Hence we see that a righteous man, even if the son of a wicked man does not suffer?] But we must say that He said thus to him: "A righteous one who prospers, is one who is perfectly righteous; a righteous one who suffers, is not a perfectly righteous one; a wicked one who prospers, is one not really wicked; a wicked one who suffers, is one grossly wicked." And this [saying of Rabbi Jochanan] differs from that of R. Meier, for R. Meier said : "Two requests were granted to Moses and one was not granted, for it is said (Ex. 33, 19.) And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, although he does not deserve it; And I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, although he does not deserve it." 
And He said: Thou, canst not see my face. (Ib.) R. Joshua b. Karcha said: "Thus said the Holy One, praised be He! unto Moses: 'When I was willing [to reveal myself] thou wast unwilling (didst hide thy face) ; now when thou art willing [to see me] I am not willing [to reveal myself ].' " And this differs from the opinion of R. Samuel b. Nachmeini who quoted R. Jonathan ; for R. Samuel b. Nachmeini said in the name of Jonathan : "On account of three things Moses earned the merit of the following three things; viz., for And Moses hid his face, (Ib. 3, 6.) he earned the merit of A shining face; for He was afraid (Ib.) he earned the merit of, And they were afraid to come nigh unto him (Ib. 34, 30.) ; and for To look up to God (Ib. 3, 6.) he earned the merit of. And the similitude of the Lord doth he behold (Num. 12, 8)." [Hence it shows that he was rewarded for hiding his face and differing with R. Joshua B. Karcha]. And then I will remove my hand, and thou shalt see my back; but my face shall not be seen (Ex. 33, 23). R. Chama b. Bizua in the name of R. Simon the Pious said: "This means that the Holy One, praised be He ! showed to Moses the knot of the Tephilin (Philacteries)." 
(Ib. b) R. Jochauan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai said : "Since the day the Holy One, praised be He! created the world there was no man who called the Holly One, praised be He! 'Lord' (Adon) until Abraham came and called him 'Lord,' for it is said (Gen. 15, 8.) And he said Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?" Rab said "Daniel also would not have been answered were it not for the sake of Abraham, for it is said (Dan. 9, 17.) And now listen, O our God! to the prayer of thy servant, for the sake of the Lord; — 'for Thy sake' he [Daniel] ought to have said? But [he prayed] for the sake of Abraham, who called you Lord." 
Again said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai : "Since the day when the Holy One, praised be He ! created the world, there was no man who thanked the Holy One, praised be He ! until Leah came and thanked Him, as it is said (Gen. 29, 35.) This lime will I thank the Lord." 
What is the meaning of being called Reuben ? R. Elazar said: "Leah said, 'See the difference between my son and the son of my father-in-law (Esau) ; whereas my father-in-law's son sold his birthright to Jacob of his own accord, as it is written (Gen. 25, 33.) And he sold his right of first-horn unto Jacob, yet what happened? As it is written (Ib. 27, 41.) And Esau hated Jacob, and it is also written (Ib. ib. 36.) And he said, hath he been therefore named Jacob, because he hath supplanted me these two times; but my son, although it was against his will that Joseph took from him the birthright, as it is written (I Chr. 5, 1.) But when he defiled his father's bed was his birth-right given unto the sons of Joseph; yet he never envied him, for it is written (Gen. 37, 21.) And when Reuben heard it he delivered him out of their hands.'" Why was she named Ruth ? R. Jochanan said "Be cause she merited that from her shall come forth David, who satisfied the Holy One, praised be He ! with songs and praises." And whence do we derive that the name is the cause? R. Elazar said: "It is said (Ps. 46, 9.) Come, look at the deeds of the Lord, who hath made desolation on the earth. Do not read it Shamoth (desolation), but read Shemoth (names)." 
Further said E. Jochanan in the name of R. Jose: "Every utterance which came forth from the mouth of the Holy One, praised be He ! for good purpose even when upon condition, was never retracted." Whence do we derive this? From our Teacher Moses, as it is said (Deu. 9, 14.) Let me alone, and I may destroy them, and blot out their names from under the heavens, and I will make of thee a nation mightier and more numerous than they; and although Moses invoked mercy concerning this thing and succeeded in annuling that decree, yet it [the promise. And I will make thee a nation mightier and more numerous] was fulfilled to his children, as is said (I Chr. 23, 15-16.) The sons of Moses were Gershon, and Eliezer, and the sons of Eliezer were Rechabyah, the chief, the sons of Rechabyah became exceedingly great in number, and R. Joseph taught they were more than sixty myriads. This is inferred from the two similar words, Rabu, Rabu: It is written here. They were exceedingly great in number (Rabu), and it is written there (Ex. 1, 7.) They were fruitful and exceedingly great in number (Vayirbu). 
(Ib. b) Further said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai : "A degenerate child in a man's house is worse than the war of Gog and Magog, for it is said (Ps. 3, 1.) A song of David, when he fled from before Abshalom, his son. Immediately after this is written. Lord! How numerous are my assailants! How many that rise up against me, while of the war of Gog and Magog it is written (Ib. 2, 1.) Wherefore do nations rage and people meditate vain things? But How numerous are my assailants is not stated [in connection with the war of Gog and Magog]." 
A song of David, when he fled from Abshaalom his son (Ib.) It should have been said, A lamentation of David? R. Simon b. Jochai said: "Unto what can David's incident be likened? Unto a man against whom a large note was brought forth to be paid; before he paid it he felt grieved and sorrowful, but after he had paid it, he rejoiced. So was David — since the Holy One. praised be He ! said to him (II Sam. 12, 11.) Behold! I will raise up against thee evil out of thy own house; he felt grieved, for he feared it would be a slave or a bastard who would have no mercy on him. But when he saw it was Abshalom [his own son] he was glad and composed a song." 
Further said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai : "It is permitted to quarrel with the wicked in this world, because it is said (Pr. 28, 4.) They that forsake the Torah praise the wicked, but those who observe the Torah contend with them." We also have a Baraitha to the same effect. R. Dostai b. Mathun says: "It is permitted to quarrel with the wicked in this world ; as it is said (Pr. 28, 4.) They that forsake the Torah praise the wicked, but those who observe the Torah contend with them; and if some one should whisper to you saying: 'Behold ! it is written (Ps. 37, 1.) Of David! Do not fret thyself because of the evil-doers.' Tell him that he whose heart smites him [who has no clear conscience] says so, for the real meaning of the passage is: Do not compete with the evil-doers, i.e., to be among evil-doers; And neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity, to be like them. And it is also said (Pr. 23, 17.) Let not thy heart be envious against sinners, but in the fear of the Lord (remain) at all times." Is that so? Behold! R. Isaac said: "If you see a wicked man upon whom fortune smiles, do not quarrel with him, for it is said (Ps. 10, 5.) Prosperous are his ways at all times; and moreover, he always wins by law, as it is said (Ib.) Far aloof (remain) Thy punishments from him; and moreover, he sees [revenge] in his enemies, as it is said (Ib.) All his assailants, he puffeth at them." There is no difficulty [in understanding this] ; one deals with secular affairs and the other deals with. divine affairs, and, if you wish, you may say both passages deal with divine affairs and there is no difficulty ; for one deals with a wicked man upon whom fortune smiles, and the other with the wicked man upon whom fortune does not smile ; and, if you wish, you may say both deal with a wicked man upon whom fortune smiles; yet there is no difficulty, for one deals with a perfectly righteous man and the other with one who is not righteous throughout ; for R. Huna said: "What means the passage (Habakuk 1, 13.) Wherefore wilt thou look upon those that deal treacherously : be silent when the wicked swallows us him that is more righteous than he? How can it be possible that a wicked man should swallow up a righteous man? Behold! It is written (Ps. 37, 33.) The Lord will not leave him in his hand, and it is written (Pr. 12, 21.) No wrong can come unawares to the righteous! We must therefore say: "One, more righteous than he is, the wicked person does destroy, but he cannot destroy the perfectly righteous man." And, if you wish, you may say that when fortune smiles upon a man, it is different [and even one perfectly righteous should not fret at him]. 
Again said R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai : "The obedience [to the law] is more important than the study; for it is said (II Kings 3, 11.) Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, who poured water on the hand of Elijah. Poured, is said, not Studied; from this we infer that obedience [to the law] is more important than the study." 
R. Isaac said to R. Nachman : "Why did not the master come to the synagogue to pray ?" "Because I was not feeling well," answered R. Nachman. "The master should have gathered ten in his house and then prayed," said R. Isaac. "It was too hard a task for me," said R. Nachman. "If so," remarked R. Isaac, "then why did not the master direct the Sexton to inform him when the public pray? [so that he might pray at that time?]" "Why are you so particular about it?" asked R. Nachman, "Because," said R. Isaac, "R. Jochanan in the name of R. Simon b. Jochai said: (Fol. 8a) 'What is meant by the passage (Ps. 69, 14.) But as for me, I direct my prayer unto Thee, O Lord, in a time of favor. When is it a time of favor? It is when the community at large prays.'" R. Jose, the son of Chanina said: "We infer it from this, (Isa. 49, 8.) Thus hath said the Lord, in the time of favor have I answered thee." R. Chanina said : "We derive it from this, (Job 36, 5.) Behold, God is mighty and despiseth no one, and it is written (Ps. 55, 19.) He delivered my soul in peace from the battle against me; for in multitudes are they (contending) with me." We have also a Baraitha to the same effect, R. Nathan said : "Whence do we know that the Holy One, praised be He! despiseth not the prayers of a community? It is written (Job 36, 5.) Behold God, many He doth not despise, and it is written (Ps. 55, 19.) He delivereth my soul in peace from the battle against me; for in multitudes, etc., i.e., the Holy One, praised be He! says: 'When any one occupies himself with the study of the Torah and the practice of loving kindness I consider as if he delivered me and my children from the nations.' " 
R. Levi said : "Whoever has a synagogue in his town, and does not go there to pray, is to be called a wicked neighbor, as it is said (Jer. 12, 14.) Thus hath said the Lord against all my wicked neighbors; moreover by his actions he causes exile to himself and his children, as it is said (Ib.) I will pluck them out of their land, and the house of Judah will I pluck out from the midst of them." 
They told R. Jochanan. that there are aged people in Babylon, and he remarked wonderingly, "It is written (Deu. 11, 21.) In order that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children in the land which the Lord swore unto your fathers, but not outside of Palestine." But when he was informed [of the fact] that they come early to the synagogue, and leave it late, then he said: "Aye, it is this which helps them, as R. Jochanan b. Levi said unto his children, 'Come early and remain late in the synagogue, in order that you may live long.'" R. Acha the son of R. Chanina said: "From what Biblical passage [do we learn this]? Happy is the man that hearkeneth unto me, watching day by day at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors (Pr. 8, 34), and after this is written. For he who finds me, finds life." 
R. Chisda said: "A man shall always enter two doors to the synagogue." What does he mean by "two doors"? He means that a man should wait as long as it takes to walk the length of two doors, and then begin to pray. 
For this shall every pious one pray unto Thee at the time when Thou mayest be found (Pr. 32, 6). R. Chanina said: "L-eth Metzo, (At the time when thou mayest be found) alludes [to the time when one is about to take a] wife, as it is written (Pr. 18, 22.) Whoso hath found a wife hath found happiness." In Palestine, when a man married he was asked Matzah (found), or Motzei (find). Matzah, as it is written (Pr. 18, 22.) Whoso hath found (Matza) a wife hath found happiness; Motzei, as it is written (Ecc. 7, 26.) And I find (Motzei) the woman more bitter than death. R. Nathan said: "L-eth Metzo, refers to the Torah, as it is written (Pr. 8, 35.) For he who findeth me (the Torah), findeth life." R. Nachman b. Isaac said: "L-eth Metzo, means [the time of] death, as it is written (Ps. 68, 21.)The escape from death." We have also a Baraitha to the same effect: There are nine hundred and three kinds of deaths in the world, as it is said (Ib.) The escape from death (Totzaoth). The numerical value of the word Totzaoth, amounts to nine hundred and three ; the hardest of all deaths is croup, and the easiest of all is the divine kiss ; croup is like a thorn in a ball of wool, which [if one tries to tear loose] lacerates backward (in the opposite direction of the knots) ; others say as the gushing water at the entrance of a canal [when the sluice bars are raised] ; the kiss referred to is like the extraction of a hair from milk. 
R. Jochanan said : "L-eth Metzo, refers to the grave." R. Chanina said: "Where is the Biblical passage to prove it? (Job 3, 22.) Who would rejoice, even to exulting, who would he glad could they but find a grave." 
Rabba b. R. Shila said: "Thus it is that people say : 'Man ought to pray for peace even to the last clod of earth thrown on his grave.' " 
Mar Zutra said: "L-eth Metzo, refers to the necessity of living in a place where there are sanitary conditions." The sages of Palestine [upon hearing all the opinions in explaining the above passage] remarked that Mar Zutra's opinion is the best of all. 
Raba said to Rafram b. Papa: "Speak to us, Master, of those excellent things you said in the name of R. Chisda in reference to the synagogue." "This is what R. Chisda said," said [Rafram] to him : " 'What is the meaning of the passage (Ps. 87, 2.) The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. The Lord loveth the gates that are marked with the signs of Halacha (laws) more than the synagogues and the houses of study.' and this agrees with R. Chiya b. Ami who said, in the name of Ulla: 'Since the destruction of the Temple, nothing has remained to the Holy One, praised be He! in His world, but four cubits of the Halacha [where it is studied].' " Abaye said : "At first I was accustomed to study in the house and pray in the synagogue, but since I heard what R. Cliiya b. Ami said in the name of Ulla, that since the destruction of the Temple, nothing has remained to the Holy One, praised be He! in his world but four cubits of the Halacha, I never prayed but where I studied.'" K. Ami and R. Assi, although they both had twelve synagogues in Tiberia, still did not pray elsewhere but between the pillars where they had studied. 
R. Chiya b. Ami, in the name of Ulla said : "A man shall always live in the same place where his teacher lives, for as long as Shimi b. Geira lived, solomon did not marry Pharaoh's daughter." Behold, we are taught that a man shall not live in the same place with his teacher! This is not difficult to explain, for the former deals with a disciple who bends before (obeys) his teacher, and the latter deals with a disciple who does not bend before (obey) his teacher. Another thing said R. Chiya b. Ami, in the name of Ulla: "He who enjoys life through the labor of his hand, is greater than he who fears God, for concerning the man who fears God, it is written (Ps. 112, 1.) Happy is the man who feareth the Lord ; while concerning the man who enjoys the labor of his hand, it is written (Ib. 128, 2.) When thou eateth of the labor of thy hands: (then) wilt thou be happy, and it shall be well with thee. — Wilt thou be happy, in this world. And it shall be well with thee, in the world to come; but concerning the one who fears God it is not said, And it shall be well with thee." 
(Ib. b) Raba said to his children (by way of advice) : "When you cut meat don't cut it on your hand." — Some attribute this to the danger in cutting into the hand and others to the spoiling of the meat. — "And you should not sit down on the bed of an Armenian, and do not pass behind the synagogue at the time the community is praying." Regarding the bed of an Armenian, some say is meant not to go to sleep without the Sh'm'a  which resembles an Armenian bed, and according to others, it means not to marry a proselyte. And, according to others, it means a real Armenian and refers to the incident that happened to R. Papa. R. Papa visited an Armenian and she brought him out a bed bidding him to sit on it. R. Papa refused and said to her: "I shall not sit on it unless thou wilt lift up the bed and show me what is under it." She did so and he noticed a dead child was uader the bed. Since than the sages said : "A man shall not sit on the bed of an Armenian." "Do not pass the rear of the synagogue while the community is praying;" this supports the opinion of R. Joshua b. Levi, who said : "A man has no right to pass behind the synagogue while the community is praying." 
We are taught that R. Akiba says: "For three things do I admire the Medians: when they carve meat, they do it on the table ; when they kiss, they do so only upon the hand ; and when they keep counsel, they do so only in the field." R. Ada b. Ahaba said: "What Biblical passage indicates [that consultation should be held only in the field] ? And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to his flock (Gen. 31, 8)."
 
(Fol. 9a) R. Abba said: "All agree that the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt took place in the evening, as it is said (Deu. 16, 1.) Did the Lord, thy God, bring thee forth out of Egypt by night; and [they also agree] that they did not leave [Egypt] before the next morning, as it is said (Num. 33, 3.) On the morrow after the Passover sacrifice, the children of Israel went out with a high hand, but they differ as to the meaning of Chipazon (In haste, Ex. 12, 11). R. Elazar b. Azariah holds that Chipazon (In haste), refers to the Egyptians who [after realizing the plague of the first-born] hurried the children of Israel to leave ; and R. Akiba holds Chipazon (In haste), refers to the Israelites [who were in haste to leave]." We have also a Baraitha to the same effect: Did the Lord, thy God, bring thee forth out of Egypt by night (Deu. 16, 1). "Did they really go out at night? Behold! it was in the morning, for it is said (Num. 33, 3.) On the morrow after the Passover sacrifice, did the children of Israel go out with a high hand. We must therefore say that the beginning of the deliverance was in the evening." 
Speak. (I beg thee) in the ears of the people (Ex. 11, 2). It was said in the school of R. Janai: "The word Nah, means nothing else but request; the Holy One, blessed he He ! said unto Moses. 'I pray thee go and tell them (Israel) that I request of them they shall ask from the Egyptians silver vessels and golden vessels, lest that righteous one (Abraham) shall not say, Aye, the decree, (Geu. 13, 13.) And they will make them serve and they will afflict them, was indeed fulfilled for them; but [the other half of the decree] And afterwards shall they go out with great substance was not fulfilled.' [When Moses informed Israel of this] they said to Him: '0 that we might go out ourselves.'" This may be likened unto a man detained in prison, who when told by the people that he would be set free the next morning and would receive a large sum of money, said to them: "I pray of you, take me out immediately ; that is all I wish." 
And they caused to give unto them, what they required (Ib.). R. Ami said: We infer from this, that it was given to them against their will." Some say against the will of the Egyptians, and others say against the will of the Israelites; those who say against the will of the Egyptians, infer this from (Ps. 68, 13.) Yet she that tarried at home (Egypt that tarried at home), divided the spoil; and those that say against the will of the Israelites, because of the burden of carrying them; And they emptied out Egypt. (lb.) R. Ami said: "We learn from this that they left her (Egypt) like a net without grain," and Resh Lakish said: "They left her like a depth without fishes."
I will be that I will be (Ex. 3, 14).The Holy One, praised be He! said unto Moses, "Go and tell Israel that I was with you during this subjugation and I will be with you during the next subjugation." So Moses said unto Him: "Sovereign of the Universe, is not the affliction terrible enough when it is really present [without telling of it beforehand] ?" Whereupon the Holy One, praised be He! said unto Moses: "Then go and tell, 'I will be,' sent me unto you." 
Answer me, O Lord, answer me (I Kings 18, 37). R. Abuhu said : "Why did Elijah say twice. Answer me? We infer from this that Elijah said, before the Holy One, praised be He ! 'Sovereign of the Universe, answer me that a fire shall come down from Heaven and consume everything that is upon the altar; and answer me, to remove from their mind that they shall not think it was the result of sorcery,' as it is said (Ib.) Thou hast turned their hearts back again." :
Let us see: The passage (Ps. 19, 15.) May the words of my mouth he acceptable, can be explained in the past tense, and it may be explained in the future tense. Why then have the Rabbis decided to say it after the Eighteen Benedictions and not before? R. Juda, the son of R. Simon b. Pazi, said: "Because David did not say this verse until after he had said eighteen chapters, therefore did the Rabbis decree [to say it] after the Eighteen Benedictions." Is it after eighteen ? Behold ! it is after nineteen ? Aye ! the first two chapters, viz., Happy is the man, and Wherefore do heathens rage, are only one chapter, for R. Juda, the son of R. Simon b. Pazi, said : "One hundred and three chapters were uttered by David, and he did not say Hallelujah until he had contemplated the downfall of the wicked ; as it is said (Ps. 104, 35.) Let the sinners be taken completely out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more; Bless the Lord, O my soul. Hallelujah! Instead of one hundred and three, we ought to say, one hundred and four ? but we infer this, that Blessed is the man, and Why do the heathens rage, are but one psalm. (Fol. 10a) As R. Samuel b. Nachmeini in the name of R. Jonathan said: 'Every chapter that was beloved by David, he began and concluded it with the word, Happy; It began with Happy is the man (Ps. 1, 1), and ended with Happy are all they that put treir trust in Him (Ib. 2, 10).' [This proves that the first two chapters are one]." 
There were some highwaymen in the neighborhood of R. Meier who annoyed him so much that he once prayed that they should die ; but his wife Baruriah said to him : "How do you justify this? [such prayer?] Is it because, it is written (Ps. 104, 35.) Let sin be consumed [which you understand to mean that the wicked should be destroyed] ; behold is it then written The sinners? It is written sin! Besides, read the last part of this verse And the wicked will be no more. Pray, therefore [on their behalf] , that they may be led to repentance and the wicked will be no more." He did pray for them and thereupon they were led to repent. 
A Sadduce once asked R. Abuhu: "It is written (Ps. 3, 1.) A psalm of David when he fled from his son, Abshalom, and it is written (Ib. 57, 1.) By David a Michtam, when he fled from Saul. Let us see, which event occurred first? Was it not the incident with Saul? Why then is it written last? "Aye," R. Abuhu said to him, "you, who do not recognize the rule of contiguous passages find this difficult, but to us who recognize the rule of contiguous passages, it is not at all difficult; for R. Jochanan said: "What is the Biblical proof for the rule of contiguous passage? It is said (Ps. 111, 8.) They are well supported forever and eternally they are framed in truth and uprightness. Why is the story of Abshalom placed near the chapter of Gog and Magog ? If one should ask you, 'Is it possible that a slave (Gog and Magog) shall rebel against his master (God) ?' answer him : 'How is it possible that a son shall rebel against liis own father ? Yet, it did so happen (with Abshalom) ; so is this also possible.' " 
R. Shimi b. Ukba, and some say Mar Ukba, frequented the house of R. Simon b. Pazi., who was accustomed to arrange Agadah before R. Joshua b. Levi, and asked R. Simon b. Pazi : "What is the meaning of the passage (Ps. 103, 1.) Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me (praise) His Holy name." "Come and see,"' said R. Simon b. Pazi to him, "how the custom of the Holy One, praised be He ! differs from the custom of frail man ! The custom of frail man is to form a shape on the wall but he can put into it neither breath nor soul, nor entrails nor bowels, but the Holy One, praised be He ! is not so. He forms a shape within a shape (creates a body within a body) and puts into it breath, soul, entrails and bowels, and it is this that Hannah means when she said (I Sam. 2, 2.) There is none holy like the Lord; for there is none besides Thee, and there is not any rock like our Lord. What is meant by Ein Tzur Keloheinu? It means that there is no shaper like our Lord." And what does it mean by For there is none besides Thee? R. Juda b. Menassya said: "Do not read Ein Biltecha (none besides Thee), but read Ein Lebalathecha (nothing could wear you out), for the nature of the Holy One, praised be He ! is not like the nature of frail man. The works of frail man wear out their maker, but the Holy One, praised be He ! is not so. He wears out his work." "You did not quite understand my question," said R. Shimi b. Ukba to R. Simon b. Pazi, "what I Intended to ask was this : Five times did David say Bless the Lord, O my soul; in reference to what was it said ?" "He said it," [replied R. Simon b. Pazi] "in reference to the Holy One, praised be He! and in reference to the soul, for just as the Holy One, praised be He! filleth the entire world, so does the soul fill the entire body; just as the Holy One, praised be He ! seeth, but cannot be seen, so does the soul see, but cannot be seen ; just as the Holy One, praised be He ! feedeth the entire world, so does the soul feed the entire body; just as the Holy One, praised be He ! is pure, so is the soul pure ; and just as the Holy One, praised be He! dwelleth in a place secret from all, so does the soul dwell in a secret place; therefore, let that (the soul) which possesses these five attributes come and praise Him, to whom these five attributes belong." 
R. Hamnuna said: "What means the passage (Ecc. 8, 1.) Who is like the wise? And who knoweth (as well) the explanation of a thing? i. e., who is like the Holy One, praised be He! who knoweth how to compromise 'between two righteous men, between (King) Hezekiah and Isaiah? Hezekiah said, Isaiah ought to come to me for we find that Elijah went to Ahab, as it is said (I Kings 18, 2.) And Elijah went to show himself unto Ahab; and Isaiah said Hezekiah ought to come to me (to pay me a visit), just as we find that Jehoram, the son of Ahab went to Elisha. What did the Holy One, praised be He ! do ? He brought affliction on Hezekiah, and then said to Isaiah: 'Go and visit the sick,' as it is said (Isaiah, 38, 1.) In those days Hezekiah fell sick unto death; and there came unto him Isaiah, the son of Amotz, the Prophet, and said to him: Thus hath the Lord said. Give thy charge to thy house for thou Shalt die and not live." What is meant by Thou shalt die and not live? [if he will die, he will surely not live]. Thou shalt die in this world, and thou shalt not live in the world to come. "Why so severe a punishment?" asked Hezekiah. "Because," said Isaiah, "thou hast not married." "Aye," said Hezekiah, "it was because I foresaw through the Divine Spirit, that bad children will come forth from me." "What have you to do with, the secret of the Almighty ? Whatever you are commanded to do, you ought to fulfill, and whatever pleases the Holy One, praised be He! let Him do." "If so,"' said Hezekiah, "then give me thy daughter, Perhaps thy merits combined with mine will prove effective to bring forth good children." "But," said Isaiah, "it has already been decreed that you must die." "Aye, son of Amotz," exclaimed Hezekiah, "finish thy prophecy and go forth! for thus have I a tradition from the house of my father's father (David) : 'Even if the sword already touches the throat, yet should a man not refrain from praying for mercy.' " It has been taught that R. Jochanan and R. Elazar both say, "Even if the sword already touches the throat, yet should a man not refrain from praying for mercy, as it is said (Job 13, 15.) Lo, though he slay me yet will I trust in Him (Ib. b)." Soon after this it is said Then did Hezekiah turn his fare toward the Kir, and prayed to the Lord (Is. 38, 2). What is meant by Kir? R. Simon b. Lakish said: "It means from the chamber of his heart, as it is said (Jer. 4, 19.) My bowels, my bowels! I am shaken at the very chambers (Kiroth), of my heart." R. Levi said: "It means concerning the chamber; he (Hezekiah) said before the Holy One, praised be He ! 'Sovereign of the Universe, if for the Shunamith who prepared only one little chamber [for Elisha], Thou hast saved the life of her son, then how much more [should you help me], for the sake of my father (Solomon) who covered the whole Temple with silver and gold ?' " 
Remember now, that I have walked before Thee in truth and with an undivided heart and have done what is worthy in thine eyes (Ib.). What means And have done what is worthy in thine eyes? R. Juda in the name of Rab said : "He was always careful to say the Eighteen Benedictions immediately after the benediction of Ge-ula." R. Levi said : "He hid the book of remedies [so that the sick should pray to God to invoke His mercy, and not depend merely on medicinal help]." 
R. Jochanan said in the name of R. Jose b. Zimra: "He who depends [for God's help] upon his own merits will [finally] be raised through the merits of others, but he who depends upon others' merits will [finally] be helped because of his own merits. Moses, who depended upon the merits of others, as it is said (Ex. 32, 13.) Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel, Thy servants, was raised because of his own merits, as it is said (Ps. 106, 23.) lie therefore spoke of destroying them, had not Moses, his chosen, stood in the breach before Him. Hezekiah depended upon his own merits, as it is written (Is. 38, 3.) Remember now that I have walked before Thee, but was [finally] raised through the merits of others, as it is said (II Kings 19, 34.) And I will shield the city to save it, for my own sake, and for the sake of David, my servant." And this is [the interpretation] of R. Joshua b. Levi. For R. Joshua b. Levi said : "What is the meaning of the passage (Is. 38, 17.) Behold, for in peace I had great bitterness, i.e., even when the Holy One, praised be He! sent peace unto him, yet he felt bitter [since it was done because of the merits of others] ." 
Further said R. Jose, the son of R. Chanina, in the name of R. Eliezer b. Jacob: "A man should never stand upon an elevated place while praying, but upon a low place shall he stand and pray, as it is said (Ps. 130, 1.) Out of the depth have I called Thee. O Lord." We have also a Baraitha to the same effect: "A man should never stand either upon a chair or upon a bench nor upon an elevated place while praying, but upon a low place shall he stand and pray because pride cannot exist before the Lord, as it is written (Ib.) Out of the depth have I called Thee, O Lord, and it is also written (Ib. 102, 1.) A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed."  Again said R. Jose, the son of R. Chanina in the name of R. Eliezer b. Jacob : "He who prays should keep his feet straight (one near the other), for it is said (Ez 1, 8.) Their feet were straight feet." And R. Jose, the son of R. Chanina, in the name of R. Eliezer b. Jacob, said further : "What means the passage (Lev. 19, 26.) Ye shall not eat upon the blood? Ye shall not eat before ye pray on behalf of your blood (life)." R. Isaac said in the name of R. Jochanan, who spoke in the name of R. Jose, the son of R. Chanina, who in turn, quoted R. Eliezer b. Jacob: "Concerning one who eats and drinks, and then prays, of him the passage says: (I Kin. 14, 9.) And me hast thou cast behind thy back. Do not read Geivecha (thy back) but read it Geiyecha (thy pride), i. e., the Holy One, praised be He ! said : 'Only after this one had become haughty [through eating] he took upon himself the Heavenly Kingdom.'"
(Fol. 12b) Rabba b. Chinena, the Senior, in the name of Rab, said further: "Whoever is able to pray for mercy on behalf of his friend and does not pray, is to be called a sinner; as it is said (I Sam. 12, 23.) Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the Lord by ceasing to pray in your behalf." Raba said: "If he who is the sick be a great man, his friend should pray for him until he himself is worn out." What is the reason? Shall we say because it is written (Ib. 22, 8.) And there is none who sickens for me nor informeth me? Perhaps this refers only to a King? But we learn it from this, (Ps. 35, 13.) But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth. 
Further said Rabba b. Chinena, the Senior, in the name of Rab: "He, who after committing a transgression, feels ashamed, will be forgiven of all his sins, as it is said (Ez. 16, 63.) In order that thou mayest remember, and feel ashamed and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame. When I forgive thee for all that thou hast done saith the Lord God." Perhaps a community [to which that refers] is different? But we learn from this, (I Sam. 28. 15.) And Samuel said unto Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me? And Saul answered, I am greatly distressed for the Philistines make war against me, and God has departed from me and hath not answered me any more, neither by the agency of the prophets, nor by means of dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do. And he fails to mention the Urim and Tummim ; he was ashamed to mention these because he killed all the priests of Nob who performed that rite. And whence do we learn that his sins were forgiven by Heaven ? It is said (Ib.) And Samuel said unto Saul, to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me, and R. Jochanan said: "With me, means in my abode." And the other Rabbis say from this [it is derived that God forgave his sin], (II Sam. 21, 6.) And we will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibas of Saul, the chosen of the Lord. i.e., A Bath Kol (heavenly voice) went forth and said "The chosen of the Lord." 
It was taught that Ben Zoma said to the sages: "Is it truly so that the Exodus from Egypt will be mentioned [as a miraculous incident] after Messiah will come? Has not the prophet long ago said (Jer. 23, 7.) Therefore, behold, days are coming, saith the Lord, when they shall no more say, as the Lord liveth, who hath brought up the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt ; But as the Lord liveth, who hath brought up, and who hath led forth the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and out of all countries whither I had driven them." "This," said the sages, "is intended to mean, not that the memory of the redemption of Egypt will be removed from its place (entirely extinct), but that the latter redemption will be the principal consideration and the redemption of Egypt the secondary. Just as it is said (Gen. 35, 10.) Thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. (Fol. 13a.) It means not that the name Jacob will entirely fall into disuse, but that Israel shall be the principal name and Jacob the secondary. And this is meant by the passage (Is. 43, 18.) Remember not the former things, and ancient events regard no more. Remember not former things, alludes to the present subjugation, and ancient events regard no more, refers to the redemption of Egypt." Behold, I will do a new thing; now shall it spring forth (Ib. ib. 10). R. Joseph recited a Baraitha that this alludes to the war of Gog and Magog. It is likened to a man who while walking on the road met a wolf from whom he escaped, and as he was exulting over the miracle of the wolf, he met a lion and also escaped him. He exulted over his escape from the lion, forgetting the miracle of the escape from the wolf. He then met a serpent and also escaped. He forgot all the former escapes and exulted over the miracle of the serpent. Thus it is with Israel; the later troubles make them forget the earlier ones. 
Abram, the same is Abraham. (I Chr. 1, 27.) i.e., at first he was the father (progenitor) of Aram but later he became the father (progenitor) of the entire world. And Sarai, the same is Sarah (lb.), i,e., at first she was a princess of her own nation but later she became a princess of the entire world. 
Bar Kappara recited : "Whoever calls him Abram instead of Abraham transgresses a positive commandment, for it is said (Gen. 17, 5.) But thy name shall be Abraham." R. Eliezer said : "He transgresses the prohibitory law which says: (Ib. ib. ib.) Neither shall thy name any more be called Abraham." But according to this, if one calls Sarai instead of Sarah, would you also say [that he transgresses the positive law] ? Nay: In this case the Holy One, praise be He! said to Abraham only: As for Sarai thy wife, thou shall not call her name Sarai. but Sarah shall her name be. But according to this, if one calls Jacob "Jacob" instead of Israel, should we also say [that he transgresses the positive law] ? Nay: The latter is different because the Scripture itself repeats his name later as Jacob, for it is written (Ib. 46, 2.) And God said to Israel in the vision of the night saying "Jacob, Jacob." R. Jose b. Abin and according to others R. Jose b. Zebida raised the following contradiction : Thou art indeed the Lord the (true) God, who didst choose Abram (Neh. 9, 7). [Hence he calls; him Abram] ? There the prophet renewed the praises of the Lord by referring to the past [when Abraham's name was still Abram].  


