Introduction to Seder Nashim

Today we begin learning a new order or seder of Mishnah, Seder Nashim, “The Order of Women”.  Seder Nashim deals with issues involving marriage, including a tractate dedicated to betrothal (Kiddushin), one dedicated to the marriage document, the ketubah (Ketuboth), and one dedicated to divorce (Gittin, the plural of the word get, the divorce document).  The longest tractate in Seder Nashim is Yevamoth and it deals with levirate marriage, which will be explained in the intro to Yevamoth which we begin to learn today.   Tractate Sotah deals with the Sotah ritual, which is outlined in Numbers 5.  Briefly, a Sotah is a woman whose husband suspects her of committing adultery.  Finally, Seder Nashim also includes tractates dedicated to vows (Nedarim) and another tractate dedicated specifically to Nazirite vows (Nazir).  The reason that Nedarim is included in Seder Nashim is that in Numbers 30 we learn that a husband may annul his wife’s vows. Nazir follows Nedarim because it discusses other types of vows.  Each tractate also contains information on various other subjects which arise due to the sometimes associative process of the organization of the Mishnah.
As is typical, the order of the tractates within Seder Nashim is from longest to shortest (Yevamoth has 16 chapters and Kiddushin four).  Despite many attempts to find other meanings in the order of the tractates, this is clearly the simplest explanation.  
While learning Seder Nashim we need to keep in mind that the societal structure reflected in the Mishnah is patriarchal and reflects, to a certain extent, the values of a society different from our own.  Men married women and women were married to men.  A man could have more than one wife (even if this was rare) but a woman could only have one husband.  The right to divorce belonged only to a man (although a woman might find means by which to force him to divorce her).  The father had control over his daughter and the decision regarding whom she marries was largely left up to him.  Since our society is more equal, i.e. women are usually wage earners and they have a more equal role in public arenas, many of the mishnayoth might sound antiquated.  My typical strategy in explaining these mishnayoth is to describe how these laws worked in their society, to highlight how the rabbis were trying to shape marriage and to leave it up to the reader to think about how these laws relate to us and to our values.  This is of course a subject about which you are free to discuss on the listserve.  
Enjoy Seder Nashim.  Indeed, it is personally my favorite seder!  
