mishnah  . A pebble in a loaf or a large globule of salt, or a lupine,   or a burnt crust larger than a finger's breadth,   [do not serve as connectives]. But r. Jose says: [only] whatsoever that is not eaten with the loaf remains clean even when touched by a father of uncleanness’;   and need less to say [is this so when touched] by a tebul yom.  
mishnah  . Unshelled   barley or spelt, root of crowfoot,   asafoetida,   silrhium   (r. Judah says: black beans)   remain clean   even [when coming into contact] with a ‘father of uncleanness’, let alone [if touched] by a tebul yom. So r. Meir: but the sages say: they are clean if touched by a tebul yom, but unclean [when touched] by other sources of defilement. In the case of shelled barley or spelt, or wheat either with the husk on or without it, or black cummin, or sesame or pepper (r. Judah says: also white beans), they become unclean even when touched by a tebul yom,   let alone [when they have come into contact] with other sources of uncleanness.  
mishnah  . Liquids that issue  from a tebul yom are like those  which he has touched: neither of them has power to defile.  With regard to all others that are unclean, be they of minor  or major  [degree]. The liquids issuing from them are like those they touch; both are considered of first grade uncleanness.  The sole exception being such liquid that is in itself a ‘father of uncleanness .   
mishnah  . If a pot was full of liquid and a tebul yom touched it, the liquid becomes unfit if it is terumah, but the pot is clean.  But if the liquid is common food [hullin] then all remains clean.  If his hands were soiled, all becomes unclean.   Here greater stringency is applied to soiled hands than to a tebul yom; but greater stringency is applied to a tebul yom than to soiled hands, since any doubt respecting the tebul yom renders terumah unfit, but any doubt concerning [soiled] hands is deemed clean.    
mishnah  . If the porridge was of terumah and the garlic or oil [it contained] was of hullin, and a tebul yom touched part of them, then the whole becomes unfit;   but if the porridge was of hullin and the garlic or oil it contained was of terumah, and a tebul yom touched part of them, he renders unfit only the part he has touched.   If the greater part was garlic then they go after the majority.   When is it so?   Said r. Judah: when it   formed one cohesive mass in the pot, but if it was scattered small in the mortar, then it is clean, since it is his wish that it should be so scattered.   [similarly] with all other mashed foods which were mashed with liquids;   those, however, which are usually mashed   with liquids and yet were mashed without liquids, though   they formed one cohesive mass in the pot, are regarded as a cake of preserved figs.    
mishnah  . If the porridge and batter-cake   were of hullin and the oil of terumah was floating above them, and a tebul yom touched the oil, he renders unfit only the oil. If, however, he stirred it altogether, all the places whither the oil goes become unfit.    
mishnah  . If a film of jelly   had formed over the flesh of hallowed things, and a tebul yom had touched the jelly, the slices [of flesh] are clean;   but if he touched one of the slices, that slice and all [the jelly] that comes up with it   form a connective the one with the other. R. Johanan b. Nuri says: the two of them serve as connectives to each other.   Similarly, with [cooked] beans that have formed a layer over pieces of bread.   Beans cooked in a pot, as long as they are still separate, do not serve as connectives; but when they become a solid pulp,   they do act as connectives. If they formed several solid pulps,   they are to be counted.   If oil floats on wine and a tebul yom touched the oil, only the oil is rendered unfit; but r. Johanan b. Nuri says: each serves as a connective with the other.    
mishnah  . If a jar   had sunk into a cistern containing wine,   and a tebul yom touched it, and [he touched it] within the rim,   it serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim,   it does not act as a connective. R. Johanan b. Nuri, however, says: even though [the level of wine in the cistern] is the height of a man   [above the sunken jar], and he touched [the wine] directly above the mouth of the jar, it serves as a connective.  
mishnah  . If a jar   had a hole either at its neck,   bottom or sides, and a tebul yom touched it [at the hole], it becomes unclean.   R. Judah says: only if the hole is at its neck or bottom it becomes unclean; but if on its sides, on this side or on that, it remains clean.   If one poured [liquid] from one vessel into another, and a tebul yom touched the stream, and there was something within the vessel, then [whatsoever he touches] is neutralized in a hundred and one.    
mishnah  . If a bubble   of a jug was pierced with holes on its inner side and on its outer side, whether above or below,   [and the holes are] opposite one another, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’;   and it [likewise] becomes unclean if it is in a tent wherein lies a corpse.   If the inner hole is below and the outer above, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’, and it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse; if the inner hole is above and the outer below, it remains clean if touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’,   but it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse.    
mishnah  . All [stalks that serve as] handles to produces, which count as connectives when touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’, also count as connectives when touched by a tebul yom. If a foodstuff was severed yet a small part was still attached, r. Meir says: if one takes hold of the larger part and the smaller part is pulled away with it, then the latter is regarded as the former.  R. Judah. However, says: if one takes hold of the smaller part find the greater is also pulled away with it, then the latter is like the former. R. Nehemiah says: [this refers only] to the case of the clean portion,  but the sages say: [it refers only] to the unclean portion.  In the case of all other produces,  those usually held by the leaf should be taken by the leaf, and those usually held by the stalk should be taken by the stalk.   
mishnah  . If a beaten egg was on top of vegetables of terumah,  and a tebul yom touches the egg, then he renders unfit only that stalk [of the vege tables] that is opposite the part [of the egg] he touched.  R. Jose, however, says: it affects the whole of the upper layer;  and if it was arranged like a cap  it does not serve as a connective.  
mishnah  . The streak of an egg   that had become congealed on the side of a pan that had been touched by a tebul yom within the rim [of the pan]. Serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim, it does not serve as a connective. R. Jose maintains that only the streak and the part that can be peeled away with it [serves as a connective].   The same applies to beans that had formed a layer of jelly on the rim of the pot.    
mishnah  . Dough   that had been mixed [with dough of terumah]. Or that had been leavened with yeast of terumah, is not rendered unfit by [the touch of] a tebul yom;   r. Jose and r. Simeon, however, pronounce it unfit. Dough   that had become susceptible [to uncleanness] by a liquid,   and it was kneaded with produce juice,   and later touched by a tebul yom, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If vegetables of hullin were cooked with oil of terumah and a tebul yom touched it, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If a clean person chewed food and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, it   is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   If he ate crushed olives or moist dates with the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, [the latter] becomes susceptible to uncleanness.   . If, however, he ate dried olives, or dried figs without the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and they fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, the latter is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   This is the case irrespective of the fact whether it was a clean man or a tebul yom [who was eating]. R. Meir says: in either case it becomes susceptible to uncleanness in the case of a tebul yom, since liquids issuing from unclean persons render anything susceptible regardless of the acceptability of their presence or not. But the sages say: a tebul yom is not regarded as an unclean person.    
mishnah  . If food that was tithe-offering had been rendered susceptible by a liquid, and a tebul yom or unwashed hands  touched it, terumah of tithe  may still be set apart from it in purity, since it only suffered third grade uncleanness, and third grade uncleanness counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . A woman that had immersed herself the same day may knead dough, cut off the dough-offering,  and set it apart, but must place it on an inverted basket of twigs,  or on a tray  , and then bring it near  and declare it by its name.  For it  suffered only third grade uncleanness,  and third grade uncleanness is deemed as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . In a trough which had been immersed that very day, one may knead dough and cut off the portion for hallah and bring it near and even pro nounce it by name [as hallah];   for it   suffers only third grade uncleanness and a third grade counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . If a flagon that had been immersed the same day and had been filled out of a cask containing tithes from which the heave-offering   had not yet been taken, and one said, let this be heave-offering of tithe after nightfall,   it becomes heave-offering of tithe. But if he said: let this be the food for the [sabbath] ‘erub,   his remarks are not valid at all.   If the cask was broken,   the contents of the flagon still remain tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken;   if the flagon is broken,   then what is in the cask still remains tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken.    
mishnah  . Formerly they used to say: one may redeem   for the produce of an am ha-arez.   Later they reconsidered and said: also for money of his.   Formerly they used to say: if a man is led out in chains   and commands: write a bill of divorce for my wife’, it had to be written and delivered;   but after consideration they added the case of a man undertaking a sea voyage, or setting out with a caravan.   R. Simeon of shezur added the case of one who was at the point of death.    
mishnah  . Ashkelon levers   that had become broken, only their hooks still remaining, are susceptible to uncleanness.   A pitch-fork, winnowing-fan, rake   [so-too, a hair comb]. Which had lost one of its teeth, and another of metal was constructed for it, are all susceptible to uncleanness.   Concerning all these,   r. Joshua said: this is a new thing which the scribes have made and i have nothing to reply.    
mishnah  . If one was taking terumah   from a cistern and said: ‘let this be terumah provided it comes up safely’, [it is implied that he meant] safely from being broken or spilled,   but not from contracting uncleanness;   but r. Simeon declares: also from uncleanness.   If it were broken,   it does not render [the contents of the cistern] subject to the restrictions of terumah. How far away   can it be broken and still not make it subject to terumah restrictions? Only so far that if it rolls back, it can reach the cistern.   R. Jose adds: even if one had the intention of making such a stipulation, but did not do so, and it got broken, it does not nevertheless make it subject to terumah restrictions, for this is a stipulation laid down by the beth din.    
mishnah  . [a minimum of] a quarter [of a log]  of water must be poured  over the hands  [to be sufficient] for one [person] and is even [sufficient] for two;  a minimum of half  a log must be poured over the hands [to be sufficient] for three or four persons;  one log or more [is sufficient] for five, ten, or one hundred persons.  R. Jose says: but provided only there is not less than a quarter of a log left for the last person among them. More [water] may be added to the second water,  but more may not be added to the first water.   
mishnah  . Water may be poured over the hands out of any kind of vessel, even out of vessels made of animal ordure,   out of vessels made of stone   or out of vessels made of clay.   Water may not be poured from the sides of [broken] vessels   or from the bottom of a ladle   or from the bung of a barrel.   Nor may anyone pour [water] over the hands of his fellow out of his cupped hands because one may not draw, nor sanctify,   nor sprinkle   the water of purification,   nor pour water over the hands except in a vessel. And only vessels closely covered with a lid protect [their contents from uncleanness]   and   only vessels protect [their contents from uncleanness] from earthenware vessels.    
mishnah  . If water has become so unfit   that it cannot be drunk by cattle, if it was in a vessel it is invalid,   but if it was in the ground   it is valid. If there fell into it ink, resin,   or vitriol   and its colour changed, it is invalid.   If a person did any work with it   or soaked his bread therein, it is invalid.   Simeon of teman says: even if he intended to soak his bread in one water and it fell in another water [do you still consider the other water to be invalid? In such a case i consider that the other water] is valid.    
mishnah  . If he cleansed vessels therein or scrubbed   measures therein, [the water] is invalid; if he rinsed therein vessels which had already been rinsed or new vessels, it is valid. R. Jose declares it to be invalid if they were new vessels.    
mishnah  . Water in which the baker dips gelusk   n   is invalid;   but if he [merely] moistened his hands therein   it is valid. All are fit to pour water over the hands, even a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor. A person may place the barrel between his knees and pour out the water   or he may turn the barrel on its side and pour it out.   An ape   may pour water over the hands. R. Jose declares these [latter] two cases invalid.    
mishnah  . If a person pours  water over one of his hands with a single rinsing his hand becomes clean.  If over both his hands with a single rinsing, r. Meir declares them to be unclean until he pours a minimum of a quarter of a log of water over them.  If a loaf of terumah  fell on the water the loaf is clean.  R. Jose declares it to be unclean.   
mishnah  . If he poured the first water  over his hands [whilst standing] in one place, and the second water over his hands [whilst standing] in another place, and a loaf of terumah fell on the first water,  the loaf becomes unclean. But if it fell on the second water it remains clean.  If he poured the first and the second water [whilst standing] in one place, and a loaf of terumah fell thereon, the loaf becomes unclean.   If he poured the first water over his hands and a splinter or a piece of gravel is found on his hands, they remain unclean,   because the latter water only makes the first water on the hands clean. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel. Says: if any water-creature [falls on the hands whilst they are being cleaned] they nevertheless become clean.    
mishnah  . Hands become unclean and are made clean as far as the wrist. How so? If he poured the first water over the hands as far as the wrist and poured the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and the latter flowed back to the hands, the hands nevertheless become clean.   If he poured the first and the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and they flowed back to the hands, the hands remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over one of his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over both his hands, they remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over both his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over one of his hands, his one hand becomes clean. If he poured water over one of his hands and rubbed it on the other hand it remains unclean.   If he rubbed it on his head or on the wall   it becomes clean. Water may be poured over the hands of four or five persons, each hand being by the side of the other, or being one above the other, provided that the hands are held loosely so that the water flows between them.  
mishnah  . If there was a doubt whether any work has been done with the water or not,   or whether the water contains the requisite quantity or not, or whether it is unclean   or clean, then where there is such a doubt the water is considered to be clean. Because they   have said in a case of doubt concerning hands as to whether they have become unclean or have conveyed uncleanness or have become clean, they are considered to be clean. R. Jose says: in a case [of doubt as to] whether they have become clean they are considered to be unclean. How so? If his hands were clean and there were two unclean loaves before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not;   or if his hands were unclean and there were two clean loaves   before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two clean loaves   before him and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched it with the unclean hand or with the clean hand; or if his hands were clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched the unclean one or the clean one; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean, and he touched both of them, and there is a doubt whether the unclean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the clean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the unclean hand touched the clean loaf, the hands remain in the same state as they were before and the loaves remain in the same state as they were before.  
mishnah  . If a person puts his hands inside a house smitten with leprosy,  his hands become unclean in the first degree.  [these are] the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: his hands become unclean in the second degree. Whoever conveys uncleanness to the garments at the time when he touches [the uncleanness]  conveys a first degree of uncleanness to the hands.  [these] are the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: in such a case he conveys a second degree of uncleanness. They said to r. Akiba: where do we find anywhere that the hands become unclean in the first degree? He said to them: but how is it possible for them to become unclean in the first degree without his whole body becoming unclean,  save only in these cases?  Foodstuffs and vessels which have been rendered unclean by liquids convey a second degree of uncleanness to the hands. [these are] the words of r. Joshua. But the sages say: that which has been rendered unclean by a father of uncleanness conveys uncleanness to the hands, but that which has been rendered unclean by an offspring of uncleanness  does not convey unclean ness to the hands. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: a practical instance occurred when a certain woman came before my father and said to him, my hands protruded into the air-space inside an earthenware vessel.  He said to her: my daughter, what was the cause of its uncleanness?  But i did not hear what she said to him. The sages said: the matter is clear. That which has been rendered unclean by a ‘father of uncleanness’ conveys uncleanness to the hands, but if by an offspring of uncleanness’ it does not convey uncleanness to the hands.  
mishnah  . Everything which renders terumah unfit   conveys a second degree of uncleanness to the hands.   One [unwashed] hand can convey uncleanness to the other hand. [these   are] the words of r. Joshua.   But the sages say: that which is in the second degree of uncleanness cannot convey a second degree of uncleanness. He said to them: but do not the holy scriptures which are in the second degree of uncleanness   render unclean the hands?   They said to him: the laws of the torah may not be argued from the laws of the scribes, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from the laws of the torah, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from [other] laws of the scribes.    
mishnah  . The straps of the tefillin   [when connected] with the tefillin render unclean the hands.   R. Simeon says: the straps of the tefillin do not render unclean the hands.  
mishnah  . The margin on a scroll   which is above   or below or at the beginning   or at the end renders unclean the hands. R. Judah says: the margin at the end does not render unclean [the hands] until a handle is fastened to it.    
mishnah  . A scroll   on which the writing has become erased and eighty-five letters remain thereon, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’,etc.   Renders unclean the hands. A single sheet   on which there are written eighty-five letters, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’, renders unclean the hands. All the holy writings   render unclean the hands. The song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands.   R. Judah says: the song of songs renders unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about ecclesiastes.   R. Jose says: ecclesiastes does not render unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about the song of songs. R. Simeon says: [the ruling about] ecclesiastes is one of the leniencies of beth shammai and one of the stringencies of beth hillel.   R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two   elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the academy   that the song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands. R. Akiba said: far be it! No man in israel disputed about the song of songs [by saying] that it does not render unclean the hands. For the whole world is not as worthy as the day on which the song of songs was given to israel; for all the writings are holy but the song of songs is the holy of holies. So that if they had a dispute, they had a dispute only about ecclesiastes. A. Johanan b. Joshua the son of the father-in-law of r. Akiba said: in accordance with the words of ben azzai so they disputed,   and so they reached a decision.    
mishnah  . On that day  the votes were counted and they decided that a footbath holding from two logs to nine kabs  which was cracked could contract midras  uncleanness. Because r. Akiba said a footbath [must be considered] according to its designation.   
mishnah  . On that day they said: all animal sacrifices  which have been sacrificed under the name of some other offering  are [nevertheless] valid,  but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations,  with the exception of the paschal-offering  and the sin-offering.  [this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time   and to the sin-offering at any time. R. Eliezer says: [with the exception] also of the guilt-offering.   [so that this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time and to the sin- and guilt-offerings at any time. R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the college that all animal sacrifices which are eaten and which have not been sacrificed under their own name are nevertheless valid, but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations, with the exception of the paschal-offering and the sin-offering. Ben azzai only added [to these exceptions] the burnt-offering, but the sages did not agree with him.  
mishnah  . On that day they said: what is the law applying to ammon and moab in the seventh year?   R. Tarfon decreed tithe for the poor;   and r. Eleazar b. Azariah decreed second tithe.   R. Ishmael said: eleazar b. ‘azariah, the onus is upon you to produce your proof because you are expressing the stricter view;   for the onus is upon the person who expresses a stricter view to produce the proof. R. Eleazar b. Azariah said to him: ishmael, my brother, i have not deviated from the sequence of years,   tarfon, my brother, has deviated therefrom and the onus is upon him to produce the proof. R. Tarfon answered: egypt is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as egypt must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah answered: babylon is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as babylon must give second tithe in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give second tithe in the seventh year. R. Tarfon said: on egypt which is near, they imposed tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel might be supported thereby during the seventh year; so on ammon and moab which are near, we should impose tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel may be supported thereby during the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah said to him: behold, thou art like a person who would benefit them with gain, yet thou art really as one who causes souls to perish. Wouldst thou rob the heavens so that dew or rain should not descend?   As it is said, will a man rob god? Yet ye rob me. But ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and heave-offerings.   R. Joshua said: behold, i shall be as one who replies on behalf of tarfon, my brother, but not in accordance with the subject matter of his arguments. The law regarding egypt is a new act and the law regarding babylon is an old act, and the law which is being argued before us is a new act. A new act should be argued from [another] new act, but a new act should not be argued from an old act. The law regarding egypt is the act of the elders and the law regarding babylon is the act of the prophets, and the law which is being argued before us   is the act of the elders. Let one act of the elders be argued from [another] act of the elders, but let not an act of the elders be argued from an act of the prophets. The votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab should give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. And when r. Jose b. Durmaskith   visited r. Eliezer   in lydda he said to him: what new thing did you have in the house of study to-day? He said to him: their votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eliezer wept and said: the counsel of the lord is with them that fear him: and his covenant, to make them know it.   Go and tell them: do not have any apprehension on account of your voting. I received a tradition from r. Johanan b. Zakkai who heard it from his teacher, and his teacher from his teacher, and so back to an halachah given to moses from sinai,   that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year.  
mishnah  . On that day judah, an ammonite proselyte, came and stood before them in the house of study. He said to them: have i the right to enter into the assembly?   Rabban gamaliel said to him: thou art forbidden. R. Joshua said to him: thou art permitted. Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, an ammonite or a moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the lord: even to the tenth generation, etc.   R. Joshua said to him: but are the ammonites and moabites still in their own territory? Sennacherib, the king of assyria, has long since come up and mingled all the nations, as it is said: in that i have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures, and have brought down as one mighty the inhabitants.   Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, but afterward i will bring back the captivity of the children of ammon,   so that they have already returned. R. Joshua said to him: the scriptural verse says, i will turn the captivity of my people israel and judah.   Yet they have not already returned. So they permitted him to enter the assembly.  
mishnah  . The aramaic sections in ezra and daniel render unclean the hands.   If an aramaic section was written   in hebrew, or a hebrew section was written   in aramaic, or hebrew script,   it   does not render unclean the hands. It never renders unclean the hands until it is written in the assyrian script,   on hide, and in ink.  
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, because you say that the holy scriptures render unclean the hands,   but the books of hamiram   do not convey uncleanness to the hands. R. Johanan b. Zakkai said: have we nothing against the pharisees excepting this?   Behold they say that the bones of an ass are clean, yet the bones of johanan   the high priest are unclean.   They said to him: proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness, so that nobody should make spoons out of the bones of his father or mother. He said to them: so also the holy scriptures; proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness. The books of hamiram which are not precious do not convey uncleanness to the hands.    
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you declare an uninterrupted flow of a liquid to be clean.   The pharisees say: [do] we complain against you, o ye sadducees, that you declare a stream of water which flows from the burial-ground to be clean?   The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, in that you say, my ox or ass which has done injury is liable,   yet my manservant or maidservant who has done injury is not liable’.   Now if in the case of my ox or my ass’ for which i am not responsible if they do not fulfil religious duties,   yet i am responsible for their damage, in the case of my manservant or maidservant for whom i am responsible to see that they fulfil religious duties,   how much more so that i should be responsible for their damage? They said to them: no, if you argue about my ox or my ass’ which have no understanding, can you deduce anything therefrom concerning my manservant or maidservant who have understanding? So that if i were to anger either of them they would go and burn another person's stack and i should be liable to make restitution?    
mishnah  . A galilean sadducee   said: i complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you write the name of the ruler and the name of moses together on a bill of divorcement.   The pharisees said: [do] we complain against you, o galilean sadducee, that you write the name of the ruler together with the divine name on a single page? And furthermore that you write the name of the ruler above and the divine name below? As it is said, and pharoah said, who is the lord that i should hearken unto his voice to let israel go?   But when he was smitten what did he say? The lord is righteous.         
