    
    
   במדבר
    
    
   פלס ומאזני משפט לה' מעשהו כל אבני כיס, “Honest scales and weights are the Lord’s; all the weights in the bag (pocket) are His work” (Proverbs 16,11). Solomon wanted to tell us in this verse that all of man’s deeds are carefully weighed and that all the weights (by which they are evaluated) belong to G’d.
     The single most heavy weight is called פלס; also, a much smaller weight of which there are two are called מאזנים. The word is derived from אזן, i.e. when there are two weights each called אזן, the scale is called מאזנים to indicate that equal weights are on opposite sides. There are many words in Scripture which appear in the plural, especially when in order to make full use of what these words represent one requires two of them. Examples are נעלים, shoes, רחים, millstones, etc. G’d is described as “weighing” each of our actions using small weights known as “pocket weights, weights small enough to be carried in one’s pocket. The largest weight known in the Torah is called ככר, whereas the smaller weights known as אונקיה are usually divided into אונקיה, and half or quarter “ounces.” [this is not the “ounce” we are familiar with but a weight of about 4 regular shekalim or about 29 grams]. Solomon only wanted to illustrate that when “weighing” our sins in the scales of merits and demerits respectively, even the smallest sin (or merit) is taken into account. Reward and punishment is meted out according to G’d’s yardsticks as to the relative “weight” of such deeds we have performed. If you need proof that after G’d has first weighed the “heavy” sins He proceeds to also weigh the “light” sins look at Jeremiah 16,16 where the prophet says: הנני שולח לדיגים רבים נאום ה' ודיגום ואחרי כן אשלח לרבים צידים וצדום, “Lo, I am sending for many fishermen--declares the Lord--and they shall haul them out; and after that I shall send the hunters and they shall hunt them.” The prophet employed the verb צידה, hunt, after the expression “fishing.” It is similar to a person who moves out of a house and first removes the larger pieces of furniture, returning to pick up the smaller items he has left behind. The meaning of the whole verse quoted above is: the large weight stone called peles, the smaller ones, i.e. moznayim, as well as weights carried in one’s pocket; all of them are at the disposal of the Lord and He makes use of them.” In other words, the justice dispensed by the Lord will be true justice having taken into account all factors relevant to arriving at a verdict. The reason Solomon refers to small weights as אבני כיס is because people are in the habit of carrying them in a pocket, a small bag. This is in order to keep them clean and not exposed to erosion.
    It is possible that an additional dimension contained in the expression אבני כיס is an allusion to the fact that G’d’s verdict remains hidden from us similar to these little weights a person carries in his pocket being concealed from others. Man’s intelligence and knowledge is very limited and it is impossible for us to have access to all the factors which combine to make G’d arrive at a fair verdict concerning man’s deeds. This is why, when describing G’d’s superior way of judging, David says in Psalms 36,7: “Your beneficence is like high mountains; Your justice like the great deep;” David means that G’d’s righteousness and His deeds of loving kindness are so far above us as are high mountains and the bottom of the deep sea; both are inaccessible to us. However, there is a difference between the high mountains and the depth of the ocean. High mountains can be seen though they may be inaccessible, where the bottom of the deep is something we cannot even see. Similarly, G’d’s righteousness is well known throughout the world though we may not be able to explore it; the justice of G’d, however, is totally beyond our ability to assess. 
    Let me illustrate what I mean. Jerusalem was destroyed on the ninth day of the month of Av. When Ezekiel was told of this G’d is described as having sent a messenger who arrived on the tenth day of the fifth month. (Ezekiel 33,21 describes the arrival of an escaped citizen of Jerusalem as having occurred on the fifth of the tenth month). Examination of the verse in Ezekiel both in chapter 33 and chapter 24 poses obvious contradictions. We are forced to conclude that G’d wanted to conceal the true dates and that therefore incomplete information is recorded in the Book of Ezekiel. You may contrast this with extremely precise information given by the Torah in the opening chapter of the Book of Bamidbar, (when the subject was not destruction, i.e. meting out of justice). Here the Torah gives a) the day of the month; b) the name of the month; 3) the year in which this occurred; 4) in relation to which previous event, i.e. the Exodus from Egypt.
    1,1. וידבר ה' אל משה במדבר סיני באהל מועד באחד לחודש השני בשנה השנית לצאתם מארץ מצרים, לאמור, “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first day of the second month of the second year after the Exodus from Egypt, saying:” The wilderness of Sinai in which Mount Sinai was located. Bamidbar Rabbah 1,6 comments that the reference to the “wilderness of Sinai” is to remind us that the giving of the Torah comprised three elements: 1) fire; 2) water;   3) the desert. We know that fire was a factor in the giving of the Torah from Exodus 19,18: “the whole Mountain of Sinai was smoking on account of the Lord having descended upon it in fire.” We know that water was also a crucial factor from Judges 5,4 (Devorah’s song) “O Lord when You came forth from Seir, advanced from the country of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens dripped, yea, the clouds of water, the mountains quaked before the Lord, Him of Sinai, before the Lord G’d of Israel.” Finally, we know that the desert was a factor in the giving of the Torah  from the reference to the desert of Sinai in our verse.”
    Why were these three elements an integral part of the giving of the Torah? To tell you that just as three basic phenomena on earth are available for free to everyone, so Torah is to be taught without charge. Isaiah 55,1 spelled this out clearly when he proclaimed: “Ho, all who are thirsty, come for water!”  Why was it important to give the Torah in the desert? To teach that one cannot truly acquire Torah except after one has made oneself הפקר, “ownerless like the desert.” [One must not allow oneself to be dominated by other philosophies or the evil urge if one wants to absorb Torah in its undiluted form. Ed.]
   באהל מועד, “in the Tent of Meeting, etc.;” this is the Tabernacle. Once G’d called Moses from the Tabernacle, i.e. from Leviticus 1,1 on where the words “He called to Moses from the Tent of Meeting” occurred for the first time, G’d always spoke to Moses out of the Tent of Meeting seeing that the attribute כבוד which had addressed Moses at the Mountain had moved to the Tabernacle as soon as it had been inaugurated. This is why at this time the instructions had to be issued to the Levites whose camp was around the Tabernacle not to trespass and enter the Sanctuary as any non-priest who entered the Sanctuary was bound to die (verse 51). The warning not to enter the Sanctuary was of the same type as the warning before the revelation not to step beyond the fenced off section of Mount Sinai (Exodus 19,13). The warning is spelled out in detail in Numbers 18,5 after the rebellion of Korach and parts of the senior members of the tribe of Levite. At that time even the priests were included in the warning (Exodus 19,24), and in Numbers 4,20 the Torah warns the Kehatites, the senior group of Levites, not to “look” when the “holy” is inserted or they would die. Even though they carried these “holy” items such as the Ark, they were not to look at it until the Ark had been covered.
    Furthermore, the Torah does command that the 22,000 Levites encamp around the Tabernacle (compare Numbers 3,43) seeing that their numbers corresponded to that of the angels who had accompanied G’d when He took up residence in the Tabernacle. We have this information from Psalms 68,18 where the psalmist speaks about רכב אלוהים רבותים, “G’d’s entourage amounting to 22.000.” The Israelites’ camp was composed of four flags, corresponding to their having observed at Mount Sinai that the angels grouped themselves into four camps with a flag each. [some say each angel had a flag of his own, compare Rabbi Abudimi in Pessikta Rabbati on Asseret Hadibrot. Ed.] 
    Another Midrashic comment in Tanchuma 3 remarks on the words באהל מועד, that previously G’d had spoken to Moses at the burning bush, as we know from Exodus 3,4. Later He spoke to him in Midian (Exodus 4,19). Subsequently, He had spoken to him in Egypt (compare Exodus 12,1). Still later He spoke to him at Sinai (Leviticus 25,1). As soon as the Tabernacle had been erected G’d changed the venue, preferring the privacy of the Tabernacle to any of the other locations from which He had addressed Moses previously. This concept is reflected in the words of Micah 6,8 that the Lord desires that we relate to Him “by walking modestly with your G’d.” As of now, G’d began to converse with Moses in the Tent of Meeting. When David said in Psalms 45,14 that “the honour and glory of a king’s daughter is observed only within the home,” he merely used a metaphor to describe that matters between the Lord and man are to be conducted in private. The fancy garments worn by the princess are not meant for show. In that verse the בת מלך is a reference to Moses as we know from Isaiah 19,4: “I will place the Egyptians at the mercy of a harsh master.” This was a reference to the Ten Plagues they were to endure. Isaiah continues: “and a ruthless king shall rule them.” This refers to Moses who represented the Kingdom of Torah known as עוז, the same word used by Isaiah in that verse. We know that Torah is called עוז, from ה' עוז לעמו יתן “the Lord gives עוז to His people” (Psalms 29,11). It is also written in Proverbs 8,15: “Kings reign through Me.” He who realises that all mortal authority is dependent on G’d’s approval will be modest. Our sages (Tanchuma Bamidbar 3) say that any woman who practices modesty  is entitled to marry a High Priest even if she is not of priestly or levitic descent; she is fit to bear children who in turn will become High Priests. They base this on the end of the verse in Psalms 45,14 where the psalmist says: “her dress is embroidered with golden mountings.” The words “golden mountings” are also used in the garments of the High Priest (compare Exodus 28,11). It is the mark of the modest woman not to display her fancy garments outside her home. When Moses entered the Tent of Meeting to speak to G’d he would hear the heavenly voice (Numbers 7,89).
    Rabbi Joshua son of Levi said: “if the Gentiles would realise how much benefit they derive from the existence of the Temple (ours) they would place armed guards around it in order to protect it. In fact it is of greater benefit to them than it is to the Jewish people. Even Solomon included the importance to the Gentiles of his Temple when he prayed to G’d to respond favourably to the prayers offered by them in the Jewish Temple (Kings I 8, 41-42). He asked for outright acceptance of the prayers of the Gentiles whereas he asked only for qualified acceptance of prayers offered by Jews, i.e. deserving Jews only. As a result of this it is clear that seeing a Jew is aware of G’d and His power, he will search his heart for sins he may have committed when he finds that G’d did not respond to his prayer. A Gentile, who does not know G’d, would react angrily if he finds his prayer rejected. He would point to the fact that after having taken all the trouble to cross the seas in order to pray at such a world-famous shrine, he had wasted his time and money. As a result he would cause G’d’s image to become tarnished among other human beings. Not only is the Temple (of the Jews) more beneficial to them than to the Jews, but even the Jewish people’s existence is of great importance to them. Were it not for the Jewish people they would not be the beneficiaries of rain and dew at the appropriate times of the year. Even the sun dispenses its light and warmth only for the sake of the Jewish people as we know from Jeremiah 33,25: “if it were not for My covenant with day and night- the laws of heaven and earth- so I will never reject the offspring of Yaakov and My servant David, etc.” the message is that destruction of the Jewish people would make the continued existence of mankind pointless. In the future the Gentiles will see that the Lord G’d speaks to the Jewish people and as a result of this they will come and flock to establish close ties with Israel. This is what Zecharyah 8,23 spoke about when he said (the Gentiles speaking) “let us go with you for we have heard that G’d is with you.”
   באחד לחודש השני, “on the first of the second month.” The subject matter of G’d’s conversation with Moses at that time was the details of the encampment, the positioning of the flags,  in which order the people should break camp and in which order they should make camp. (this needs elaboration as a) our portion does not contain any of the 613 commandments, b) the Jewish people did not start journeying until the twenty-second of that month). The reason why this portion follows the chapter dealing with the laws about exchanging the objects of vows made (Leviticus 27), is to remind us that G’d is One, is Unique, and there are no substitutes for Him. Just as there are no substitutes for G’d, so there is no substitute for the unique Jewish people and He will never exchange us for any other nation. We have this on the authority of  Song of Songs 2,16 דודי לי ואני לו, “My beloved belongs to me and I to Him.” We also have a verse spelling out the other half of this relationship when we read in Samuel I 2,3 (Channah speaking) אין קדוש כה' ואין בלתך, “there is none as holy as G’d and there is none beside You.” Furthermore, we find that the Jewish people are referred to as G’d’s “flock” in Ezekiel 34,31. Just as we learned in the last chapter of Leviticus that no member of the flock once it has been sanctified must be exchanged, so we may rest assured that G’d will never exchange His flock, i.e. the Jewish people.
    
    1,2. שאו את ראש כל עדת בני ישראל, “take a census of the entire assembly of the Jewish people, etc.” The Jewish people do not experience an ascent of a spiritual kind unless they perform the laws of the Torah. When the counting of the Jewish people is described here by the word שאו instead of say, פקדו, this indicates that being counted at the command of G’d is a spiritual ascent. The word שאו combines within it two meanings, one the direct opposite of the other. It may mean that one’s head is being elevated in the sense of someone being promoted; on the other hand, the same word is also employed as depicting that someone is being beheaded, such as in the case of the chief baker of Pharaoh’s court whose execution Joseph foretold in Genesis 40,19. 
    We find a similar approach in Tanchuma Bamidbar 8 where the author paraphrases our verse as G’d saying: “I have not been as fond of any nation as I am of you, therefore I have elevated you to be the head just as I am the ‘head’ of all phenomena in this world.” We know the latter from Chronicles I 19,11: “Yours, Lord, are greatness, might, splendour, triumph, and majesty-yes all that is in heaven and earth; to You, Lord, belong kingship and preeminence over all.” G’d says that because of your relationship to Me, I have made you vis-a-vis the nations something similar to My position vis-a-vis all the creatures in the universe.” This is what the psalmist spoke about in Psalms 148,15: וירם קרן לעמו, “He has exalted the horn of His people.” When Moses speaks of G’d making the Jewish people supreme over all the nations of the earth, he has the same thought in mind.
    When the meaning of the word שאו is “to decapitate,” this is what we read in Genesis 40,19. The Torah deliberately uses a word which may have either of these two meanings in order to warn the people that if they deserve it the census will be beneficial for them; if not, it may have fatal consequences. The reason that the Torah adds the words למשפחותם לבית אבותם, “according to their families, their father’s households,” is to tell us that the relatives of the mother are not called “family.”
   במספר שמות, “according to the number of names, etc.;” the Torah did not write: “according to their names,” as it did in 3,40 in connection with the count of the firstborn. Perhaps we may explain this in terms of the angels who had come to earth at the time of the revelation. At that time the number of the camps, flags, etc., corresponded to the number of those angels; possibly by not referring to the individual names of the people to be counted, the Torah wanted to allude to the comparison with the angels at Mount Sinai [who have no fixed names but receive names in accordance with the missions they are asked to perform. Ed.]. During the revelation each individual Israelite was on a spiritual par with the angels except that he was like an angel equipped with a body. This may be the reason why at that time the Torah wrote: תפקדו אותם לצבאותם, “count them according to their hosts” (verse 3). The “hosts” referred to are the angels who were at Mount Sinai. They are the ones commonly known as מלאכי השרת, “the ministering angels.” G’d Himself had referred to the Jewish people as “My hosts” in Exodus 7,4 when He told Moses that Pharaoh would refuse His request to take His hosts (the Jewish people) out of Egypt.
    We need to analyse the wording of the Torah in Exodus 12,41 that יצאו כל צבאות ה' מארץ מצרים, that “all the hosts of the Lord departed from the land of Egypt.” We would have expected the Torah to write that “all the hosts of Israel departed from Egypt.” The reason the Torah wrote that verse as it did was to tell us that when the Israelites left their exile so did the angels, the divine representatives assigned to them. Whenever Israel is in exile or is experiencing pain, a similar experience is shared in the celestial regions. Seeing that this is so, mention has to be made of the hosts of the heaven when the Israelites are redeemed from physical exile on terrestrial earth. Further proof of this whole concept may be derived from the words in verse 46: “all the numbered ones amounted to, etc.” The Torah refers to the corresponding heavenly hosts which matched the number of Israelites who were counted. This is the reason that we do not find the word ישראל mentioned in verse 46. If you will take a closer look at chapter 2,32 you will suddenly find the name Israel mentioned. This strongly suggests that seeing the total number is identical to the number in chapter 1,46 where the name Israel is not mentioned, that the former refers to the number of angels corresponding to the number of Israelites who had been counted and whose number is reported in chapter 2,32.
    
    1,3. מבן עשרים שנה ולמעלה, “from twenty years old and up.” The reason that the under twenty-year olds were not included in the census was because they were not yet strong enough physically to be recruited for army duty. This is reflected in the statement by our sages in Avot, 5 (near end) that at twenty one is strong enough to engage in  pursuit (of an enemy).
   כל יוצא צבא, “all those able to bear arms.” The Torah adds the word בישראל, “among the Israelites,” to exclude members of the recent converts to Judaism, the mixed multitude (Ibn Ezra).
     תפקדו אותם, “you are to count them.” The reason that the Torah did not use the word תספרו for counting here is that this was not a head count. The term פקידה implies (divine) supervision. The Israelites were commanded to find out how many of them there were, but they did not arrive at the number through counting heads but through counting the half-shekel each one of these men had to contribute. 
   לצבאותם, “according to their hosts.” There were many different hosts (armies). Every single tribe had a substantial army.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Bamidbar 19: the words “count them according to their hosts,” are reminiscent of Isaiah 43,4: “because you are precious to Me, and honoured, and I love you, I have given men in exchange for you and peoples in your stead.” G’d said to Yaakov: “you are so precious in My eyes that I have engraved your facial features on My throne, and the angels praise Me by employing your name, saying: ‘blessed be the name of the G’d of Israel  from one end of time to the ultimate end of time.’” The Midrash breaks down these compliments into its constituent parts. “You are precious to Me,” because although I did not bother to count any of the other nations I counted you, giving you an importance expressed in numbers.“ This can be better understood in terms of a parable. A king had many barns most of which were filled with straw and other relatively worthless matters. He did not bother to count the precise contents of each of these barns. He had one barn, however, which was filled with wheat. He told his manager: “count for me how many measures of wheat are stored in that barn.” The king in the parable is a metaphor for G’d; the wheat is a metaphor for the Jewish people. We have a verse in Isaiah 21,10 comparing the Jewish people to grain when the prophet exclaims: “My threshing, the product of My threshing floor.” The harvest the prophet speaks about are the Jewish people as Jeremiah 2,3 described the Jewish people as “Israel is sacred to G’d, it is the first of His harvest.” The “manager” mentioned in the parable is a metaphor for Moses, of whom G’d Himself said in Numbers 17,7 that in “My entire house he is trusted.” Similarly, the barns filled with straw in the parable are metaphors for the Gentile nations concerning whom we have been told in Job 21,18: (Job speaking about the wicked) “Let them become like straw in the wind, like chaff carried off by a storm.” we also have a verse in Ovadiah 18 expressing similar sentiments, i.e. “and the house of Esau shall be straw; they shall burn it and devour it.” The Jewish people by way of contrast are compared to wheat, are described as righteous as per Isaiah 60,21: “and Your people, all of them righteous, shall possess the land for all time; “ this is why G’d was so concerned with each one of them that He ordered each one to be counted.
    
    1,10. לבני יוסף לאפרים, “For the children of Joseph,- for Ephrayim;” after the Torah had first enumerated all the sons of Leah it now turns to the sons of Rachel, mentioning Ephrayim ahead of Menashe the older seeing Yaakov had blessed Ephrayim first on is deathbed (compare Genesis 48,20). Afterwards the Torah mentioned the descendants of Binyamin. Although born last, the Torah honoured the memory of Rachel by mentioning him ahead of the sons of the maidservants. When listing the four sons of the maidservants, the Torah begins with Dan who was the senior of those four sons, whereas the Torah lists Asher next seeing that he was encamped next to Dan (compare 2,27). Next the Torah lists Gad who was the older of the sons of Zilpah. Next to him was Naftali.
    
    1,18. ואת כל העדה הקהילו באחד לחדש השני, “They gathered together the entire assembly on the first of the second month;” On the very day G’d spoke to Moses, Moses and Aaron assembled the entire people and began to organise and count them; however, the count was not completed in a single day. This is why the Torah had to write: “he numbered them in the desert of Sinai“ (verse 19). He completed the count in the same spot though not on the same date. This is the view of Nachmanides.
   ויתילדו על משפחותם, “they proved their genealogy according to their families.” They had to ask their parents when exactly they had been born in order to know if they had reached the age of twenty. Alternatively, the Torah means that each one recorded their genealogy in writing proving which tribe he belonged to. This is the view of Ibn Ezra.
    
    1,20. ויהיו בני ראובן בכור ישראל, “The members of the tribe of Reuven, Yaakov’s firstborn were, etc.” The Torah gave the number of members of the tribe of Reuven first, although in the list of encampments it listed Yehudah first, (2,3) seeing that Reuven was the biological firstborn. Shimon was listed next, in accordance with seniority of birth. Gad was listed next as he was the firstborn of Leah’s maidservant. Next the Torah lists the tribes which were grouped around the flag of Yehudah. Issachar and Zevulun who formed part of the army group are listed in that order as part of the camp of Yehudah. Subsequently the Torah lists Ephrayim followed by the tribes who were part of his camp, i.e. Menashe and Binyamin. Finally, the Torah lists Dan followed by Asher and Naftali who were part of his camp and flag. The tribes’ camps (Dan, Asher, Naftali last) are listed in the same order as here when the offerings on the occasion of the inauguration of the Altar in the Tabernacle are recorded in Numbers chapter 7.
    The number of tribes listed and counted here are 12, seeing Levi is not included and two separate tribes are counted as Joseph. They were encamped facing the four directions East, South, West, North. Each army group comprised three tribes. Among the twelve tribes the tribe of Yehudah and Dan were the ones best known for their bravery; this is why they traveled at the head and at the rear of the Israelites respectively. Both of these tribes have been described at different times as גור אריה, “lion cub” (Genesis 49,9 and Deut. 33,22). 
    The word לגלגלותם, “according to their heads,” an expression used by the Torah only in connection with the tribes of Reuven and Shimon (verse 20 and 22), is one that applied to all the tribes. The reason that it was spelled out only with these two tribes may be that both of these tribes required atonement for sins committed by their respective founding fathers against Yaakov, and this is why the word פקודיו, “its numbered ones,” is also repeated in Shimon’s case, indicating that by now they were on a par with all the other tribes. Perhaps in the case of Shimon that word may not mean “numbered,” but may be a reference to the use of the word in the Ten Commandments, where G’d speaks about “remembering the sins of the fathers to the later generations” (Exodus 20,5). Verse 22 then ought to be translated as follows: “The matters remembered for the tribe of Shimon and his offspring according to their families and their fathers’ houses were, etc.” The words במספר שמות, “according to the number of names,” belong to what follows, to the word פקודיהם. The Torah wished to convey that actually the descendants of Shimon carried the burden of the sin of their founding-father and his part in the sale of Joseph (instigator) and by rights they should have paid for that unatoned for crime. Proof that Shimon had been the instigator of the violence committed against Joseph at the time is the fact that he was the only one detained by Joseph in Egypt after he permitted the other brothers to return and to bring Binyamin to Egypt on their next trip. (compare Genesis 37,24, 42,24, Bereshit Rabbah 84,16). The number of males counted in the tribe of Shimon, i.e. 59,300 was in itself an allusion to the fact that Satan had some control over their number and that at the time when their leader Zimri committed his famous indiscretion with Kosbi bat Tzur, the princess of Midian, publicly cohabiting with her, (Numbers 25,14) the decree which had long been held in suspense was finalised and their number was reduced to 22,200 as we find at the next count (Numbers 26,14). 
    The reason why in the case of Naftali the Torah writes בני נפתלי instead of לבני נפתלי as it did in the case of all the other tribes may be due to the fact that Naftali was different from all the other tribes having more daughters than sons. This was already hinted at in Yaakov’s blessing who phrased his blessing in the feminine gender, i.e. אילה שלוחה instead of איל שלוח (compare Genesis 49,21). By writing בני נפתלי, the Torah singles out the males among a preponderance of females.
    
    1,45. ויהיו כל פקודי בני ישראל לבית אבותם מבן עשרים שנה ומעלה, “All the people of the Children of Israel who were numbered according to their fathers’ households and who were  over twenty years old, amounted to, etc.”  Some people use this verse to prove that the twenty-year olds were not included in the census and that only people over twenty were included in the census (Ibn Ezra). Why did the Torah repeat the words ויהיו כל הפקודים וגו' once more in verse 46 before proceeding to inform us of the total number? It is possible that the first time the word ויהיו occurs it refers to the number, whereas the second time the word refers to the קיום of these people, i.e. that they all remained alive (did not die except at the command of G’d). There was a need for this blessing as the evil eye exerts its influence on all matters which have undergone counting. This is also why, during the Torah’s report of the six days of creation, the word ויהי is used again and again to act as a counterweight to the power of the evil eye. The word ויהי in connection with what G’d created during those days means that He decreed that it should endure and not become extinct. When you look at Jeremiah 31,34-35 you will find that the prophet uses the word מהיות, to indicate the eternal existence of the Jewish people as comparable to the eternal existence of the universe G’d had created during those six days.
    
    1,50. ואתה הפקד את הלוים על משכן העדות, “and you are to appoint the Levites as in charge of the Tabernacle of Testimony, etc.” This whole verse is the explanation of verse 49 in which Moses had been told not to include the Levites in the census for the army. G’d now explains that the reason why the Levites were not to be counted with the other twelve tribes was not their ineligibility but on the contrary, it was their superior position which required them to be counted separately. Seeing it was going to be their function to perform all manner of service connected with the Tabernacle, they would be counted separately and would form a separate camp.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bamidbar Rabbah 1,12: The words ואתה הפקד את הלוים teach that anyone who demonstrates a certain degree of readiness to sacrifice his personal interests in favour of Divine interests, thereby coming closer to G’d, will be rewarded by being brought a great deal closer at His initiative. At the time when Moses had asked for volunteers to carry out the death sentence on the people who had actively engaged in worship of the golden calf, the members of the tribe of Levi had responded to his call, endangering their own lives in the process (Exodus 32,26-28). In appreciation of the Levites’ loyalty and dedication during the episode of the golden calf G’d now rewards them by assigning to them sacred duties. The reason the Torah uses the term משכן העדות, “Tabernacle of Testimony,” here is because the tasks of the Levites included transporting the Holy Ark which contained the two Tablets of Testimony, together with all the other furnishings of the Tabernacle as well as its components..
    
    1,51. ובנסוע המשכן יורידו אותו הלוים ובחנות המשכן יקימו אותו הלוים והזר הקרב יומת, “When the Tabernacle journeys, the Levites shall dismantle it ; when the Tabernacle comes to rest the Levites shall erect it; any alien who approaches shall die.”  I have already told you [Genesis 11,9 page 209 my translation, Ed.] that whenever the four-lettered name of G’d, י-ה-ו-ה, appears with the letters in reverse order, this is an allusion to the attribute of Justice being at work. For instance, when Haman said וכל זה איננו שוה לי, in Esther 5,13 the spelling is an indication that at that point [the zenith of his power, after Esther had wined and dined him with the King, Ed.] the attribute of Justice reversed his rise to power and set in motion his downfall.
    Here in our paragraph, dealing with the tasks of the Levites, the Torah first refers to the concealed name of G’d whereas afterwards it uses the  revealed name of G’d twice in a row with the letters in reversed order to show that the element of the attribute of Justice was very much involved. In each instance the allusion to the name of the Lord commences with the letter ה in the word הלוים. We know that the characteristic of the tribe of Levi is the attribute of Justice (they acted as the executioners not only against the idolaters of the golden calf, but the founding father acted as executioner against the people of Shechem). Levites became the victim of that attribute, such as Uzzah in Samuel II 6,7 who trespassed against the rules for transporting the Holy Ark. [take the letters ה-ו--ה-י in the words  הלוים-ובחנות- המשכן-יקימו]. The meaning of the words יורידו אותו is “they shall dismantle it by removing the staves holding together the pillars serving as the walls.” When it came time to make camp, the Levites were to erect the structure again. The words והזר הקרב, “any stranger that approaches,” mean that a stranger who wants to perform the service not assigned to him is guilty of death at the hands of the Lord (compare Sanhedrin 84).
    
    1,53. על עדת בני ישראל, “on the assembly of the Children of Israel;” against each one individually (Ibn Ezra).
    
    1,54. כן עשו, “so they did.” They were warned never to touch the Tabernacle. 
    2,2. איש על דגלו באותות, “each man by his flag according to the insignia.” The word אותות is used here in the same sense as in Jeremiah 10,2 where it is a reference to changes in the constellations in the skies. Each flag had different symbols, such as the flag of the camp of Reuven depicting דודאים, which looked like miniature human beings. The flag of Yehudah depicted a lion cub seeing his father had compared him to that animal (in fearlessness). The flag of Ephrayim bore the picture of an ox, seeing that Yaakov had likened Joseph to an ox in Genesis 49,9. The flag of Dan bore the image of an eagle. When you combine the four images depicted on these flags they were the same as that of the chayot which were part of the vision of Ezekiel who described these creatures or angels with such heads, as supporting the throne of G’d (Ezekiel chapter 1). (these are the views of both Ibn Ezra and Nachmanides).
    It is equally possible (our author speaking) to understand the word אותות as related to the word אות as in אות נפשו, “the desire of his soul,” or as like בכל אות נפשך, “in accordance with all you desire” (Deut. 12,20). This would reflect what we have learned in the Midrash that when the Israelites had observed that the angels who had descended on earth at the time G’d descended on Mount Sinai had all had flags with them and that the Israelites ever since had felt an urgent desire to have flags also (compare Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2,13 on the words ודגלו אהבה). There are numerous other verses interpreted in similar fashion (compare Song of Songs 2,4; Tanchuma Bamidbar 14).
    A kabbalistic approach: the Israelites wished for flags similar to those of the angels. The division of the Israelites’ camp into four sections comprising three tribes each facing each direction on earth reflected a similar phenomenon in the celestial regions. The four celestial camps are known as the camps of the Shechinah  (Midrash Maasseh Merkavah chapter 6). The tribes of the Israelites in addition had twelve maps, each one differently coloured and easily identifiable one from the other. This too reflected what they had observed when the angels had come to earth when these “maps” were in the form of fiery flames each differently coloured. Yehudah’s map was blue like the sky, featuring the picture of a lion; Issachar’s map was similar to the blue eye shadow used by women, featuring images of the sun and the moon; this reflected the fact that this tribe was famous for its knowledge of astronomy, calendar calculation, etc. Zevulun’s map was white in colour, symbolising silver, wealth; it also had a picture of a ship on it seeing that tribe had many mariners. Reuven’s map was red, featuring pictures of דודאים, mandrakes or jasmine, reminding the tribe of how their ancestor had traded these to Rachel. Shimon’s map was green, with a picture of the town of Shechem. Gad’s map was a mixture of white and black, featuring a troop of soldiers. Ephrayim and Menashe both had maps of the colour of onyx; the map of Ephrayim featured the picture of an ox, whereas that of Menashe featured the picture the animal known as ראם, single-horned buffalo? Binyamin’s map was coloured like a rainbow showing the picture of a wolf. Dan’s map was like a sapphire in colour displaying the picture of a snake; Asher’s map was similar to the light emitted from an olive-oil burning lamp and displaying  the picture of an olive. Naftali’s map was of the colour of clear (red) wine, displaying a hind.
   דגל מחנה יהודה, “the banner of the camp of Yehudah, etc.” This camp traveled first and was situated in the east of the Tabernacle. It was accompanied by the soldiers from the tribes of Issachar and Zevulun. The Torah describes these three tribes as ראשונה יסעו, “being the first ones to start journeying.” The word ראשונה is an allusion to the fact that these three tribes were all endowed with more than an average amount of חכמה, wisdom, i.e. the first of the emanations. Scriptural verses supporting this claim are found in Psalms 60,9: “Yehudah My law giver.” The 200 men attending David’s crowning as king over the nation have been described as “people who understood the needs of the times,” (Chronicles I 1,32). The men of Zevulun have been described in Judges 5,14 as “holding the marshal’s staff.” In view of these tribes having wisdom as a common characteristic they were suitable partners traveling together as one single camp. The entire camp was known as the camp of Yehudah, being a counterpart of the camp comprising the angels Gavriel, Ezriel, and Shemiel in the celestial spheres which is known as the camp of Gavriel.
   דגל מחנה ראובן, “the banner of the camp of Reuven, etc.,” this camp was situated at the South of the Tabernacle.  Reuven was a repentant sinner. The acceptance of repentance by G‘d is an outstanding act of love and kindness on G’d’s part vis-a-vis His creatures. Seeing that Reuven was the first person to demonstrate repentance he opened the gate for other repentant sinners. The Torah credited Reuven with having intended to save Joseph and even attributed Joseph’s life being saved to his suggestion to throw him into a pit instead of killing him (Genesis 37,21). His camp was accompanied by that of Shimon who was born right after him by his mother Leah. He was joined by the soldiers of the tribe of Gad, the firstborn of Leah’s maidservant Zilpah. The Torah writes that this camp was second in the procession of the Israelites traveling. The expression ושניים יסעו, “they are to travel in second position,” is a hint at the emanation בינה which is second to the emanation חכמה, which had been represented by the camp of Yehudah. The camp of Reuven may be perceived as a counterpart to the celestial camp headed by the archangel Michael whose camp also included the angels Kuchbiel and Pediel who are positioned to the right of the Shechinah. All three are known as the camp of Michael, seeing he represents the attribute of Love and Mercy. It was this camp which Moses alluded to when he said in the song after crossing the sea of reeds מי כמוך, and he concluded the Torah with the verse commencing אין כאל ישורון. When you combine the word מי in the Shirah, with the word כאל  in Deut. 33,26 you get the word מיכאל, a reference to that angel who represents the attribute of Mercy.
    Following this we encounter the camp of the Levites as traveling בתוך המחנות, “amidst the other camp.” You are aware already that the camp of the Levites consisted of 22.000 men from the age of one month and up (3,39). This number corresponded to the number of angels who had accompanied the Shechinah at the revelation at Mount Sinai. This has been alluded to in Psalms 68,18 as we pointed out before. These 22.000 angels were the ones that are normally the angels closest to the Shechinah. In a comparable manner the camp of the Levites surrounded the Tabernacle which housed the Shechinah on earth. There is little doubt that at the time of the revelation many more than the 22.000 angels mentioned in that Psalm descended as an entourage of the Lord. However, these 22.000 have been mentioned because of their superior rank in the celestial hierarchy. All the men of the twelve tribes who had been part of the census were some distance away from the Holy Ark seeing that the Torah employs the word מנגד in describing their relative position in 2,2. The word מנגד always describes distance as we know already from when Hagar put distance between herself and her crying son Ishmael in Genesis 21,16.
    You should also realise that the fact that four camps of the Israelites with their four flags surrounded the camp of the Levites in each direction of the globe is expressed by the Torah by the word that that camp traveled בתוך המחנות, “within the camps.” On the other hand, the several divisions of the Levites in their turn also surrounded the Tabernacle from all four directions. Moses, Aaron, and his sons were situated to the East of the Tabernacle; the sons of Gershon in the West; the sons of Kehat in the South, and the sons of Merari in the North. The Tabernacle was within this inner group of camps. When the Torah describes the camp of the Levites as journeying “within or amidst the other camps,” the meaning is that the Tabernacle journeyed in the centre of the camps of the Levites, whereas the camps of the Levites journeyed in the centre of the camps of the Israelites. In this manner the entire encampment was patterned after the tradition we have about how the celestial entourage of G’d was arranged. This is the meaning of Midrash Maasseh Mercavah chapter 6 that ושכינת אל באמצע והוא על כסא רם ונשא וכסאו גבוה למעלה, “the Shechinah was in the centre seated on a throne and the throne was elevated.”
   דגל מחנה אפרים לצבאותם ימה, “the flag of the camp of Ephrayim, according to its hosts, to the West.” You are aware that Jerobam both sinned himself and caused the whole people to sin. He was of the tribe of Ephrayim. There was therefore a need to heal the “fracture” or “rift” which this man created among the Jewish people, i.e. their camps. The tribe of Ephrayim was encamped together with the tribe of Menashe and the tribe of Binyamin. This is the meaning of Psalms 80,3: “at the head of Ephrayim, Binyamin, and Menashe! Rouse Your might and come to our help!” They were camped on the West side of the Tabernacle; our sages have stated (Baba Batra 25,) that the Shechinah resided in the Western part of the Temple. Concerning the camp headed by Ephrayim the Torah writes that the members  of that camp traveled in third position (verse 24).
    It was appropriate that after the camp of Yehudah which represented Torah, followed by the camp of Reuven which represented repentance, there should follow the camp of Ephrayim which represented the attribute גבורה. This camp corresponded to the celestial camp headed by the archangel Raphael supported by the angels Zavdiel and Achziel which was situated immediately behind the Shechinah. This was the camp that Moses alluded to when he prayed that Miriam be healed from her tzoraat by saying אל נא רפא נאלה, “please G’d heal her,” (Numbers 12,13). He appealed to the attribute represented by Raphael.
   דגל מחנה דן צפונה, “the flag of the camp of Dan, to the North.” It is a well known fact that two golden calves were erected by Jerobam in the territory of Dan [an historical inaccuracy as it hosted only one of these golden calves based on Shir Hashirim 2,4]. Jerobam erected one of these golden calves in Bet El (Kings I 12,29), whereas he placed the second one in the territory of Dan. It was quite appropriate to be in the North as material wealth is perceived as originating from the North and Dan caused the whole world to become darkened by the sin of idolatry. We have a Scriptural verse alluding to this in Isaiah 29,15 “Who do their work in the dark and say: ‘who sees us,’ etc.” Although the sun rises in the East, it is at its brightest when it is in the South at midday. The sun, by traveling westwards before it sets, also illuminates the West with its light. The only direction which the sun does not illuminate directly is the North. This is why the North is associated with the concept of darkness. The expression צפון השמש, “hidden from the sun,” is a double entendre as the word צפון also means “North.” In light of historical developments it was therefore quite appropriate that the camp of Dan should be situated to the North of the Tabernacle. In view of the problems the tribe of Dan would create for the Jewish people as a whole, this camp was in need of atonement, i.e. that G’d’s light should shine upon it notwithstanding the shortcomings mentioned which darkened the halo of that camp. This is why we find that Micah 7, 8  exclaims: “though I have fallen, I rise again; though I sit in darkness, the Lord is my light.” The tribe of Dan was joined by the tribes of Asher and Naftalii who helped to brighten the darkness as we know from Deut. 33,24 and 23 describing Asher having plentiful oil, oil being the raw material from which man-made light is derived. The Torah also  describes Naftali as blessed by the Lord and well satisfied (same passage), indicating that it did not suffer from spiritual darkness. This camp journeyed last. The Torah here used the expression לאחרונה where we would have expected it to write simply ואחרונה יסעו, without the introductory preposition ל. The letter ל points at the letter ה at the end of that word which itself is a reminder of the last letter ה in the tetragram, the symbol of the aspect of the attribute of Justice even in the name Hashem. The three tribes Dan, Asher, Naftali, are all understood as part of the term “the camp of Dan.” It parallels the camp of Uriel in the celestial spheres, the latter being flanked by the angels Daniel and Tamael on the left side of the Shechinah. In the celestial spheres that camp is known as the camp of Uriel, a camp which David hinted at in connection with the atonement achieved by the sacrificial offerings. When he said in Psalm 118,27: ‘The Lord is G’d, He has given us light, bind the festival offerings to the horns of the altar, etc.,” he addressed that attribute represented by Uriel.
    You ought to appreciate that just as the four flags in the desert were copies of the four camps of the Shechinah, the same concept is represented by the four chayot in the vision of the Divine entourage of Ezekiel. They appear in the same order as the camps of the Israelites are listed here. The chayah with the face of a lion representing the camp of Gavriel corresponded to the flag of the camp of Yehudah in the East; the chayah named ox corresponded to the camp of Raphael and the flag of the camp of Ephrayim in the West; the chayah named Adam, represented the camp of Michael and the terrestrial counterpart of the flag of Reuven situated in the South; finally, the chayah known as eagle and representing the camp of Uriel had its parallel on earth in the flag and camp of Dan situated in the North. The author proceeds to demonstrate that many of the names of the tribal princes whose names end with the letter אל correspond to the names of the angels in the celestial camps which we listed. We find that the name of the prince belonging to the camp facing East was called נתנאל, whereas the name of the prince heading he camp of Reuven facing South was שלומיאל; a prince whose camp faced West, of the camp of Ephrayim was called גמליאל, whereas the name of a prince of the camp of Dan facing North was called פגעיאל. None of the other princes in these camps had names concluding with the letter אל, thus providing some linkage to the celestial camps in which each of the twelve angels bears a name ending with these two letters. When you peruse chapter 7 where the inaugural offerings of the twelve princes are listed you will again find that these offerings were brought in the sequence in which the camps are listed here. If you add the total of the respective days on which the princes whose names ended with the letters אל brought their respective offerings, i.e. the second, +the fifth,+the eighth,+the eleventh, you will get the number 26, the numerical equivalent of the tetragram. You will find a parallel allusion to the name of G’d in Ezekiel 1,1 when you combine the dates provided by the prophet, i.e. the 30th year, the 4th month, the 5th of the month. This amounts to a total of 39 or the tetragram spelled as י-ה-ו-ה אחד,”Hashem is One.”
    A Midrashic approach found in Tanchuma Bamidbar 12: the reason the Torah speaks of איש על דגלו באותות, is that Yaakov had already told each of his sons what would be inscribed on their respective banners. He had commanded them that when he died none of the Egyptians and none of his grandchildren should touch his bier, seeing that among the latter there was someone of Canaanitic descent. This is the meaning of Genesis 50,12-13: “his sons did just as he had commanded them; his sons carried him all the way up to the land of Canaan.” The reason that the Torah twice wrote the line “his sons, etc.,” is to inform us that only his sons and no one else participated in carrying the casket in which Yaakov was being transported. He had instructed them that Yehudah, Issachar, and Zevulun were to support the eastern side of the casket, that Reuven, Shimon, and Gad were to support the southern side of the casket. Ephrayim, Menashe, and Binyamin were to carry the western side of the casket, whereas Dan, Asher, and Naftali were to carry the northern end of it. Joseph was not to carry any part of it seeing he was a king. Levi was not to carry any part of it seeing he was slated to carry the Holy Ark. It would not be appropriate that someone who would carry the Holy Ark should defile himself by carrying a casket. [Ephrayim and Menashe, though technically grandchildren, had been described by their grandfather as “like Reuven and Shimon,” i.e. as children (compare Genesis 48,5). Ed.] Yaakov had said that “if you will carry my casket in accordance with my instructions, then G’d will provide you each with flags in the desert. Now Moses made certain that the arrangement of who was going to encamp in which order around the Tabernacle would correspond to the order in which the tribes had carried Yaakov’s bier so that there would be no disagreements. G’d had told him that he would not have to figure out whom to place where as the matter had been arranged already by their patriarch Yaakov.
   יחנו בני ישראל מנגד, “the Children of Israel shall encamp  at a distance, etc.;” according to Tanchuma Bamidbar 14 this was one mile distant from the Tabernacle. This corresponded to the instructions given by Joshua (Joshua 3,4) to the people to keep a distance of 2,000 cubits between themselves and the Holy Ark which crossed the river Jordan ahead of the main body of the Israelites. The reason the Tabernacle was not to be more distant from the camp was to enable the people to walk to it on the Sabbath to conduct their prayers. The flags were equidistant from one another in each direction, whereas Moses and Aaron and his sons were close to the Ark. We know this as the Torah writes that the ones who were making their camp immediately east of the Tent of Meeting were Moses and Aaron and his sons (Numbers 3,38). G’d had said that He wanted it that way so that in case He had occasion to become angry at the Israelites, Moses and Aaron would be at hand to re-establish harmony between G’d and the people. This is the deeper meaning of Psalms 20,6 נרננה בישועתיך, “we will jubilate when Your Shechinah will be present.” The תשועה the psalmist refers to is the saving of the Jewish people from the Egyptians at the sea, whereas the words following in that same verse, i.e. ובשם אלו-הינו נדגל, “and in the name of our G’d we will display flags,” refer to the flags in the desert; finally, the last words of that verse ימלא ה' כל משאלותיך, “may the Lord grant all your requests,” refer to the additional stature attained by the Israelites at that time giving individual status to each of the tribes as a group beloved by G’d by means of the flags they displayed. (Tanchuma Bamidbar 10). The Midrash further sees in Song of Songs 2,4 an allusion to the same idea. Solomon writes there: “He brought me to the banquet room and His banner of love was over me.” We may understand what is written there as a parable. A wealthy man had a treasure chamber full of wine. When he entered to examine the wine he found that it had all turned to vinegar. As he turned around to leave that treasure chamber he came across a single barrel of good wine. Thereupon he said that this single barrel was dearer to him than the entire amount in the rest of that storage chamber. The Lord has 70 nations at His disposal; however, upon examination the only nation from which He derives any pleasure are the Jewish people. The word יין, “wine,” has a numerical value of 70, an allusion to the nations of the world. Concerning all of the barrels of wine G’d said that only the one (nation) which flies a flag has merited His love so that Israel can say: “it is displayed over me.”
    Solomon also says (Song of Songs 6,8) “there are 60 queens and 80 concubines, and damsels without number, whereas unique is she My dove,” a reference to the Jewish people. The former are an allusion to the alufim of the sons of Seir mentioned in Genesis 36. The eighty concubines are a reference to the descendants of Noach which have ben named. The damsels without number refer to the descendants of Ishmael, whereas “the unique one,” which did not intermarry with any of the others are the Jewish people.
    Rabbi Yehudah in Tanchuma Bamidbar 10 said that the verse “He brought me to the house of wine” (Song of Songs 2,4), is a reference to the revelation at Mount Sinai. The Torah may be interpreted to yield either 49 aspects of purity or 49 aspects of impurity (depending on who does the studying). He points out that the numerical value of the word ודגלו, “and His flag,” is 49. The next paragraph in Tanchuma (Bamidbar 11) sees in the words איש על דגלו באותות in our portion an allusion to Solomon saying in Song of Songs 6,10: מי זאת הנשקפה כמו שחר יפה כלבנה ברה כחמה איומה  כדגלות, “Who is she that shines like the dawn, beautiful as the moon, radiant as the sun awesome as bannered hosts?” The nations of the world are portrayed as trying to seduce the Jewish people by inviting the beautiful looking Jewish people to become one of them, culturally speaking. They hold out the promise of appointing the converts to important positions in their midst. Israel replies sarcastically, מה תחזו בשולמית, “what can you possibly  bestow upon us (7,1) seeing that we have already been granted positions more elevated than any of you can ever attain!”
    2,3. והחונים קדמה מזרחה, “and the ones encamped forward, to the east.” The three tribes Yehudah, Issachar, and Zevulun who were stationed right next to Moses and Aaron benefited thereby in that these tribes are described at various times in the Bible as very competent in Torah-law. (compare Judges 5,14 re Zevulun, Chronicles I 12,32 re Issachar and Genesis 49,10 regarding Yehudah). This is what the Talmud Sukkah 56 had in mind when it said that the good experienced by the righteous also devolves upon his neighbour. On the other hand, the tribes of Reuven, Shimon, and Gad were encamped close to the area where Korach and his family had their tents. Concerning them we apply the saying: “woe to the wicked and to those who keep company with him.”
    There were a total of seven clouds of glory surrounding these various camps. Four clouds were positioned one in each direction, i.e. east, west, south, and north. One cloud would move a distance of three days’ march in front of the people; the cloud indicating the presence of the Shechinah would be positioned on top of the people’s camp including the Tabernacle. The seventh cloud would form a curtain between the people and the Shechinah. Numbers 10,14 describes the cloud which rested above the camp by day and by night. The cloud which traveled a three-days’ march ahead of the people would cause all snakes and other harmful creatures in the path of the Israelites to die; it would also smooth out valleys and rises in the terrain to enable the people to walk on an even surface. The cloud which acted as a sort of curtain above the entire camp would protect the people against climate changes such as excessive heat or cold. Concerning the experiences of this entire generation Solomon wrote in Song of Songs 6,4: יפה את רעיתי כתרצה, “You are beautiful my beloved when your deeds are pleasing.” In other words, when the Jewish people were pleasing to G’d in their deeds and desires, He in turn made all obstacles in their way disappear (Tanchuma Bamidbar 12). Moses referred to this state of affairs in Deut. 32,10 when he said: ”He discovered them in a desert land....He encircled them and granted them discernment, etc.” This meant that G’d instructed them in the ways of the Torah. The entire verse in Deuteronomy there is a graphic description in poetic form of the uplifting experiences the Jewish people enjoyed in the desert, largely thanks to the flags, i.e. again in the words of Solomon in Song of Songs 5,10 דגול מרבבה, “they were elevated by being surrounded by myriads of angels.” Thus far the Midrash.
    2,9. ראשונה יסעו, “they are to be the first ones to journey.” Our sages in Tanchuma Bamidbar 14 mention that wherever you look throughout the Scriptures you will always find the tribe of Yehudah mentioned first, being in the forefront. This is true in connection with the journeys, the encampments, the offering of the inaugural sacrifices, the battles against the Canaanites remaining after Joshua’s death (Judges 1,1-2). The same will hold true in the future when the message of the impending redemption will arrive; Yehudah will be the first one to proclaim it  as we know from Isaiah 52,7: ”how welcome on the mountain are the footsteps of the herald announcing happiness, heralding good fortune; announcing victory, telling Zion, “Your G’d is King!” Similarly, in Nachum 2,1: “Behold on the hills the footsteps of a herald announcing good fortune! Celebrate your festivals O Yehudah.” [In both verses quoted it is Yehudah who is addressed. Ed.]
    
    2,14. ונשיא לבני גד אליסף בן רעואל, “and the prince of the sons of Gad, Elyassaph son of Re-uel.” In this instance Elyassaph’s father’s name begins with the letter ר instead of the letter ד as we have read it elsewhere. According to the Massoretes there is only one other person whose name רעואל appears with the alternate spelling דעואל. He is Moses’ father-in-law‘s father mentioned in Numbers 10,29. At any rate the switch in letters indicates that the persons concerned were anxious to obtain nearness to G’d, understanding of Him and intimacy with Him. [when spelled רעו-אל, the first three letters allude to רועה, shepherd, someone extremely caring; when spelled דעו-אל the first three letters refer to דעה intimate knowledge, intimacy. Ed.]
    
    2,32. אלה פקודי בני ישראל ...שש מאות אלף ושלשת אלפים חמש מאות וחמישים, “These are the countings of the Children of Israel, ....603,550.” This same number has already been reported in 1,46. The reason the Torah repeats this number is only to draw our attention to the miracle that from the day the census took place until the day the people commenced their journeys on the 22nd day of the month not a single one of these people had died.
    
    3,1. ואלה תולדת אהרן ומשה, “and these are the descendants of Aaron and Moses: The reason the Torah mentions the name of Moses here although it does not tell us anything about his sons is that the person who teaches someone else Torah is considered as if he had fathered him. Seeing that Moses taught the sons of Aaron Torah he was included in the people considered as their progenitors. This is also why our verse mentions Mount Sinai, as the Torah had been given at Mount Sinai.
   ביום דבר ה' את משה בהר סיני, “on the day the Lord had spoken to Moses at Mount Sinai.” Seeing that the Talmud Sanhedrin 19 makes the point we just made that anyone who teaches the son of his friend Torah is considered as if he had fathered him, the Torah here repeats: “these are the sons of Aaron,” to make sure we understand that biologically speaking the sons now enumerated were fathered only by Aaron. This is also why all four of them are mentioned by name. Later on (verse 3) they are mentioned once more as the ones who had been anointed with sacred oil.
    According to the plain meaning of the text we can explain this apparent duplication of information already supplied by the Torah as proof that G’d is very meticulous when dealing with even the slightest error committed by socially and spiritually eminent people such as the sons of Aaron (and of course Aaron himself as well as Moses). We have a verse to this effect in Psalms 50,3: ”those around Him are judged fiercely.” By adding the words: “the priests who had been anointed,” the Torah explains in advance why even highly esteemed people like Nadav and Avihu do not have their mistakes overlooked; not only is G’d not indulgent with people of such stature, but, on the contrary, He is more demanding of them in light of their representing not only themselves but G’d and His image. When the Torah describes the enemies of Israel who will invade the country as part of G’d’s retribution for Israel’s private and collective sins, it mentions a people who will show no respect for the elderly (Deut. 28,50). The reason this is mentioned is because normally one indulges the elderly, crediting them with wisdom, etc. G’d had to make plain that in His system of justice the more rarefied the spiritual atmosphere in which a person moves the more is he prone to retributive action by G’d if he fails to live up to G’d’s and the people’s expectations. We find the same point being made in Job 34,19 when Elihu tells his friend Job that “he is not partial to princes; the noble are not preferred to the wretched, for all are the work of His hands.”  
    Another approach: There is a mystical element here when the Torah writes of the four sons of Aaron, two of whom had already died and who certainly were not part of this census anymore. The Torah had described Nadav and Avihu as having died “before the Lord” (verse 4). It is reasoable then to understand the words “these are the sons of Aaron” as referring only to Nadav and Avihu whose death is being repeated in verse 4. Seeing that all four of Aaron’s sons had been anointed with sacred oil, we would have to understand the word לכהן at the end of verse 3, normally translated as: “to function as priest,” as meaning לכוהן, “to be priests,” a reference to someone who would function as priest after his father had died, i.e. Pinchas son of Eleazar. This would also account for Exodus 6,25: “she bore for him Pinchas the heads of the Levites according to their families.” This is also why again at the beginning of Parshat Pinchas (Numbers 26,60-61) the birth and death of Nadav and Avihu is once again mentioned. This is also why in Numbers 25,11 the Torah troubled itself to again trace Pinchas’ genealogy back to his grandfather Aaron. Seeing that the entire Torah is full of hints with profound meanings the Torah here saw fit to refer to these sons of Aaron three times. The first mention covers the intellectual relationship of these sons to their uncle Moses. The second time their existence is mentioned is a reference to their physical existence. The third time they are mentioned was to reveal to us something about the nature of G’d’s system of Justice, how instead of indulging the great it does the reverse and measures each one of their actions minutely. Seeing that two of these insights into G’d’s mind were revealed at the same time, the Torah used the conjunctive letter ו in introducing chapter three with the word ואלה. Seeing that the sons of Aaron had to be mentioned, the Torah also had to repaet what happened to them and why.
    
    3,15. מבן חדש ומעלה תפקדם, “you shall number them from one month up.” Our sages in Tanchuma Bamidbar 15 refer to Psalms 92,13 where the righteous is described as blooming like a date palm, saying that the reason that David chose this metaphor was that the shade of a palm tree can reach very far from its trunk. In other words, most of the time, sitting immediately under that tree you do not get much shade. They compare this to the reward the righteous receives for his righteousness. It is not immediate but delayed just like the full effect of the shade cast by the palm tree. Another similarity between the date palm and the people of Israel is that just as the date palm produces both dates (edible) and unripe or underdeveloped useless offshoots, so the Jewish people produce both righteous people, Torah scholars as well as ignorant people not worth preserving in G’d’s storage chambers. Some Israelites were deemed worthy to enter G’d’s treasure chamber, i.e. the land of Israel, others were not. 
    
    4,5. ובא אהרן ובניו, “Aaron and his sons shall come, etc.” The sequence of covering up the furnishings of the Tabernacle was as follows: they would spread the dividing curtain over the Ark of Testimony; over this would be spread the tachash-skins which had been part of the roof; this in turn would be covered with a cloth made of techelet, blue wool. Next they would wrap the Table with a woolen cloth made of techelet. The appurtenances of the Table would also be wrapped in that cloth. These in turn would have an outer wrapping of tolaat-shani, scarlet-coloured wool. This in turn would be enclosed in the tachash-skins. The Menorah, candlestick, would be covered in an inner covering of techelet-coloured  wool, and an outer covering of tachash-skins. They would cover the golden Altar with a techelet-coloured woolen cloth, and wrap it in tachash-skins. The copper Altar would be covered with a purple-covered woolen cloth. This in turn they would wrap in the tachash-skin. You will note that all the furnishings whether they were wrapped in techelet-coloured woolen cloth or different red cloths had an outer covering of tachash-skin around them. This was the same skin which formed the outer cover of the four layers of the ceiling of the Tabernacle and its appearance was familiar to everybody. The only furnishing the Torah did not want to enclose in that tachash-skin was the Holy Ark, preferring to have it wrapped in techelet-blue wool to remind the onlooker of the colour of heaven.
    
    4,16. ופקודת אלעזר בן אהרן הכהן שמן המאור וקטורת הסמים, “and the task Eleazar son of Aaron the priest was charged with was the oil for lighting the Menorah and the Incense.” Nachmanides, commenting on the unusual expression ופקודת instead of ומשא describing the word “task,” writes that this indicates that as opposed to the Levites, especially the Kehatites who literally carried the Holy Ark on their shoulders, Eleazar did not actually carry these items mentioned here. He was in charge in a supervisory capacity, not physically carrying these items.
    However, from the Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 10,3 we get the impression that Eleazar personally carried the oil and the Incense. This was certainly a heavy load seeing that during some parts of the year the Incense consisted of 365 daily portions. The oil for the Menorah amounted to 183 login (at the time it had been prepared and mixed, slightly over 50 liters). It would have required super-human strength to carry these amounts [if indeed the full amounts of both ingredients were prepared at the same time. They were prepared only once a year, so that the stock decreased progressively. Ed.] Thus far the comment of Nachmanides. According to my edition of the Jerusalem Talmud, Eleazar carried the oil in his right hand and the incense in his left hand. The daily quantity of the gift-offering he had hanging from his arm, whereas he had a small bottle of anointing oil suspended from his belt.
    
    4,18. אל תכריתו את שבט משפחות הקהתי, “do not let the tribe of the Kehatites be cut off from the family of the Levites!” G’d commanded Aaron and his sons to warn the Levites, especially the sons of ‎Kehat, not to become guilty of the karet penalty. G’d  thereby displayed especial concern for the Levites who had risked their lives for the holy name of G’d at the time of the golden calf episode. At that time they had executed all the errant Israelites who had actively worshipped the golden calf (Exodus 32,27).
    A Midrashic approach based on the Mishnah in Makkot 23: The sages concluded from the wording in our verse that if someone is guilty of the karet penalty but has had 39 lashes inflicted upon him instead, he has thereby saved himself from the karet penalty. The Talmud bases this on Deut. 25,2 והפילו השופט, “the judge shall cast him down;” the Torah goes on to say: “he shall administer 40 lashes.” The Torah also writes (verse 3 ibid) ונקלה אחיך לעיניך, “and your brother will be degraded in your eyes.” The sages therefore derive from this that once a guilty Israelite has been degraded he is again considered “your brother,”  Why did the Torah set the number of 40 lashes as the number of lashes to be administered [for violations of ordinary negative commandments for which the karet penalty does not apply. Ed.]? The reason is that a human being after 40 days in the womb of his mother is considered as “formed.” He subsequently violated a Torah law, i.e. the Torah which it took 40 days to teach Moses on Mount Sinai. It is appropriate therefore that when such a human being violates the Torah he should be punished by forty lashes. Having received such demeaning punishment he is considered as having discharged his guilt.
    You will find that something similar occurred with Adam. When Adam had transgressed G’d’s command not to eat from the tree of knowledge the world was subjected to forty punishments. This was divided into ten punishments for Adam, ten for Chavah, ten for the serpent, and ten for the earth itself. Ever since, when man transgresses G’d’s laws he is subject to forty lashes as punishment. The number 40 was therefore also applied to the generation of the Israelites in the desert when they sinned by accepting the report of the ten spies. G’d decreed that the punishment would extend over forty years.
   משפחות הקהתי, “the families of the Kehatites.” The Torah deliberately did not write “the family (sing) of Kehat,” being aware that many of them would be members of the rebellion of Korach against Moses and Aaron. In spite of this foreknowledge, G’d said that every care must be taken not to cause the Kehatites to become guilty of serious sins. By writing the word אל תכריתו in this form the Torah added two letters (יו) of the name of G’d in order to append them to the name קהת. You may understand the idea behind this by means of a parable. A king had a son who kept bad company and eventually was arrested with the thieves he had joined. The king’s response was that at this time he would deal leniently with the thieves themselves seeing that his own son was also part of that group. However, he warned that there would not be a second time when such leniency would be practiced. This is also the meaning of Isaiah 48,9: “for the sake of My name I control My wrath; to My own glory I am patient with you and will not destroy you.” 
    
    4,20. ולא יבואו לראות כבלע את הקדש ומתו, “but they shall not come and look as the holy is dismantled, lest they die.” The meaning of the word כבלע is that something is being removed and canceled. (Ibn Ezra). We find the word used in a similar sense in Isaiah 3,12  ודרך אורחותיך בלעו, “they destroy the course of Your paths.”
    According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of the words ולא יבואו לראות וגו' is that when the dismantling of the Tabernacle is in progress prior to the Israelites breaking camp and beginning their journeys, there should not be nosy onlookers bent on feasting their eyes on beholding the holy vessels normally not visible as they are kept inside the Tabernacle.
    A kabbalistic approach:  the words ולא יבואו לראות כבלע mean that when the attribute of כבוד disappears and returns to its original domain in the celestial regions (at the time when its abode is being dismantled) one must not endanger oneself by trying to get a glimpse of it. It is well known that throughout the year this attribute כבוד was detached from the cloud and resided in the Holy of Holies immediately above the lid of the Holy Ark, the כפורת. This is the meaning of the word “for in the cloud I will be ‘visible’ above the kapporet” (Leviticus 16,2). The Torah did not write כי אראה בענן, but כי בענן אראה. Had the Torah written the former I would have understood that G’d’s majesty would be visible within the cloud. The wording that the Torah chose however, suggests that on the way to earth the attribute of majesty is within the cloud only to detach itself from the cloud above the Tabernacle and to descend to the kapporet within the Holy of Holies. I have mentioned this already at the appropriate place. This was the reason why the High Priest was not allowed to enter the Holy of Holies except on the Day of Atonement. Even on that day he was not allowed to enter that part of the Tabernacle except equipped with the incense, the smoke of which made it impossible for him to see something he was not meant to see. This was also the reason he was not to enter with ready-made incense but he had to ensure that the smoke would be initiated inside the Sanctuary so as to fill the airspace within the Holy of Holies enveloping the kapporet, the site of the attribute of כבוד in the process. The Torah spells this out in Leviticus 16,13 “and the cloud of incense is to cover (envelop) kapporet which is above the Testimony.” This then is the reason why the Levites were warned here not to become guilty of beholding things which would cause their deaths, things which even the High Priest was never permitted to behold with his eyes. The matter is paraphrased by Chabakuk 3,4 ונוגה כאור תהיה קרנים מידו לו ושם חביון עזו, “it is a brilliant light which gives off rays on every side- and therein His glory is enveloped.”
    
    
    
    
    
   נשא  את  ראש
    
   שמחה לצדיק עשות משפט ומחתה לפעלי און, “It is a joy for the righteous to do justice; ruin will come to evildoers “ (Proverbs 21,15). In this verse King Solomon informed us that the system of justice by means of which the universe continues to exist is a source of ruin and trepidation for the wicked and a source of joy for the righteous.
    The expression שמחה describes a greater degree of joy and happiness than expressions such as גילה, רינה, משוש, all of which also describe joy of varying degrees. The expressions just cited appear also in connection with the righteous in such verses as Proverbs 23,24: “the father of the righteous will rejoice greatly (גיל יגיל), he who fathers a wise child will be happy (ישמח) with him.” You will observe that Solomon described the joy of the righteous as גיל, whereas he used the expression שמחה in connection with the חכם, the wise. The reason is simply that the wise enjoys both the virtue of being righteous plus the attribute of wisdom. It is quite inconceivable that Solomon would sing the praises of a חכם who is wicked. In Psalms 32,11 David mentions three different kinds of joy in one verse writing שמחו בה' וגילו צדיקים, והרנינו כל ישרי-לב, “Rejoice in the Lord; and exult O you righteous; shout for joy all upright men.” You will note that David reserved the term שמחה for association with Hashem; seeing G’d is so superior in virtuous attributes the highest form of joy is associated with His Being. After all, David did not write שמחו וגילו צדיקים בה', which would have meant that the righteous are to display both forms of joy in relation to Hashem. The meaning of the verse we quoted at the beginning is: the righteous has reason to be happy (שמחה) when justice and righteousness is being observed in the city and there is an absence of violence and robbery; if, however, there is oppression of the poor and robbery then the righteous will worry about it and will be upset about this as it is the nature of the righteous to care. The second half of the verse which speaks about the ruin means that the performance of justice will frighten the wicked of becoming ruined when the righteous admonish the wicked about their conduct pointing out that retribution is in store for them. They will be punished for the hatred they display against the practice of justice. In other words, the new dimension of insight revealed here by Solomon is that the very performance, i.e. prevalence of justice and righteousness spells doom for the evildoers. When the righteous observes this reaction of the evildoers he has cause to rejoice.
    Solomon, by implication, exhorts us to be joyful when performing G’d’s commandments and when seeing others perform them. This is why he speaks about עשות משפט, “the dispensing of justice,” in the infinitive. He does not speak about particular people dispensing justice but refers to the phenomenon which when observed inspires great joy. 
    Naturally, the joy which accompanies the performance of a commandment by an individual Jew is in a class by itself. Seeing that performance of the commandments is called עבודת ה', “serving the Lord,” we can understand what is written in Deut. 28,16 תחת אשר לא עבדת את ה' אלוקיך בשמחה, “on account of the fact that you did not perform the commandments of the Lord your G’d with joy, etc.” When David writes in Psalms 100,2 עבדו את ה' בשמחה, “serve the Lord with joy,” he does not refer to the offering of sacrificial animals but to the performance of each and every commandment which it is our duty to perform. Joy is the ingredient which makes service of the Lord something perfect. This concept helps us understand the unusual phrase in Numbers 4,46 לעבוד עבודת עבודה. Concerning this expression our sages in Erchin 11 ask what kind of service this is that the Torah speaks of there. The answer given in the Talmud is that the Torah speaks of offering songs and hymns. The Levites are commanded to offer songs and encourage expressions of joy to accompany the sacrificial offerings. All of this was to ensure that joy is the prevailing sentiment accompanying service of the Lord.
    It is well known that the age of thirty is the age at which man is at the zenith of his physical power (Avot end of chapter 5). Beginning with the age of fifty our physical strength begins to decline. This is the reason that the years during which the Levites perform active service are between the ages of 30-50. How would he be able to offer song to G’d at a time when he feels that his physical strength is already beginning to ebb? This is also why we have been taught in Chulin 24 that although Levites who are afflicted with certain physical blemishes are not disqualified from performing their service, they are disqualified as soon as they are over fifty years of age. This is why the Torah writes in 8,25: “from fifty years of age he shall withdraw from the legion of work and no longer work.” This is also why the census of the Levites included the ones between the ages of 30-50 only. 
    4,22-23. נשא את ראש בני גרשון גם הם לבית אבותם למשפחותהם, מבן שלשים שנה ומעלה עד בן חמישים שנה, “take a census of the sons of Gershon, as well, according to their fathers’ household, according to their families.” The words גם הם mean that the same procedure which was observed concerning the census of the Kehatites was followed here. Although Gershon was the oldest of the sons of Levi, the Kehatites were counted first as they were entrusted with transporting the Holy Ark as well as other holy vessels. I have already mentioned earlier that just as the encampments of the twelve tribes were four, three tribes in each direction, so the Levites also were divided into four groups, the three sons of Levi (descendants) Kehat, Gershon, and Merari who were encamped around the Tabernacle in three directions, and Moses, Aaron, and his sons who had their tents to the east of the Tabernacle.
    
    4,25. ומכסה התחש אשר עליו, “and the covering of tachash-hide which was above it.” The reason the Torah does not mention here the second type of skin-coverings of the Tabernacle, the ones of red-dyed ram skins, is because they were attached to the tachash-skins. Alternatively, the reason is that the Torah omitted same in the interest of brevity. The task assigned to the Gershonides was relatively easy in terms of what they had to carry, as they had to carry woven materials, not heavy materials such as the Kehatites carried, or the heavy beams which the Merarites had to load unto the wagons. Ittamar was assigned the duty of supervising both the tasks to be performed by the Gershonides and those of the Merarites.
    
    4,47. לעבוד עבודת עבודה, “to perform the work of service.” This is a reference to the song which in itself was a service to support another “service,” namely the sacrificial offerings (Erchin 11). This reflects what David said in Psalms 100,5: “serve the Lord in joy.” We have a clear verse that the offerings were accompanied by song in Chronicles Ii 35,15: “the Asaphite singers were at their stations, by command of David and Asaph and Heman and Jeduthun, the seer of the king; they did not have to leave their tasks.” The “song” referred to was accompanied by music played with harps and percussion instruments. They used to sing the praises of the Lord at the times the daily public sacrifices were being offered on the Altar.
    Our sages (Erchin 13) discuss the details of the musical instruments such as the number of strings on the harp (lyre) being seven. They base this on Psalms 16,11 שובע שמחות את פניך, “In Your presence is perfect joy.” They suggest that instead of reading the word for “perfect” as sovea, it should be read as sheva, “seven,” [same spelling as letters without vowels. Ed.] According to tradition, when the Messiah will come the music played at the sacrificial offerings will be on an instrument with eight instead of seven strings. This is alluded to in Psalm 12,1 which commences with the words: “on the eight-stringed instrument.” In a still more distant period we envision a harp featuring ten strings as alluded to in Psalms 33,2 as well as 92,4. All of these details are discussed at the end of the second chapter of Erchin.
    [The relevance of these somewhat peripheral-sounding discussions is that our present universe is perceived as being based on the seven fixed stars [planets of pre-Copernicus astronomical principles, Ed.]. It is presumed that the general supervision exercised by G’d over all of mankind once the messianic age arrives will be increased to eight such planets. At a still later period, the period perceived as “the world to come” (in terms of resurrection of the dead), the world will enjoy supervision by G’d based on ten planets assigned that task.
    You should be aware that the entire subject of song being offered during the offering of the public sacrifices has not been spelled out anywhere until the time of David. The number of Levites (of whom Scripture tells specifically as singing hymns) is eight. They were: אסף,הימן,ידותן,איתןהאזרחי,; this makes four. Add Levi, who is referred to here as בן “son;” this makes five; then there is the one called על הגיתית, a reference to the family of Gattit a song offered by that family who hosted the Holy Ark. (compare Chronicles I 13,13). This gives us six.  Add the sons of Korach; this makes seven. Finally, there are the “sons” of Moses giving us a grand total of eight such “singers,” or better: “composers of songs and hymns” who were all Levites. These eight people between them used eight musical instruments. The instruments are known as 1) נגינות (Psalms. 4,1). 2) מחלת, (Psalms. 53,1). 3) עלמות שיר (Psalms. 46,1). 4) משאת (Chronicles I 15,22). 5) נחילות (Psalms .5,1). 6) שושנים, (Psalms. 45,1). 7) גתית, (Psalms. 8,1). 8) שמינית, (Psalms 6,1).
    
    4,49. על פי ה' פקד אותם ביד משה, “He counted them at the command of G’d to Moses.” When you compare the census of the Israelites with that of the Levites you will note that the expression: “at the command of G’d” does not occur in connection with the former. The reason this expression was introduced here was to draw attention to the attribute of Justice, an attribute closely associated with the tribe of Levi and its activities. This tribe was appointed to perform tasks which involved making sounds, raising their voices. The letter ש as in שיר, song, is by definition an allusion to שריקה, whistling, whereas the letter מ is by definition a letter which conveys the image of silence, דומם, or וידום אהרון, “Aaron remained silent” (Leviticus 10,3). We find a statement to this effect in the Sefer Yetzirah 6,1 where the significance of the three letters א-מ-ש is discussed. 
    In addition to being assigned the function of singing and playing musical accompaniments during the offering of the daily communal sacrifices, the Levites were also charged with presiding over judicial matters and with mounting the security guard around the Tabernacle. The Levites were also permitted to slaughter the sacrificial animals seeing that the priests did not do this. [there was a rule that the Levites and the Priests must not perform each other’s tasks, and moreover, according to the Zohar, it was conceptually not acceptable for the Priests whose function it is to prolong and preserve life to kill the animals by slaughtering them. The sages derive from the words ושחט אותה לפני,ו “he shall slaughter it in his presence” (Numbers 19,3), the rule that a non-priest slaughter the red heifer whereas the High Priest Eleazar was only to supervise the procedure. (compare commentary by Recanati on Nasso, item 124,1) The apparent contradiction to other verses is resolved by suggesting that animals intended as private offerings were slaughtered by the owners whereas animals intended as communal offerings were slaughtered by the Priests. [compare notes by Rabbi Chavell.]
    At any rate, in view of the various tasks performed by the Levites you will usually find the expression על פי ה', “at the command of the Lord,” in connection with such instructions. I, (author speaking) am fairly convinced that the reason the count of the Levites included babies from the age of one month old is anchored in a mystical dimension of the word חדש, month. The mystical mystical dimension of “month” i.e. “moon” is that it governs by night. The function of the Levites which was a derivative of the attribute of Justice, an attribute predominately active at night, was to demonstrate the virtue of אמונה, “faith, loyalty.” We find this concept alluded to in Psalms 92,3 ואמונתך בלילה, “Your loyalty and dependability is best demonstrated at night.” [Moses contrasts חסד, loving kindness which is manifest by day, with the אמונה, “faithfulness,” which is manifest at night. Ed.] 
    
    5,2. וישלחו מן המחנה, “they shall expel from the camp, etc.” The reference is to the מחנה שכינה, “the camp of the Shechinah” i.e. the sacred domain of the Tabernacle and its courtyard. There were three categories of ritual impurity each of which required a minimum of seven days before it could be purified. They were the צרוע, the זב, and the טמא מת, “the person afflicted with the skin disorder known as tzoraat, the person suffering from semen-related emissions, and the person who contracted impurity through contact with a corpse. The first-named category is expelled from all three camps; the Torah spells this out in Leviticus 13,46 when it says: ”he shall dwell apart, his dwelling shall be outside the camp.” There the word “camp” means the camp of the Israelites. The person suffering from seminal emission needs to keep out of the inner two camps, the camp of the Levites, and, of course, the camp of the Shechinah. This is based on an interpretation by the Talmud Pessachim 68. Concerning someone who had nocturnal emissions (including deliberate marital intercourse) but whose emissions are not beyond his control, i.e. a disease, the relevant verse is found in Deut. 23,11: ”if anyone among you is rendered unclean by nocturnal emission, he must leave the camp, and he must not reenter the camp. Toward evening he shall immerse himself in a ritual bath and at sundown he may reenter the camp.” The camp such a person must leave is the camp of the Levites. Lastly, if someone has become ritually impure through contact with a dead person he must leave the camp of the Shechinah but may move freely in either of the other two camps.
    
    5,17. ולקח הכהן מים קדושים בכלי חרש ומן העפר אשר יהיה בקרקע המשכן, “the Priest is to take sacred water in an earthenware vessel, and he shall take from the earth that is at the floor of the Tabernacle, etc.” Why does he have to take water? Because water symbolises the Heaven (the “upper waters”) and from the floor of the Tabernacle, as this symbolises dust, Earth. We have been taught in Sotah 17 that Rava, commenting on the requirement of dust in connection with the procedure involving the Sotah, the woman suspected of marital infidelity, claims that in the event the woman is found innocent (as she claims) she will bear a son similar to Avraham who said of himself: “I am dust and ashes” (Genesis 18,27). If the woman in question was guilty, however, her fate, i.e. death, will be that she returns to “dust.” Thus far the Talmud.
   בכלי חרש, “in an earthenware vessel.” Rabbi Meir said in Sotah 8 that a person is “measured” (rewarded or receives retribution) by G’d applying similar yardsticks to him as the ones he had employed himself. He bases this on Isaiah 27,8: בסאסאה בשלחה תריבנה, “He will strive with her using her own סאה, “ (grain) measure.” We also have a statement by Rabbi Chiyah that although since the Temple was destroyed the judicial power of the Sanhedrin to administer death penalties was canceled, this does not mean that someone who is guilty of such a penalty will go free. G’d will arrange that a person guilty of the penalty of being stoned to death, for instance, will instead fall off a roof, or something similar. If someone would have been guilty of execution by burning he will instead become the victim of a fire, etc., etc. The same applies to the legislation concerning a Sotah, something that cannot be enacted in the absence of the Temple. At the time the Temple was standing the peripheral procedures of this legislation also reflected the principle of “measure for measure.” The guilty woman presumably enticed her lover by serving him fancy wine in a costly goblet, etc. This is why the Torah demands that the water be “served” her in an earthenware jug, and that the water itself contain dust (compare Sotah 9). She presumably waited for her lover at some secluded place; the Torah displays her and her shame at the entrance to the Temple, for all to see her embarrassment. She no doubt dressed up in her finery and wore a fancy coiffure when having an assignation with her lover; the Torah demands that she be disheveled and dressed in coarse-looking garments.
    If you take a close look at the words בכלי חרש you will find in them a hint that the woman if found guilty will not qualify for afterlife at the time of the resurrection but will remain like a חרש הנשבר, a broken shard of an earthenware vessel. (according to halachah such vessels cannot be repaired so that they will be purified. Source: Pessikta zutrata). This too is part of the punishment being modeled after her sin. She loses her life both in this world and in the world to come as retribution for the fact that until found out she had served two masters, i.e. her husband and her lover. This is the reason the Torah insists on an earthenware jug rather than a glass jug, the latter being capable of purification after it was broken by being heated and blown up again. If a glass vessel which was created by man and destroyed by man is subject to “resurrection,” how much more so is man who was created by G’d and who died at the hands of G’d subject to resurrection! The reason that the woman is to respond with the word אמן twice (verse 22), is to confirm that she is innocent both in respect of her husband and in respect of the man with whom she is supposed to have sinned. If she was guilty, the words are her confirmation that neither man would be part of her assigned בן זוג, “soul-mate,” either in this world or in the world to come (compare Sotah 18).
    
    5,18. מנחת קנאות היא וביד הכהן יהיו, “it is a meal-offering of jealousies, and in the hand of the Priest they shall be.” I have already explained on a number of occasions (Genesis 11,9 et al) that whenever the letters of the name of G’d appear in the reverse order this is an allusion to the attribute of Justice. It means that the subject matter under discussion by the Torah at that point is one in which the attribute of Justice is poised to strike against the guilty party concerned. I have also mentioned that there were a total of 54 words written on the parchment which is placed in the jug with the מים המאררים, “the potentially curse-laden waters,” mentioned in verse 22. (Maimonides Hilchot Sotah 3,7). The number 54 represents the middle two letters of the name א-ד-נ-י, the name of G’d with those letters in reverse order. In other words, the number 54 is the allusion to the attribute of Justice poised to take action against the woman drinking these waters.
   מי המרים המאררים, “the bitter waters carrying a curse.” They are already called “bitter;” this will be the effect if the party drinking them was guilty (compare Rashi). This is not the only time in the Bible that an adjective is applied to something which is only potentially so. Another example is Job 22,6 ובגדי ערומים תפשיט, “and strip the clothes off the naked.” Clearly, one cannot strip clothes off people who are already naked. The point is that the people are described as “naked” seeing that after they have been stripped of their clothing they will remain naked. Another example of the same kind of phraseology is found in Isaiah 47,2: קחי רחים וטחני קמח, “take the mill and grind meal!” Clearly, only the product of grinding grain is meal; the prophet calls the product “meal” even before it has been ground seeing that this is the purpose of the mill.
    The reason the Torah uses the term מאררים to describe this water is due to the words of curses which have been placed into this water on the parchment containing our passage. These words effectively put a curse on the water. The brilliant Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra mentioned a mystical aspect of the matter when he wrote that the word מי (as opposed to מים) is a genitive, a construct form; it has been placed by the Torah next to the word המרים, “the bitter ones.” This word is an adjective describing the noun, as if the Torah had written “the water of the bitter matters.” The mystical dimension of all this is well known. Thus far Ibn Ezra. I would add (author speaking) that he is quite correct. that the word המרים is not a noun but an adjective. Let me now explain the mystical element referred to by Ibn Ezra. Our verse refers to the celestial forces (which activate the effect of this water) as מרים. We know already from Job 3,5 that he called the day on which he had been born מרירי יום ואוררי יום, “a bitter day and a cursed day.” [Actually what Job said was that “if the day had been cursed he would not have been born; as it is was his misfortune that the day had not been cursed. Ed.] According to our author the letter כ in the words יבעתוהו כמרירי יום, (Job 3,5) is not to be understood as part of the root but as a prefix just as in Hoseah 5,10 כ-מסיגי גבול, “just as people who illegally move boundaries.” Job also said in verse 8 of that chapter יקבהו אוררי יום העתידים ערר לויתן, “may those who cast spells on the day damn it, those prepared to disable Leviathan.” Our sages (Baba Batra 75) have also predicted that the archangel Gavriel will instigate a hunt for Leviathan and were it not for G’d’s personal assistance to the archangel he would not be able to subdue this monster. They base this on Job 40,19: “He is the first of G’d’s works; only His Maker can draw the sword against him.”
    I would like you to appreciate the true meaning  of the words מי המים המאררים. The meaning is that the (bitter) contents of that water are what put the curse upon it. When the Priest made the woman take the oath in the name of Hashem while he is holding the water in his hand, he had in mind two attributes of G’d, the attribute of Day and the attribute of Night; (representing the attributes of Mercy and the attribute of Justice respectively). He indicated that both attributes are in agreement that if the woman were guilty she was to suffer the full punishment. Alternatively, if the accusation would be proved unfounded she would become pregnant with child and be cleared of all suspicion for all to see. The intelligent reader will understand that these two attributes are contained in the word מרים. (the מר refers to the attribute “Day” from מר דרור, whereas the ים part of the word refers to the attribute “Night”, based on the verse in Kohelet כל הנחלים הולכים אל הים, that all the rivers stream towards the ים, (based on תורת חיים). These two attributes between them radiate major influence on what goes on in our terrestrial universe, hence Job referred to the “day” as he did. All of these considerations prompted Ibn Ezra to describe the word מרים as an adjective instead of as a noun. In brief: “the waters of the attributes which curse it.” If, in apparent contradiction to this view, the Torah writes in verse 24 ובאו בה המים המאררים למרים, these words mean that “the waters which contain the curses in them will enter her seeing that they have been afflicted by these attributes.” The word מרים refers to the power or attribute which orchestrated the effect of these waters.
    
    5,31. ונקה האיש מעון, “if the man is free from guilt.” Our sages in Sotah 47 interpret this phrase to mean that the divinely-assisted proof of the woman’s guilt will be effective only if her husband’s conduct in matters relating to marital fidelity had been blameless. The specific “innocence” of the husband is that ever since he suspected her of infidelity he had ceased having marital relations with her. Others hold that if the husband ever in his life had indulged in illicit sex, he is in no position to call upon heavenly intervention to prove his wife’s guilt, and the whole procedure will become ineffective. Even if the husband had only slept with his wife after she was betrothed to him but still lived in her father’s house, (a Rabbinic prohibition only) he would have forfeited the right to rely on the procedure of Sotah for the rest of his life. The sages holding this view base it on the wording in our verse where they read the following words as forming a single sequence and meaning that “only when the husband is free from guilt concerning his own wife will the wife have to bear her guilt.” Therefore, if aware of this, the woman had indulged in questionable conduct giving rise to her husband seriously suspecting her of infidelity, she is not asked to drink these waters but is divorced without receiving the כתובה, the financial 
settlement a woman who has not been proven at fault in a divorce is entitled to. 
    There is, however, also an historical development to the enactment of the legislation discussed in our chapter. We are told in Sotah 47 that due to the increased number of instances of marital infidelity the effectiveness of the מי המאררים declined. We have a verse in Hoseah 4,14 drawing attention to the deterioration of the morals in Jewish society. The prophet writes: “I will not punish their daughters [by making them drink these waters Ed.] for fornicating nor their daughters-in-law for committing adultery; for they themselves consort with whores (the husbands) and sacrifice with prostitutes, and a people that is without sense (of honour) must stumble (be afflicted).” What the prophet is saying is simply that there was no longer a justification for G’d involving Himself in restoring domestic peace between husband and wife when both parties had already deliberately destroyed that relationship which should be built on mutual trust. As long as by and large, the Israelites conducted themselves as true to their destiny of being a holy nation, G’d did His part in healing the occasional breach of trust which occurred. Once lack of fidelity had become a way of life there was no point in that. When G’d used to perform the miracle of the מי המאררים, the legal objective was to avoid the birth of bastards or children perceived to be bastards and the negative social fallout of such phenomena. Seeing a time had come when the parents did not seem to mind begetting bastards, why would G’d interfere by peforming miracles to preserve individual families’ cohesion? Sexual intercourse had ceased to be an instrument for producing children and had become a tool for satisfying the respective lust of the participants. The wording of the last words we quoted from Hoseah mean that “a nation which is unwilling to understand what is good for its development will suffer the consequences of its own foolishness.” The word ילבט occurs in that context also in Proverbs 10,8 where Solomon says  ואויל שפתים ילבט, “the one whose lips speak foolishly will be afflicted.”
    
    6,2. איש או אשה כי יפליא לנדור נדר נזיר, “a man or  a woman who deliberately makes a vow involving abstinence, etc.” The reason that the Torah saw fit to append this paragraph to the previous one involving marital infidelity is to teach us that excess consumption of wine and resulting drunkenness may have led to the phenomenon of sexually frivolous conduct described in that paragraph. He who sees how the woman who had become guilty of such unrestrained behaviour has been dealt with will take the lesson to heart, and may even decide to abstain from alcoholic drink altogether in order to avoid temptation (compare Sotah 2). The prophet Hoseah appeared to share this view when he said (Hoseah 4,11) “lechery, wine, and (even?) new wine destroy the mind of Your people.”
    The plain meaning of the text is that a Nazirite is warned not to consume wine seeing that anyone who allows his desire for wine and alcoholic drink to determine his actions will give in to other temptations involving matters which are forbidden even in moderate quantities, to lead him astray. The reason the Nazir has been commanded to grow his hair long is that long hair causes people to worry, and the Torah wants the Nazir to worry about not breaking the constraints of his vow. When he looks dishevelled due to his unruly hair he will also abstain from other activities which reflect dishonour upon man. Hair is perceived as the remnant and excess of “smouldering“ physical forces that the body emits. [I believe that the fact that both nails and hair have to be trimmed, (and are phenomena which continue to grow even after death for some time) are viewed as reflecting the preponderance of physical forces within us. It is interesting that we find in the Talmud Sanhedrin 21 that Jewish women were generally devoid of pubic hair and under-arm hair which was taken as a sign of their moral superiority in matters of chastity. See my article on hair in “The Just lives by his faith.” Ed.]
    The expression יפליא in our verse refers to the Nazirite doing something פלא, wonderfully different. Whereas all the world indulge their senses, the Nazirite has decided to not only repress his evil urge but to fortify his resolution by making a vow to abstain from wine, the prime cause of stimulating such temptations.
    The expression נזיר occurs first in connection with the Priests being commanded not to touch the holies of the Children of Israel when in a state of ritual impurity (Leviticus 22,2). In that instance the word means: “to separate, to withdraw.” Another instance where we have encountered this expression is Exodus 29,6 in connection with Aaron’s headgear. It is described as a sort of crown which set Aaron apart from the other Priests. Crowns are worn by Royalty, i.e. people in authority. Aaron, in his capacity as High Priest, was perceived as a human being who was in total control of his urges and who exercised authority over his יצר הרע. In other words, his status was the same as that of the voluntary Nazirite except that in his case it was part of his “job-description.”
   להזיר לה', ”to abstain for the sake of the Lord.” The vow of abstinence is dedicated to the Lord whom one cannot serve to the full if one’s brain is befuddled by strong drink.
    
    6,3. מיין ושכר יזיר, “he must abstain from wine and alcoholic drink.”  In this verse the word יין refers to wine which has aged appropriately, whereas the word שכר refers to new wine which has not yet fermented. According to Onkelos the meaning is exactly the reverse, and it would preclude the need to desist from alcoholic drink which does not originate from grapes.
    The Nazirite is forbidden the use of five grape-products: 1) wine; 2) grapes; 3) raisins; 4) the kernel; 5) the skin. Consumption of either of these five items is considered as a separate violation of the commandment legislated here. Unripe grapes are included under the heading “grapes,” whereas vinegar is considered part of the prohibition “wine,” seeing it had been wine before it turned into vinegar. The element causing it to be prohibited is not perceived as having departed from the liquid which deteriorated into vinegar. The Talmud Nazir 38 rules that if a Nazir ate fresh grapes together with dry grapes and kernels and skins and he squeezed out a cluster of grapes, he has violated 5 commandments and is liable for them separately. (to receive 5 times 39 lashes).
    A kabbalistic approach: in connection with the words איש כי יפליא, I have already explained on Leviticus 21,10 what the High Priest represented. Here the Torah teaches that the Nazir is on a spiritually even higher level than the High Priest. The High Priest’s dominating attribute (emanation) is that of חסד, whereas the predominant attribute of the Nazir is בינה, which is ranked higher than חסד in the list of emanations. Seeing he is “crowned” with this attribute the Torah calls such a person נזיר, a reference to the נזר, crown, which is worn by the High Priest. This is the meaning of the words “the crown of his G’d is on his head,” (verse 7). Because of all this “a razor shall not cross his head” (verse 5), “the growth of his hair on his head shall continue growing” (verse 5), ”his head shall be sanctified” (verse 11). All of this is subsumed under the heading כי יפליא, “a display of superior wisdom.” Converting such wisdom into something concrete requires the attribute בינה and this is described in the Torah by the words לנדר נדר. The part of the brain in which vows originate is the part where the attribute בינה is located.
    The Nazir is warned concerning three separate matters: 1) consumption of wine; 2) shearing the hair on his head; 3) becoming ritually impure through contact with a corpse directly or indirectly. The Torah divides these prohibitions into three separate ones by writing the words כל ימי נזרו, “all the days his vow is effective,” between each of them. The first time this expression occurs is in verse 4 in connection with the grapes. The second time it occurs in verse 5 in connection with the prohibition to shave or trim his beard. The third time it occurs in verse 6 in connection with observing mourning rites.
    The reason the Nazir must not drink wine or become ritually impure is to keep his distance from forces which are beholden to the “left side” of the emanations, the part  which is perceived of as representing spiritually negative influences. On the other hand, he is warned not to shave as hair represents strength as we know from Samson. The moment Samson agreed to have his hair cut his “spiritual” strength disappeared and he was no better than any other ordinary mortal. He regained his prowess only after his hair had grown back (Judges 16,17 as well as Judges 16,22). As I have mentioned previously, hair grows incessantly and continues to grow even after death if the corpse is in a moist environment. Each single hair is a symbol of the far-flung activities of the Lord, activities which deal with minute details, just as every single hair seems by itself insignificant. Hairs represent continuous develop- ment in all directions of the globe. As a reminder of this concept of G’d the “All-Present,” the Nazir is commanded to give the hair full and unrestrained opportunity to keep growing This is the mystical dimension of the words גדל פרע שער ראשו. The Nazir is cautioned not to destroy any part of his hair by means of a razor seeing that ”it is the crown of G’d on his head” (verse 7). Were he to cut this hair this would be equivalent to heresy practiced by an ordinary Israelite, something which the sages called קצץ הנטיעות “destroying saplings planted by G’d through cutting them (spiritually).” It is similar to separating the holy name of the Lord from His “branches.” When Samson allowed his hair to be cut his physical strength departed from him immediately and the prophet Samuel (himself a Nazir and author of the Book of Judges) describes what happened to him in these words: ותאלצהו, “she nagged him constantly.” The word has a connotation of the attribute of Justice, i.e. the sages suggest that when reading these words we should reverse the letters ל-צ to read the word as ותאצלהו, as if it meant that Delilah had succeeded in denying Samson the spiritual input which had been the source of his physical prowess.
    Once the time arrives for the Nazir to cut his hair at the end of the term of his abstinence, the Torah commanded that he should place his shorn hair “on the fire which is below his peace-offering” (verse 18), seeing that this hair had become sanctified and is a symbol of something holy. Regarding the rule of not being allowed to become ritually defiled, the Torah applied a more stringent ruling to the Nazir than to the High Priest. Though the High Priest must also not participate actively in the funeral of his father or mother, the Torah does not say anything about his hair being burned after it is trimmed, (which occurs frequently). This makes it plain to the people that the Nazir is a model of sanctity.
    Our sages (in Sotah 10) say that there are 5 types of people who, though they were created in the Divine image, were nevertheless punished. They were: Avshalom who was punished by being hung and subseqently speared by his hair. King Shaul who was killed by his neck (through the sword). Shimshon was punished by losing his physical prowess. King Assa of Yehudah was punished by being paralyzed in his legs. King Tzidkiyahu was punished by having his eyes gouged out by the Babyloinas. Concerning the procedure prescribed for the Nazir Solomon (Song of Songs 5,11) said קוצותיו תלתלים “his locks are curled.” Also Daniel 7,9 speaks about this hair when he said: “the hair of his head is like clean wool.”
    The meaning of the word שכר in our verse refers to any agent capable of causing man to become intoxicated. The word חרצנים is unique in the Bible just as is the word זגין. The former refers to the seeds inside the grapes, the latter to the skin on the outside. Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra thinks that it is the other way around.
    
    6,9. בפתע פתאם, “suddenly, unexpectedly;” the word means the same as אדמת עפר in Daniel 12,2. where he describes sudden resurrection of the dead. The Nazir, as opposed to most other instances when a sin-offering has to be brought, brings such an offering regardless of whether he defiled himself knowingly or unwittingly. This is what our sages said in Keritut 9: four people have to bring an offering both if they committed an intentional wrong and if they committed the same wrong unintentionally. They are: 1) the Nazir, 2) the person who swore an untrue oath concerning what happened to an item entrusted to his care. 3) Swearing a false oath through testifying to an event which did not take place as described. 4) A person who engaged in sex with a partially freed slave-woman. He receives 39 lashes and brings an offering. 
    Concerning the impurity contracted by that Nazir the Torah wrote both the word פתע and the word פתאם. The reason is that the word פתע speaks of an inadvertently contracted impurity. The word פתאם speaks of an intentional defilement by the Nazir, something our sages derive from Proverbs 22,3 where Solomon writes ופתיים עברו ונענשו, “the fools kept going and were punished.” This indicates that both the wilful and the merely foolish have to endure the punishment. As far as the other candidates for such offerings are concerned, the Torah added the words ונעלם ממנו, “it (the commission of a sin) was concealed from him,” in each example. The only exception to this rule is Leviticus 5,24. This proves that in the situation described in that passage it makes no difference if the error was committed knowingly or not. In both situations the guilty party has to restore the object, add 25% as punitive damages, and offer a guilt offering to expiate for what he had done. The laws pertaining to the other three examples we mentioned are all based on the law applying to the person who swore an oath denying he had trespassesd against an article entrusted to him. The method used to do this is called gezeyrah shavah, similar sounding words being used by the Torah in subjects which are not conceptually related to one another. It is presumed that the relevant expression was not needed to give us the plain meaning of the verse in question. The word in question is תחטא. In connection with the man who had sexual intercourse with the semi-free slave, the Torah adds the words ונסלח לו, “he will be pardoned,” again making the deed subject to an offering regardless of the awareness of the sinner at the time. Seeing that it is the function of the guilt-offering to obtain forgiveness for the sinner, it seems reasonable to see in the unnecessary mention of this result a reference to the fact that even a deliberate perjury can be wiped out through this offering.
    
    6,13. ביום מלאת  ימי נזרו, “on the day the days of his vow of abstinence are complete.” The Torah did not reveal a reason why the Nazir has to bring this offering on the day he completes his vow of abstinence. There is no other instance when the Torah legislated a sin-offering to be brought by a person unless he had first committed an error. In this instance the Torah speaks about  these offerings in anticipation of the day when the vow is complete. Why would a person who had undertaken to abstain from the pleasures of this world be required to bring an offering in order to expiate?
    Nachmandies offers an interpretation in line with the plain meaning of the text. He views the very conclusion of the period of abstinence as a decline in the spiritual standard which the Nazir had imposed upon himself at the time he undertook the vow. It would have been appropriate for the Nazir to maintain the spiritual “high” he had achieved indefinitely, for the rest of his life. Seeing that the Nazir limited the time period during which he would try to be so “frumm,” he has to bring this offering. He needs atonement. Even when we accept the reasoning of Nachmanides the uniqueness of this legislation remains unaffected by it. Unless we resort to a kabbalistic interpretation we will not truly understand this legislation.
    I have already pointed out that the very concept of the Nazir’s abstention reflects that he sought to attach himself to the celestial counterpart of the attribute רחמים. Now the same person desires to descend from this level of sanctity. The Torah, while demanding these sacrifices from the Nazir, does not mention that he is in need of forgiveness. There is no mention of the word atonement either. The idea of the sacrifice is to marshal celestial forces and to do this in preparation of returning to “normal” life and the permissible indulgences which are part of such a life. The very fact that the three offerings brought by the Nazir consist of burnt-offering, peace-offering, and sin-offering shows that we are not dealing with a sin. If there were a need to confirm this the fact that the Torah calls that person a Nazir even after he has completed the procedurse and drunk wine again (verses 21-22) shows that the Torah does not view him as having been guilty of a spiritual come-down.
    
    6,23. כה תברכו את בני ישראל, “thus you shall bless the Children of Israel.”  According to the plain meaning of the text the words mean: “in this style you are to pronounce blessing.” We have the same expression כה being used in Numbers 8,7 where the Torah describes the procedure of purifying the Levites.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Nasso 9: The words כה תברכו mean that G’d gave those words to the priests as a gift so that they would have the power to bless the Israelites. Seeing that in addition to this gift G’d would assign to the priests another 24 gifts from the Israelites themselves, with this gift they would dispose of 25 gifts corresponding to the numerical value in the letters of the word כה. In Sotah 38 we are taught additionally that the word כה contains a number of restrictions within it. 1) The language in which the priests are to bestow the blessing must be Hebrew. 2) It requires further that the blessing be administered while the priests are standing. 3) The priests are to raise their hands while performing the rite of blessing the congregation. They are to face the recipients of the blessing face to face. The blessing has to be pronounced loudly and the priests (in the Temple) were to pronounce the Ineffable Name while intoning the blessing. Some of these rules are based on Leviticus 9,22: “Aaron raised his hands and blessed the people.” The words ושמו את שמי, “they are to place My Name,” is the source of the Ineffable Name being invoked. The use of the expression את שמי in our verse and the same expression in Deut 12,5 לשום את שמו, serve as the basis for this halachah. Just as in Deut. the Ineffable Name was to be invoked in the Temple, the subject matter of the verse, so here too the priestly blessing with the Ineffable Name is used only in the Temple.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word כה in the sequence כה תברכו את בני ישראל, represents the tenth attribute (emanation), the one always employed by the prophets when they convey messages they have received from G’d to deliver to the Jewish people. [The normal wording we would have expected is כתברכו, “when you bless.”] The extra letter ה is reminiscent of the last letter ה in the tetragram, a letter we have several times described as the attribute of Justice in its tempered form. In Psalms 148 David began with the words הללויה, i.e. half the Ineffable Name, and then he continued with הללוהו במרומים, “praise Him in the celestial regions”; here he supplied the other two letters of the tetragram seeing that on earth at that time (and in our time) only half of G’d’s name is effectively king. The priests are asked to emulate Avraham in a sense. When G’d said to Avraham כה יהיה זרעך, “thus will be your descendants,” and Avraham realised that he did not have a claim to such a promise but that the comprehensive nature of this promise must be an act of חסד on the part of G’d, he responded: ויחשביה לו צדקה, “he (Avraham) considered this a charitable act by G’d.” The priests when blessing the people and directing G’d’s largesse in their direction are also to have in mind the last letter ה in the tetragram which is used to guide the fates of the Jewish people containing an element of the attribute of חסד  within it.
   אמור להם, “saying to them:” The word אמור, though an infinitive, is spelled here with the letter ו, something quite unusual. The extra letter ו which stretches the word, makes it longer, is to suggest to the priests that they must not relate to the duty to bless the people as a burden imposed upon them by G’d, something they want do be done with as soon as possible, in a hurry. On the contrary, they should bless the people with all the concentration they are capable of.
    Another reason for the letter ו in the word אמור here is that the numerical value of the word including the digit 1 for the word itself is 248. The blessing is absorbed by all 248 limbs/organs of a person. If only one organ were left out this could be the heart upon which all other organs are so vitally dependent.
    The mystical element in the number is that it corresponds to the Shechinah which rests on the palms of the priests hidden there as if it were the heart of the heavens reciting the blessing. Both celestial and terrestrial forces receive their blessings from the לב השמים, the heart of the heaven.
    Another concept alluded to not only in the spelling of the word אמור but in the choice of that word instead of תאמרו, or something similar, is that the Torah insists by using this word in the spelling we have as an impersonal word, an infinitive. This is a hint that the spelling out audibly of G’d’s Ineffable Name may be at the discretion of the priests when too many people in the audience are scoffers, non-believers, non-observant and the like. At such times and places it is better for the priests to “swallow” these words so that they are not heard by the audience evoking the reverse of the “peace” which is the purpose of the blessing. In fact we read in Kidushin 31 that as of the time when the פריצים, deniers of the faith, became numerous, the priests made it a practice to swallow the name of G’d inaudibly. The priests based themselves on the dual command here. On the one hand, the Torah writes כה תברכו, “(only) thus shall you bless,” and on the other hand, the Torah deliberately leaves aspects of the blessing indeterminate by adding the words אמור להם, “saying to them.” The meaning is that the people deserving of the blessing would find it effective, the others would not. Had the Torah written the word in an imperative such as תאמרו, the inescapable conclusion would have been that even non-deserving people would be bound to become beneficiaries of that blessing. [When Yitzchak took a great chance of mortally offending his father in order to prevent the indiscriminate power to bless or to curse to be given to Esau these were precisely the thoughts that motivated him. Ed.]
    I have already mentioned in my commentary on Exodus 17,12  [page 1015 my translation, Ed.] that when the priest extends his ten fingers heavenward he signals to G’d that he desires to sanctify himself with all the sanctities embodied in the ten emanations, asking for the abundance of G’d’s goodness to be channeled toward his creatures on earth by means of the conduits G’d has available for that purpose, including all the disembodied spirits. The word את in the sequence כה תברכו את בני ישראל includes the angels in this directive. The words אמור להם is sort of a repetition to make certain all these disembodied angels both above and below certain layers of the heavens are included.
    Another lesson to be derived from the extra letter ו in the word אמור is that the chazzan is to call upon the priests to intone the blessing by pronouncing the word כהנים and to pronounce each word separately before the priests repeat it in chorus. The fact that the word אמור is singular followed by the plural להם suggests that a single individual is to call upon the priests (pl.) to proceed in such a fashion. This is also why when there is only one priest in the congregation the call כהנים is omitted and is not substituted for by the word כהן in the singular.
    The very fact that halachah deems it necessary to “brief” the priests word for word reflects that this is the practice in the celestial regions where the angels who act as priests in the celestial Sanctuary are following the same routine. This is the mystical dimension of Sotah 38 that כל כהן המברך מתברך, that every priest performing the commandments of blessing the people is himself the subject of a blessing. The Talmud means that the priest ministering on earth will in turn become the recipient of blessings from the source, the essence of Mercy in the heavenly regions; this is the meaning of what G’d promised Avraham in Genesis 12,3: “I will bless those who bless you.” In other words, the priests down here are patterning themselves after known role models in the celestial regions. Here on earth the sequence is as follows: The blessing is channeled to the congregation through the chazzan wearing a white talit through the priests pronouncing the blessing facing the congregation.
    Still another meaning embodied in the words אמור להם, is that the priests are to bless the people when the people tell them to, i.e. להם. This is why Onkelos translates the words as כד יימרון להון “when they say to them.” Once the priests have been asked by the congregation to intone the blessing and they fail to do so they violate a positive Biblical commandment (Sotah 38). As long as they have not been asked to intone the blessing they are not guilty of such a violation. Concerning this subject  we find in the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 8,5 that when Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi felt weak he hid behind a pillar so that he would not be perceived as not complying with the congregation’s invitation to intone the blessing on the plaform. Rabbi Eleazar, on the other hand, preferred to leave the Synagogue altogether if he felt he could not perform the ceremony. Both Rabbis were too frail to raise their arms in the prescribed manner. [Apparently at that time individual invitations were issued to the priests to ready themselves to perform the blessing. Ed.]
    According to Rabbi Yitzchak the elder, a Tossaphist, any priest who is not married is not to ascend the platform and raise his hands in pronouncing this blessing. I believe there is a sound basis for his opinion. The reason is that man is not complete without a wife, he lives a joyless existence and the blessing to be effective must emanate from someone filled with joy. As an incomplete human being [by choice? Ed.] he is neither the recipient of blessings nor a suitable dispenser of such. This [voluntary state of being single, Ed.] was enough reason for the sons of Aaron Nadav and Avihu to be deserving of the penalty they incurred. By not marrying they caused thousands of girls to remain unmarried, each one hoping they would be chosen as a wife for them and meanwhile refusing other offers of marriage. By the time Nadav and Avihu died these girls were too old to attract suitors so that they remained spinsters for the remainder of their lives. I have already mentioned in my commentary on Leviticus 15,33 that this is one of the six opinions offered by the sages who elaborated on the nature of these two priests’s sins. This is also what lies  behind the words of Psalms 78,63: “fire consumed their young men and their maidens remained unwed.” The reason that the young men were burned by fire was that on their account so many girls remained unwed. According to that particular view Nadav and Avihu were killed by heavenly fire as they were not worthy to pronounce the blessing over the Jewish people having themselves remained remiss in the performance of such a basic commandment. When a priest conveys the kind of blessings which include the principle of enjoying married life with a spouse, how could he be suitable to do this unless he himself had set a suitable example?
    
    6,24. יברכך ה' וישמרך, “may the Lord bless you and preserve you.” According to the plain meaning of the text the blessing, i.e. basically any blessing, is that the recipient enjoy the blessing he enjoys already and that these blessings be increased both qualitatively and quantitatively and that they be enduring. The ability to enjoy the continuity of such a blessing can be conferred only by G’d, not by an earthly ruler. The latter may dispense largesse but cannot ensure that the recipient keeps getting the benefit. Our sages Tanchuma Nasso 10 illustrated this point by means of a parable when they said: when a mortal king resident in Rome has a friend who resides in Syria, he inquired after the friend’s  whereabouts, visited him and left a gift of 100 bars of gold. The friend loaded a couple of donkeys with the gold intending to move to Rome with his new-found wealth. On the way he was attacked and had everything he owned stolen from him. It was clearly beyond the king’s power to protect all his friends against robbers world-wide. 
    A Midrashic approach: The word יברכך implies being blessed with material wealth; the word וישמרך implies that the recipient is preserved so that he can perform G’d’s commandments as a result of the material wealth G’d has blessed him with. The words יאר ה' פניו אליך , mean that G’d may grant you the kind of children who are full of Torah knowledge. The Midrash bases this insight on Proverbs 6,25 כי נר מצוה ותורה אור, “for like a single candle  lighting a narrow area is the performance of a single command- ment, whereas the performance of the Torah in all its aspects provides great light.” Furthermore, the same words include the blessing that “from you will stem priests who in turn will illuminate the Altar in the Temple,” as it is written in Maleachi 1,10 ולא תאירו מזבחי חנם, “you will not light up My Altar without recompense.” We have another verse supporting this point in Leviticus 6,5 where the Torah writes: “and the fire on the Altar will never be extinguished.” 
    Concerning the precise meaning here of the word ויחונך, Rabbi Chiyah the great taught that it means that the Lord will make His camp near you (from the root חנה). Another approach holds that the word promises that G’d will make prophets descend from your loins; that school of thought bases itself on the verse in Zecharyah 12,10 ושפכתי על בית דוד ועל יושבי ירושלים רוח חן ותחנונים, “I will pour out over the house of David and over the people of Jerusalem a spirit of pity and compassion.” These are the ingredients which we think of when we think of prophets. Still another approach sees in the word ויחונך a reference to grace in the sense of being held in esteem, being appreciated. The word appears in that meaning in Esther 2,17 where we are told that all who saw Esther, including the king, immediately formed this positive opinion of her.
    On the final verse, ישא ה' פניו אליך וישם לך שלום, “may the Lord raise His countenance toward you and grant you peace,” we must compare the meaning of this expression to Deut. 10,17 אשר לא ישא פנים ולא יקח שוחד, “Who does not play favourites nor accept bribes.” How can we reconcile these two apparently contradictory concepts of asking the very same G’d whom we applaud for not playing favourites in Deut. 10,17 to play favourites with the entire Jewish people in the priestly blessing formulated by the same G’d? [The word ישא has to be translated then as “will forgive.” Ed.] If the victim of an unfavourable decree has repented before the decree has been sealed his repentance is effective. If not, such as in Deut. 17,10 it is not. 
    A second approach to the first verse. The word יברכך implies being blessed with sons, the word וישמרך implies being blessed with daughters who require additional protection and safeguarding on the part of their parents. This is reflected in the promise in Psalms 121,5 ה' שומרך, ה' צלך על יד ימינך, ”the Lord is your guardian; the Lord is your protection, at your right hand.”
    The verse יאר ה' פניך אליך describes the element life which is associated with light, such as in באור פני מלך חיים, “in the light of the king’s face there is life” (Proverbs 16,15). The word appears in a similar connotation in Psalms 67,2 אל-הים יחננו ויברכנו יאר פניו אתנו סלה, ”May G’d be gracious to us and bless us; may He illuminate us with His face, Selah.”
    Concerning the last verse of the blessing(s)ישא ה' פניו אליך , this means that “in every direction you turn may G’d arrange for you to find peace and harmony and be protected from all unpleasant happenings.” This is a form of G’d’s personal benevolent supervision of our fates generally referred to as השגחה פרטית. We find the reverse of this threatened by G’d as part of threats of the prophet Isaiah when he quoted G’d as saying: “I am going to turn My watchful eye away from you (G’d refusing to hear our prayers)” (Isaiah 1,15).
    In Berachot 20, the sages derive from the wording ישא ה' פניו אליך that although when you look at this verse superficially you get the impression that it contradicts the verse where G’d says that He does not play favourites, using the word לא אשא פנים this way is misleading. All that is meant is that G’d will lift our countenances, i.e. respond to our first having raised our face to Him in prayer and supplication. This is not what is called “playing favourites,” i.e. using double standards. This idea is even reflected in the text of the Torah. We read in Deut. 8,10: “you will eat and be satisfied and you will bless the Lord your G’d.” Assume that father, mother, and children assemble around the family table to consume their daily meal and they find that there is not enough to sate even one of them, never mind all of them. They will turn their faces to G’d, and each one will hold back and help himself to a minimum making sure there will be enough to go around. When G’d observes such conduct, He will most certainly be affected by it and make sure that in the future this family will not be lacking for anything. This is also the deeper meaning behind the famous line in Song of Songs 3,7 that Solomon’s bed was watched over by 60 guards. Did then Solomon need these guards? Was he in danger of attacks by assassins, by terrorists? What is meant by these words is that the priestly blessing which comprises 60 letters was engraved on the edge of Solomon’s bed.
    Another explanation of this line in Song of Songs: the bed mentioned in Song of Songs is not that of King Solomon at all. It is the “bed” of He who owns peace, i.e. G’d. The “bed” is the Holy Temple; The reason the Temple is compared to a bed is that just as the function of the bed is for those on it to practice the commandment of increasing the human population of the world, so it was a propensity of all the furnishings in the Temple to increase and multiply. We have a glimmer of this in Kings I 8,8: “the staves (attached to the Holy Ark) were growing longer so that they would wind up being visible in the Sanctuary in front of the Shrine. A verse indicating something similar is found in Chronicles II 3,6 where Ezra describes the gold of the Temple as זהב פרוים, understood to mean “gold which had the capacity to multiply, which produced fruit.” A third scriptural verse which at least alludes to this phenomenon as far as the materials used for the Temple is concerned is found in Kings I 7,2 where the entire Temple is described as בית יער הלבנון, "The Lebanon Forest House,” suggesting that just as a forest and its trees keep growing, so the Temple would keep expanding. The next words in that verse in Song of Songs, i.e. כלם אחוזי חרב, “all of them trained in warfare, i.e. “swordsmen,” refer to names of the Lord. The words following i.e. איש חרבו על ירכו, “each one with his sword on his loins”, beg the question what the ירך, the seat of a man's semen has to do in this verse. The answer is that these words describe that even if Solomon (symbol of the Jewish people) had frightening dreams at night, dreams during which he (they) felt in immediate danger, thanks to the encouragement derived by the proximity of all these names of G’d the people would rouse themselves in the morning, go to the Synagogue, and shake off any fear experienced during the night in a nightmare. They would find the effects of the dream dissolve without any further ado. In order to provide the Jewish people in the desert with this remedy, G’d instructed Aaron and his sons to bless the people in the way the Torah specified.
    G’d said: “in the past when I needed to extend a blessing to My creatures I would bless Adam and Chavah, as we know from Genesis 1,28 ‘G’d blessed them saying be fruitful and multiply etc.’” G’d blessed Noach when the latter was in need of such as blessing as we know from Genesis 9,1: “G’d blessed Noach and his sons.” He blessed Avraham as we know from Genesis 25,1: “G’d had blessed Avraham with everything.” 
    From Avraham’s time on, G’d changed His mode of administering blessings directly and assigned the task to Avraham saying to him: “become a source of blessing” (Genesis 12,2). Avraham responded by siring two sons, Ishmael and Yitzchak. Avraham failed to bless either of them. In order to understand Avraham’s failure to bless either one of his sons, let us illustrate this by means of a parable. A king who owned an orchard entrusted it to a profit-sharing farmer to look after it. The orchard in question contained within it right in the centre two trees, one of which contained the elixir of life whereas the second one contained a poison which would kill. The farmer was in a quandary, saying to himself that if he watered both trees he would further the growth of the deadly tree. If, on the other hand, he did not water either tree he would cause the elixir of life to die out. He decided to serve out his contract and to leave the decision of what to do to the king, the owner, after he himself had bowed out of the picture. The “king” in the parable is G’d. The “orchard” is earth. The “farmer” is Avraham, and the two trees, the elixir of life and the poisonous one, are Yitzchak and Ishmael respectively. Avraham said to himself: “if I bless Yitzchak, Ishmael will demand to be blessed also. Seeing that he is wicked, I cannot do that. I prefer to pass and not exercise my discretion. After all, I am only flesh and blood, not all-knowing like the Lord.” What happened? After Avraham had died we find that the Torah records that G’d bestowed the blessing He had first given to Avraham on his son Yitzchak after his father had died (Genesis 25,11). Yitzchak in turn blessed Yaakov. Yaakov blessed all his twelve sons as we read in Genesis 49,28 “all these (aforementioned ones) are the twelve tribes of Israel and this is what he had said to them when he blessed them.” From that point on, G’d said to Moses: “the blessings are at your (Israel collectively) disposal. The priests shall be the ones to administer them (based on Tanchuma Nasso 9).
    
    6,27. ושמו את שמי על בני ישראל, “let them place My Name upon the Children of Israel.” G’d meant that as soon as the priests would mention G’d’s name as part of the blessing, He would bless them all, Priests, Levites, and Israelites, seeing that G’d’s name appeared in each of the three verses constituting the formula of the blessing.
    A Midrashic approach, elaborating on the procedure. The first verse contains three words; the second verse contains five words The third verse contains seven words. The symbolism alluded to is that the first verse represents the three patriarchs, i.e. G’d will remember their merits and the covenants made with them and bless their offspring; the second verse is an allusion to the five Books of the Torah; seeing that the Torah itself had been given to the people in recognition of the merits of the patriarchs. The seven words in the last verse are an allusion to the seven heavens, i.e. the priests ask the heavens to transmit these blessings.
    I have found in the Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 1,2 that when the court meets to deliberate if to add an extra month to the current year, the deliberations commence with three judges, are expanded in the presence of five judges, and are concluded in the presence of seven judges. The reason given for this is the composition of the three verses of the priestly blessing and their increasing number of words per verse, i.e. 3-5-7. These numbers "3-5-7” are featured in the Book of Kings as respective people occupying positions of influence at the palace of Tzidkiyahu. The former are known as שומרי הסף, then there were חמשה מרואי פני המלך, “five officials who have access to the king on a regular basis.” Finally, there were the שבעה רואי פני המלך, a group of seven people who were free to see the king at any time. (Jeremiah 52,25). [These various people were taken hostage by the Babylonians as a symbol representing men of authority in the Jeiwhsh state.} Nevuchadnezzar executed them. It seems reasonable therefore that when deliberating on the authority to add a month to the calendar year these numbers should be symbolised in the successively larger number of judges required for these deliberations. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: the order of these blessings, in ascending order, parallels the thoughts entertained by the priests during the offering of the communal sacrifices which also were marked by their ascending order. The priests commenced the blessings daily at the conclusion of the sacrificial service. This is the meaning of Leviticus 9,22: “he (Aaron)  blessed them; then he descended from having performed the rites of the sin-offering, the burnt-offering, and the peace-offering. The proper way to understand the sequence of what the Torah writes here is: “he blessed them after he had descended (from the Altar);” at the time he had been offering the three types of inaugural sacrifices mentioned he had concentrated with his mind first on the last letter ה in the Ineffable Name. I have explained already at that point that the allusion to this is found in the ה appended to the word המזבח, the Torah writing instead המזבחה. (Leviticus, 1,9). From concentrating on that last letter ה in the tetragram, Aaron had proceeded to concentrate on the letter ו in that name. From that level he concentrated in totally pure thought on the letter י in the Holy Name. The principal purpose of the Priest’s concentration while performing the part of the service allocated to him is to “draw” or attract G’d’s רצון, “goodwill,” from His Holy Attributes as expressed by His names from the celestial regions to the terrestrial regions.
    This is the mystical dimension of the three verses in the Torah here comprising the formula of the blessing. To summarise: the term שמור in the blessing refers to the deflection of negative influences from Israel; the term יאר ה' is already more positive, representing the קו האמצעי of the attributes pointing to פנים, symbolising Mercy. Finally, the last blessing which begins with the word ישא, is a reference to the higher emanation בינה, and proceeds once more with פניו, this time referring to combating the fear of a confrontation with the attribute of Justice, culminating with the promise of  שלום, the all-embracing harmony, based on pure חסד, undiluted loving kindness, resulting in a feeling of peace and harmony which knows no fear. In this way the three verses build on each other and each holds out greater promise of bliss than the one before it. According to the tradition I have the three blessings combine within them all ten emanations.
    However, according to Nachmanides these blessings proceed in the opposite direction, in a descending order. [I have decided to omit this as the interested reader can study this in Nachmanides’ commentary. Ed.]
    I have mentioned already in connection with my commentary on the wording אמור להם, that this wording gives the priests leeway to pronounce the tetragram audibly when the setting is appropriate, or to “swallow” these words sotto voce when the priests do not consider the audience as one deserving to hear that name of Hashem. The combined three tetragrams mentioned in the three verses of this blessing are what is known as the שם המפורש של י'ב, "the spelled out name of 12 (3 times the four letters of the tetragram).” In the Sefer Habahir item 111 the author discusses the way the name is to be pronounced, slightly differently vocalised in each verse. [Seeing the commentators on the Sefer Habahir do not agree on the precise way this is to be done, and nowadays we do not have the option to pronounce the tetragram in any form whatsoever, I do not find it useful to pursue this at this point Ed.] The author adds that he received another form of vocalisation from German Kabbalists based on the verse in Joshua 2,15 ההרה הרודף ירדוף which parallels the vowel pattern to be used when the priests utter the tetragram in each of these verses. [I believe that the reason the author finds the subject so fascinating is presumably that he was aware of a tradition that he who does indeed pronounce theשם המפורש של י'ב  not only correctly but with totally pure thoughts, cannot have any of his prayers denied. Basically, what the author teaches us is that contrary to what we might have thought the forbidden pronunciation of the tetragram does not only refer to a single vowel pattern but to several. [This is a warning not to become guilty of experimenting with  anything close to the forbidden vowel pattern. Ed.] Our author uses the vocalisation of the letter י in the words before the tetragram in each verse as clues to the appropriate pronunciation of the respective tetragram. Thus, for instance, the vowel (semi-vowel) under the י in יברכך is different from the vowel kametz under the letter י in the word יאר before the second time the Torah writes the tetragram. This is different again from the vowel chirik under the letter י in the word ישא before the final time the tetragram appears in the blessings. Here the author quotes at length from Sefer Habahir items 107-109 demonstrating how the 72-lettered name of Hashem is arrived at by means of what kinds of permutations. In the process he demonstrates that the attribute גבורה presides and its influence predominates over the צורות, “images” which Kabbalists perceive as surrounding the celestial throne from the left to the right; in other words commencing with the domain perceived as Gavriel’s to the domain perceived as Michael’s with the קו האמצעי in the middle, representing what we call אמת. The author also points out that the three verses contain respectively 15, 20, and 25 letters each and that the 60 letters  arrived at in such an ascending number, each verse having five letters more than the preceding one alludes to G’d’s presence having extended over past, present, and future, but that His presence is also felt in an ever increasing measure starting with the past progressing into the future. Going back to the verse in Song of Songs 3,7 about the 60 armed guards surrounding Solomon’s bed, the author tries to explain why the author of that Book commenced with G’d in the present rather than in the past, progressing to the future via the present. He explains that Solomon wanted to make the point that none of G’d’s “years” belong exclusively to the past. One cannot speak of, nor must one think of G’d as “in the past,” something  which has ceased to exist at least partially. Such thoughts are reflected in Psalms 102,28 ואתה הוא ושנותיך לא יתמו, “but You are forever the same, and Your years will never end.” This is why we include this concept in our daily prayers when we say  ה' מלך, ה' מלך, ה' ימלוך לעולם ועד, “the Lord is king, the Lord was king, and the Lord will remain king forever more.” [note that the author of the liturgical poem also begins with the present when referring to G’d, not with the past. Ed.] You are also perfectly familiar with the fact that this is not the only verse in Psalms in which this chronologically peculiar sequence is applied to G’d. There are numerous such verses. 
    You may be tempted to retort that in Psalm 10,7 the psalmist refers to G’d as in the future asking G’d למה ה' תעמוד בחוץ, “why O Lord will You stand aloof, etc.,” whereas in verse 16 in that same psalm  the author declares that ה' מלך that G’d is king, i.e. “He is never aloof.” Remember that you will not find that David had referred to the kingdom of heaven at all in the preceding nine Psalms. Whatever is  said in this psalm then cannot be viewed as a reversal of a previous policy of the author. In fact, you will find something confirming what we said in psalm 20, which is the tenth after psalm 10 where G’d is first mentioned as king at all, that David appeals here for the first time to the Lord, the King, to grant victory, ה' הושיעה המלך יעננו ביום קראנו, “O Lord, grant victory! May the king answer us when we call.” The timing of this plea is significant as this “tenth” hymn is dedicated to the “tenth emanation" כתר, “crown,” the one symbolising G’d as King. If we find on occasion that David relates to G’d’s kingship in the order “past-present-future,” he took his cue from Moses himself who made this sequence part of the song he composed after crossing the sea of reeds when he recorded ה' ימלוך לעולם ועד, “the Lord will rule forever more.” (Exodus 15,18).
    
    7,1. ויהי ביום כלות משה להקים את המשכן, “It was on the day Moses completed erecting the Tabernacle, etc.” This chapter was written after the priests had bestowed their blessing on the people, i.e. in chronological order. On the day Aaron raised his hands over the people in blessing them the inauguration of the Altar commenced. This verse is proof of the opinion expressed in Sifri Nasso 43 that during the seven preceding days Moses erected and dismantled the Tabernacle each day.
   וימשחם, “he anointed them,” i.e. with oil. ויקדש אותם, “he sanctified them.” This was by means of sprinkling blood on the Tabernacle’s furnishings including the Altar (compare Ibn Ezra).
    A Midrashic approach: the words: “It was on the day Moses completed the erecting of the Tabernacle” are reminiscent of Proverbs 27,18: “He who tends the fig tree will eat its fruit; he who waits on his master will be honoured.” G’d does not withhold the appropriate reward for any creature. If man has toiled and devoted his best efforts to something worthy he will be rewarded. The Midrash illustrates this with the example of David, his son Solomon, and the Temple. It is well known that the scheme to build the Temple originated with David. Not only did he amass most of the funds and materials for the project but he had drawn up detailed blue prints. This is why we find that psalm 30,1 credits the Temple to David rather than to his son Solomon who had spent seven years building it. At the inauguration the hymn commences with the words מזמור שיר חנוכת הבית לדוד, “a psalm for David. A song for the dedication of the House.” You will observe a similar phenomenon with the Tabernacle. Seeing that Moses had devoted so much effort to see the Tabernacle built, had assembled it, erected it, etc., we find here that though Betzalel was the chief architect and executive carrying out the construction, that the Torah speaks about the day “Moses completed the Tabernacle.” This is the way the Torah expresses its recognition of the contribution by people whose efforts is likened to those who plant a fig tree.
    Another Midrashic insight: the words: “it was on the day Moses completed the Tabernacle,” are reminiscent of another part of Psalms 51,2--21 “May it please You to make Zion prosper; rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. Then You will want sacrifices offered in righteousness, burnt and whole offerings; the bulls will be offered on Your altar.” Seeing that in this world, at the inauguration of the Tabernacle the sacrifices were quantitatively minuscule, as described in verse 12, G’d could have reacted to such measly offerings with some degree of indignation. The Jewish people, forestalling such a complaint explained that seeing they were not in Jerusalem, did not yet have a home of their own, were traveling through the desert, they only presented a token of their esteem for their king G’d. They hinted in this psalm that as soon as their king would lead them to their permanent home they would reciprocate by presenting the King with sacrifices more in keeping with his stature. In fact when you will study the report of the inauguration of Solomon’s Temple and compare it with the inauguration of the Tabernacle you will be amazed at the quantitative difference. The courtyard of the Temple had to be enlarged (the sanctified area) in order to accommodate all the animals being slaughtered on that occasion. Kings I 8,63 tells of 22,000 oxen, 120,0000 sheep. being sacrificed at that time. Even during the days of Ezra, at the inauguration of the second Temple, when the economic and numerical condition of the Jewish people was a far cry from the glorious days of Solomon, we read that  100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and 12 goats were offered on that occasion (Ezra 6,17).
    Another interpretation: The choice of the word כלות in the verse ויהי ביום כלות משה להקים את המשכן causes Rabbi Yochanan to understand the meaning of the word in the same sense as in Genesis 18,21 where it referred to total extinction of the people of Sodom. As long as the Tabernacle had not been erected the various destructive forces commonly known as demons had free reign on earth. When Moses had ascended Mount Sinai he recited Psalms 91,1 יושב בסתר עליון בצל שדי יתלונן, extolling “the Jewish people who had been allowed to reside in the shelter of the Most High and abide in the protection of Shaddai.” Tanchuma  Nasso 23 understands these words slightly differently i.e. the word צל, shadow, has a numerical value of 120. This is the combined number of days (3 times 40) which Moses spent in that “hideout” near G’d on the mountain. In verse two of that hymn Moses says to G’d: “my refuge and stronghold, my G’d in whom I trust.” G’d responded: “seeing you placed your trust in Me, I will indeed stand by you.” This is why the following verses dealing with miraculous rescues refer particularly to David whom G’d rescued from certain death at the hands of King Shaul (compare Samuel I 23,26). On the words ותחת כנפיו תחסה צנה וסוחרה אמתו, “and under His wings you will find refuge; His fidelity is an encircling shield (verse 4),” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish comments in that same Midrash that G’d promises to act in the fashion described for all who are true students of Torah. The next verse in the psalm, speaking of there being no need to fear the terror by night or the arrow that flies by day, is a reference to destructive forces on earth known by Moses in the psalm, i.e. the ones who fly around  by day. The term קטב מרירי mentioned in verse six is a destructive agent whose sighting the victim is not likely to survive at all. It kills man and beast alike without direct contact. To help identify this creature, our author describes its head as similar to the head of a calf, it sprouts one horn on the middle of its forehead; the time of year when it is rampant is between the 17th of Tammuz and the ninth of Av, i.e. the period when the city of Jerusalem and at the end the Temple were captured and destroyed. 
    When the psalmist (Moses) continues in verse 10 with: “no harm will befall you, no disease will touch your tent,” this is a reference to the Tent of Meeting, the Tabernacle. As long as the Tabernacle had not become functional these various destructive forces were commonplace; from the day described in our verse they ceased to exist. According to this Midrash it appears that what Moses said about  על שחל ופתן תדרוך, תרמוס כפיר ותנין, “you will tread on cubs and vipers; you will trample lions and asps,” (verse 13) refers to 4 distinct groups of demons which are the outgrowths of four specific human beings.  I have already referred to this in my commentary on Genesis 4,22 that the sister of Tubal-Kayin was Naamah [page 145 my translation. Ed.] This hymn would be recited throughout the ages in Jerusalem. It is mentioned in tractate Shevuot folios 14 and 15 where we are told that it was not permitted to expand the boundaries (walls) or the holy precincts except with the consent of the king, prophet of the generation, and the High Priest. In addition the Sanhedrin of 71 members had to give its consent and the Urim Vetumim had to be consulted by the High Priest. Two thanksgiving offerings had to be offered to make the changes effective and the Levites had to play their instruments when these offerings were presented and to recite a hymn [psalm 30 and the hymn in which David gives thanks for having escaped the pursuit of his sons Avshalom. Apparently these hymns were obligatory. Ed.]
    This is also the meaning of Exodus 25,8: “they shall make for Me a Sanctuary. When the Torah adds the apparently redundant words וכן תעשו, “and so you shall do,” at the end of this verse, the meaning is that whereas at the time the instructions were issued they applied to the construction of the Tabernacle, i.e. ועשו לי, the words וכן תעשו mean that the same rules are to be in effect when it would be time to construct the permanent Temple. 
    The song mentioned in the Mishnah in Shevuot is the one dealing with the damage inflicted by demons (Psalms 91). They would recite this in Jerusalem to ward off these negative and destructive forces just as Moses had recited it at the time he had supervised construction of the Tabernacle.
    Tanchuma Nasso 25 has Rabbi Shimon query why we need to resort to the Book of Psalms to learn all this when we could learn it simply from our verses (the priestly blessings) where surely the words of that blessing address such dangers when the priests ask G’d to “bless and protect the recipients.” Surely, he reasons the word וישמרך means: “to protect you against all dangers!” Clearly, this blessing had to be effective on the day the Tabernacle was being erected! Rabbi Yehudah son of Rabbi Seymon commented that on the day the Tabernacle was erected Moses entered and heard a beautiful voice. He decided to go closer to hear what G’d had to say. G’d then said to him: “Moses, welcome; I will speak to them and tell them that I harbour no resentment against them at all and that I am at peace with them, etc.” G’d quoted Psalms 85,11 to this effect. Up until the day of the Tabernacle being erected there had still been a tug of war between G’d and the people dating back to the golden calf episode. Concerning this interpretation, also Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said there was no need to search the Book of Psalms for such insights as the priestly blessing in our passage already concluded with the promise of peace for the Jewish people, and that blessing had been bestowed on the people on that day.
   להקים את המשכן, “to erect the Tabernacle.” Although the erection of the Tabernacle is credited by the Torah to Moses, the fact is that it erected itself, as we know from Exodus 40,17 הוקם המשכן, “the Tabernacle had been erected.” The Torah had not attributed this to any human being or combination of human beings.
    A Midrashic comment based on Tanchuma Nasso 14: the words “to erect the Tabernacle,” are reminiscent of Numbers 24,5 "how goodly are you tents o Yaakov, your sanctuaries, o Israel.” If Bileam mentioned אהליך “your tents,” why did he also have to mention משכנותיך, “your sanctuaries?” The answer given is that the "tents” Bileam referred to were the various locations commencing in the desert where the temporary structure, the Tabernacle would be located. The word משכנותיך, is to be read slightly differently, i.e. משכונותיך, from the word משכון, “pledge, collateral.” The presence of the Tabernacle (containing the Shechinah) in the midst of the Jewish people was to be their pledge that they would be loyal to G’d. Remember that history bears out that this is exactly what happened. When the Jewish people sinned  we experienced retribution as described already in Psalms 78,21 and 60. The forsaking of the Tabernacle in Shiloh in that latter verse was a direct consequence of the people’s failure to live up to their part of the bargain.
    Another meaning of the words: “to erect the Tabernacle.” According to Rabbi Seymon, at the time G’d gave instructions to the Jewish people to erect the Tabernacle, He instructed the angels in the celestial spheres to do something commensurate so that a celestial Sanctuary was established at the same time as the Tabernacle on earth. The celestial Sanctuary is the Tabernacle of the נער whose name is Mattatron. In that Sanctuary the souls of the righteous are being offered in order for them to atone for their errant brethren, the sinners of the Jewish people during the period the latter are in exile. This is why the Torah wrote את המשכן the word את alluding to the other Sanctuary which had been erected simultaneously. This is also the reason for the words מכון לשבתך פעלת ה',”the foundation of Your dwelling-place Hashem” (Exodus 15,17). Thus far the Midrash.
    
    7,3. שש עגלות צב, “six covered wagons, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text these are a type of oxen trained to draw heavy loads, such as wagons. We find the expression in Isaiah 66,20: ובצבים ובפרדים, “in drays and mules.” Alternatively, the word is related to the word צבה in Numbers 5,21 where it refers to something swollen.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bamidbar Rabbah 12,17-21: “The six covered wagons corresponded to six of the heavens. You may ask that after all, there are seven heavens! Rabbi Avin answered that the seventh heaven is reserved as a residence for the “king” (G’d Himself) and is not included in the regular count of heavens. Moses reportedly said to G’d: “supposing one of the animals will die or one of the wheels will fall off one of the wagons, is not the entire offering of the princes going to be disqualified and the entire Tabernacle discredited?” [I suppose this is based on only the combined total number of all the princes’ offerings making up the number required to complete the symbolism involved. Ed.]
     In response to this G’d said to Moses: קח מאתם והיו לעבודת וגו', “take it from them so they can be used in the service of the Tabernacle” (verse 5). The word והיו in this verse which is not really necessary means that these animals and wagons will have  an enduring existence (the normal meaning of the word in connection with the story of creation, for instance). This raises the question for how long did these animals live and these wagons remain functional? Answer: until the building of Solomon’s Temple some 480 years later. These oxen were slaughtered and sacrificed on the Altar of the Temple at the inauguration. We read in Chronicles II 7,5 ויזבח המלך שלמה את זבח הבקר עשרים ושנים אלף, "King Solomon slaughtered there as sacrifices 22,000 oxen, etc.  We would have expected to read the words זבח בקר instead of the expression זבח הבקר. The latter expression suggests that we have heard about these oxen previously. When did we hear about them? In our passage here. This led Rabbi Meir to state that the animals donated by the princes at this time survived until the inauguration of Solomon’s Temple. During all these years these animals had sustained neither blemish nor developed signs of old age (which would have disqualified them as suitable for the Altar).
    In fact there is logic in all this: if the oxen whose function in connection with the Tabernacle was merely peripheral, i.e. they served as beasts of burden transporting parts of the Tabernacle,  and as a result G’d endowed them with such longevity and enduring youthful vigour, how much more so must the Tabernacle exert this kind of influence on the Israelites who made the Tabernacle the centre of their existence! This is testified to by Moses in his final address to the Jewish people in Deut. 4,4 when he points out to them that the reason they were alive and well on the day he spoke to them was that ואתם הדבקים בה' “you who have been cleaving to the Lord.” Thus far the Midrash.
    There is another Midrash Shir Hashirim Rabbah (6,10) on Song of Songs 6,4 on the words יפה את רעיתי כתרצה, “You are beautiful My love when your deeds are pleasing.” The Midrash there also implies that the reason these animals lived so long was because the owners who donated them for the purpose were possessed of purity of thought in doing so. It appears that this Midrash too is based on the wording of a verse on the same procedure but in Kings I 8,63 which prompted the Midrash Rabbah in Nasso. The Midrash in Shir Hashirim uses a different nuance of the verse in Kings I 8,63 where the same offering is described. In that verse in Kings the word בקר appears immediately next to the word לה'. The wording we would have expected there was עשרים ושנים אלף בקר. The association of the word בקר and ה' then are the background to the longevity of these animals. It may well have been a long-standing tradition the sages had on the matter.
    Rabbi Meir’s additional contribution to this tradition was merely to establish a conceptual link why the Israelites themselves who were devoted to the Tabernacle should be blessed with long life. There were a total of eighteen wagons and animals drawing them, the number eighteen, i.e. חי, i.e. an allusion to the life-sustaining power of the Tabernacle and those connected with its functions. 
    Two of the wagons were given to the sons of Gershon in accordance with the demands of their work. The other four wagons were given to the sons of Merari in accordance with the demands of the work assigned to them. The work-load of the sons of Merari was much heavier than that of the sons of Gershon. This is why the wagons were not evenly divided between the Levites who had not been commanded to carry the furnishings of the Tabernacle on their shoulders, i.e. the Kehatites. Details of who carried what have been discussed at the beginning of the Parshah.
    
    7,10. ויקריבו הנשיאים, “the princes brought the offerings, etc.” The נשיאים referred to here are the respective tribal leaders. When the Torah repeats the same words again in the same verse they refer to the celestial counterparts of these tribal heads. You will note that the first time the word נשיאים appears in our verse it has the letter י to show that the word is in the plural, whereas the second time this letter י denoting the plural of the subject is absent. The allegorical message is that the effect of the sacrifice is unifying making a single unit of what had been diverse. This is because the sacrifice was addressed to the One and indivisible Hashem. When we try and reinforce the image of G’d throughout His universe, He in turn demonstrates His unifying power on earth.
    
    7,12. ויהי המקריב ביום הראשון  נחשון בן עמינדיו, “the prince who brought his offering on the first day was Nachshon son of Aminadav of the tribe of Yehudah.” As mentioned previously, the tribe of Yehudah usually is found in the lead, in the matter of the flags, the tribal offerings, warfare, and even distribution of the land of Israel (Joshua chapter 15). In the future, during the period of the ultimate redemption, the tribe of Yehudah will again be in the forefront (Zecharyah 12,1).
    There is what appears to be a grammatical anomaly when the Torah describes the offering of Nachshon with the word וקרבנו, “and his offering,” whereas the offerings of all the other princes are introduced with the word קרבנו, “his offering.” We would have expected the reverse seeing that Nachshon’s offering did not follow the offering of anyone before him. The Torah used the extra letter ו as a veiled warning to that tribe or individual not to consider the fact that he had been the first in that procession of princes as something to boast about. On the other hand, the way the Torah describes the offering of each of the other princes could allow each one to think that his offering had been the first of the string. This idea is reinforced by the absence of the title נשיא, prince, in connection with Nachshon, whereas each of the other princes has his title mentioned alongside his name.
    
    7,18. ביום השני הקריב נתנאל בן צוער נשיא יששכר, הקרב את קרבנו, “on the second day, Netanel son of Zuor prince of Issachar brought an offering. He brought his offering, etc.” In verse 19 the letter י is absent in the word הקרב. Why is that? Moreover, in connection with the offerings of all the other princes we find the sequence קרבנו קערת כסף אחת וגו', whereas in the case of Netanel the Torah wrote הקרב את קרבנו, “he brought forward his offering.” The Torah implies with these words that Netanel was instructed from G’d to offer precisely the same offering as had been brought by Nachshon. There had been a natural tendency for each prince to outdo the previous one in the size and value of his offering. To counter such an ego-trip the Torah hints that G’d had restrained the princes from doing just that. By omitting the letter י from the word הקרב when describing Netanel’s offering the Torah hints that it had been downsized by divine intervention. By complying with divine instructions in the matter, Netanel, who had been רחוק, “distant,” in a spiritual sense from the true purpose of these offerings, had now come close, i.e. הקרב את קרבנו, “made his sacrifice be really close to the true spiritual value to be achieved.” All the other princes after him did not need to have this lesson repeated to them.
    
    7,48. ביום השביעי נשיא לבני אפרים אלישמע בן עמיהוד, “On the seventh day, the prince of the sons of Ephrayim, Elishama son of Amihud.” Some commentators believe that the seventh day mentioned here was the seventh in the sequence of these offerings, i.e. the seventh day of Nissan. Others say that it was the seventh day counting from the first day of creation, i.e. it was the Sabbath. The Torah wanted us to know that although as a general rule sacrifices by individuals do not override the Sabbath legislation, in this case it did. This was exceptional and would not occur again (compare Ibn Ezra and Bamidbar Rabbah 13,14 on the subject).
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Nasso 28 on the fact that the tribe of Joseph brought his sacrifice on the seventh day of the week, i.e. the Sabbath. G’d said to Joseph: “by your life, you have fulfilled the commandment of not committing adultery with the wife of Potiphar at a time when I had not yet legislated this commandment in the Torah. In recognition of your self-sacrifice for the concepts contained in that commandment, I will allow your son to override the concept of the Sabbath regulations not to offer private offerings on that day when he will offer the inaugural sacrifice on behalf of your tribe.” Not only this, but there will not be another tribe’s offering separating between the offering of Ephrayim and the offering of Menashe his brother tribe.
    On the name of the prince of Ephrayim, Elishama, the Midrash sees in this a reminder of Ephrayim’s father Joseph’s great character strength in that אלי שמע, (G’d speaking) “to Me he listened whereas he did not listen to his mistress, the wife of Potiphar.” The words בן עמיהוד are perceived as a reminder of עמי היה הודו, “his glory was with Me,” (and not with the Egyptian nation). The word גמליאל (name of the prince of Menashe) is understood as alluding to גמל א-ל חסדים עמי, “the Lord performed deeds of loving kindness with me.” The word פדהצור (name of Gamliel’s father) is understood as a hint of פדה צור the “Rock” (G’d) redeemed him from his troubles in jail.” Psalms 18,21 reflects such feelings of Joseph at the time when the psalmist writes [though he refers to his own rescue from Shaul by G’d. Ed.] “the Lord rewarded me according to my merit; He requited the cleanness of my hands.” 
    It is normal for man to put his trust in the Lord as long as he is poor (and has nothing or no one else to put his trust in). When he becomes affluent he relies on his wealth to stand by him, no longer making the Lord the focus of his trust. Joseph, by contrast, placed his trust in the Lord both when he was in dire straits and when he had risen to the pinnacle of his career.  When he was a slave and a prisoner in the house of Potiphar and subject to the enticements and threats of Potiphar’s wife, he said to her: “how can I possibly commit such a great wrong against G’d?” (Genesis 39,9). When he had been appointed king he continued to revere the Lord as we know from his own lips in Genesis 42,18: “I fear the Lord.” When he had been a mere slave he nevertheless recited a benediction over the food he ate (Bamidbar Rabbah 14,5). When his master saw him whisper with his lips, he asked him what he was doing. Joseph replied that he was giving thanks to the Lord for the food He provided for all of His creatures. His master demanded: “show me this G’d you are talking about.” Joseph replied: “the sun is just one of his servants; seeing that you cannot even look at the sun without becoming blinded, if you were to behold its master you would die.” Nonetheless, G’d revealed Himself on behalf of Joseph. This is the meaning of the verse in Genesis 39,3: “when his master saw that the Lord was with him (Joseph), etc.“ These sentiments are reflected by David in Psalms 60,9: “Gilead and Menashe would be mine; Ephrayim my chief stronghold;” concerning the words לי גלעד, “Gilead is mine,” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “in the event the heretics tell you that G’d is unable to resurrect the dead, there is Elijah the prophet who came from Gilead and who revived the dead. If he could do so, would G’d be unable to do it? If, on the other hand, the same heretics will tell you that G’d does not accept repentant sinners into the fold, King Menashe of Yehudah is proof that G’d does so as that king was a great heretic, and, after having been in captivity and praying to the Lord, becoming a penitent, G’d restored him to his throne in Jerusalem (Chronicles II 33,13). This is why the psalmist speaks of “Menashe is mine.” Concerning the words: “Ephrayim is my stronghold,” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish continued, if an heretic denies G’d’s ability to enable barren women to bear children, consider the case of Elkanah from Ephrayim, whose wife Channah had been unable to become pregnant. After she had appealed to the Lord in Shiloh, He remembered her and granted her children (SamueI 2,21). In the event some heretic will tell you that G'd cannot save someone out of the flames, look at the three men from Yehudah, Chananel, Mishael, and Azaryah, whom G'd rescued from a flaming kiln (Daniel 1,6). This is what David meant when he spoke of יהודה מחוקקי, “Yehudah my scepter," in that same verse.
    An alternative explanation of this verse in Psalms. The words לי גלעד, לי מנשה, are a reference to Elijah at Mount Carmel. Someone may challenge the fact that prophet Elijah offered sacrifices on a private Altar at a time when the Temple was standing in Jerusalem. He may point out that there is a Biblical prohibition to do so, based on Leviticus 17, 3-4: "any man from the House of Israel who will slaughter a bull, or a goat in the camp or who will slaughter it outside the camp and he has not brought it as an offering to Hashem before the Tabernacle of Hashem- it shall be considered bloodshed for such a man, (i.e. a capital crime).” Tell such a questioner or challenger that whatever the prophet Elijah did he did for the sake of the holy name of G’d and the enhancement of His image among the people; moreover he did it at the behest of G’d. Proof of all this is Kings I 18,36: “it was at the time of the meal-offering, the prophet Elijah came forward and said: “O Lord, G’d of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Israel! Let it be known today that You are G’d in Israel and that I am Your servant, and that I have done all these things at Your bidding!” This is what the psalmist had in mind when he spoke of “Gilead is mine.” Elijah was a resident of Gilead. As to the words: "Menashe is mine” in the same verse; if someone challenges the conduct of Gideon (Judges 6,25-6)  who also had sacrificed an offering on a private altar at a time when the Tabernacle in Shiloh was functional, the same answer applies.
    Rabbi Abba bar Kahanah said that on the day in question Gideon performed seven actions (normally prohibited). 1) He sacrificed a bull which had been used for idolatrous purposes; 2) he sacrificed a bull intended for idolatrous purposes; 3) he built a private altar; 4) he cut down wood for it from an ashera (a tree which had served as a centre for idolatry). 5) He offered a sacrifice at night; 6) he did all this although he was not a priest (he was from the tribe of Menashe); 7) the bull had belonged to the priests who served the Baal. All of these actions he undertook he had been instructed to do by divine decree. We know all this from Judges 6,25-26): “it was during that night that G’d said to him: ‘take the young bull belonging to your father and another bull seven years old; pull down the altar of Baal which belongs to your father, and cut down the sacred post which is beside it. Then build an altar to the Lord your G’d on the level ground on top of this stronghold. Take the other bull and offer it as a burnt-offering, using the wood of the sacred post that you have cut down. This is the meaning of: “Menashe belongs to me.”
    If some were to say that David violated a negative command- ment of the Torah (when sleeping with Bat Sheva and marrying her) G’d responds to such a statement by saying that David’s action was designed to teach the sinners that repentance is accepted by G’d and the sinners can be rehabilitated. This is what David said in Psalms 51,15: “I will teach transgressors Your ways, that sinners may return to You.”
    If someone were to challenge the fact that Joshua violated the Sabbath when preparing to attack and capture Jericho (Joshua 6,2-4), answer such a scoffer that Joshua acted on G’d’s instructions as we know from the verse referred to: “The Lord said to Joshua, “See I will deliver Jericho and her king and her warriors into your hands. Let all the troops march around the city and complete one circuit of the city. ....Do this for six days, with seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns preceding the Ark. On the seventh day, march around the city seven times, with the priests blowing the horns, etc., etc.” How do we know that the seventh day the Book of Joshua speaks of was the Sabbath? There is no sequence of seven days one of which is not the Sabbath. 
    There was something else which Joshua did which he had not been instructed to do. When the walls had collapsed and the city had been captured, Joshua reasoned that seeing the Sabbath is totally sacred, the loot of a city captured on the Sabbath must also be considered sacred, no one using any of it for a private purpose. Hence we read in verse 19 of that chapter that Joshua issued instructions for all the gold, silver, copper objects, and iron to be consecrated to the Temple treasury.
    Rabbi Berechya the priest said: Joshua treated the city of Jericho according to the rules applied to an עיר הנדחת, (a Jewish city the majority of whose inhabitants had become guilty of practicing idolatry). We know that the contents of such a city are forbidden for use by any other Jew (Deut. 13,17) “you shall burn the town by fire including all its contents, totally.” Rabbi Yehudah Halevi said (Tanchuma Nasso 28):”the reason that the contents of the city of Jericho were consecrated to G’d was that it was the first city in the land of Israel which was captured. We always consecrate the “first” of everything to the Lord, both humans, animals, and crops, etc. In this instance Joshua extended this principle to apply it to inert matters such as gold, silver. G’d responded to this initiative of Joshua (in the future) by permitting the representative of the tribe of Ephrayim (Joshua’s tribe) to offer his individual offering on the Sabbath.
    
    7,84. קערות כסף שתים עשרה, “twelve silver bowls, etc.”  Seeing that the Torah had specified in each of the princes’ offerings details such as ”one golden spoon of a certain weight, etc,” why did we need to be told here what the totals amounted to?" Actually, the Torah informs us that contrary to utensils made for secular use, these were identical in weight. When you have 12 spoons which had been fashioned to weigh one ounce each you will find that twelve of these spoons do not necessarily weigh 12 ounces together. The spoons donated by the princes were precisely fashioned so that 12 of them collectively weighed exactly 12 times what each single one of them weighed (compare Sifri Nasso 54). When offering these donations and sacrifices, each prince concentrated on thoughts beneficial to his tribe. Nachshon, the prince of Yehudah thought of the two great men who would be descended from his tribe, King Solomon and the Messiah. They would extend their respective domains both on land and sea. This is the reason he donated a bowl the shape of which is reminiscent of the ocean which spans the universe. The shape of the ocean is like the shape of a bowl. The number 130 mentioned here as its weight refers to the third day of creation when G’d ordered all the waters of the oceans to congregate together in a continuous mass and he called themימים . The numerical value of that word is 100. When you add one more “round, ocean-shaped bowl” with a circumference of 100 to the appurtenances of the Temple and you bisect it to get the line representing its diameter you have 30, i.e. a total of 130 for that bowl. 
   מזרק אחד, “one basin of silver,” this was to symbolise the earth which is shaped like a ball. You have an allusion to the oceans in the bowl, and an allusion to the mass of dry land on earth in the offering of the basin. The weight of 70 shekel of the basin is an allusion to the fact that both these kings (Solomon and the Messiah) will extend their rule over seventy nations, spanning earth and the oceans and islands therein. The words שניהם מלאים, “both of them filled,” are an allusion to the gifts these nations will bring to Solomon and the Messiah to demonstrate their homage. The word סולת, “fine flour,” is reminiscent of המסולאים בפז, (Lamentations 4,2) that the Jewish people were valued as fine gold. The words בלולה בשמן, “soaked in oil”, is a reference to the excellent reputation enjoyed by both Solomon and the Messiah, reminding us of Solomon’s statement in Kohelet 7,1: “better a good name than even the best of oils.” The word כסף, is used in the sense of Proverbs 10,20: “the tongue of the righteous is choice silver.” The words: כף אחת עשרה זהב, “one golden ladle of ten shekel weight,” are a veiled reference of the ten generations which elapsed between the birth of Peretz (son of Yehudah and Tamar) until the generation of people who all qualified as righteous. The words מלאה קטורת, “filled with incense,” describe the good deeds of the members of that generation as exuding a pleasant fragrance just as did the incense. The animals listed, i.e. פר אחד, איל אחד, כבש אחד  refer to the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov respectively. The שעיר עזים אחד לחטאת, the male-goat as a sin-offering, is in respect of the sin of the original Yehudah who had presented Joseph's torn coat to his father causing him untold anguish. The words ולזבח השלמים בקר שנים, "and for a peace-offering two cattle," are a reference to David and Solomon respectively who commenced the dynasty of the house of Yehudah on a spiritually high note. The words אילים חמשה, עתודים חמשה, כבשים בני שנה חמשה, "five rams, five he-goats, five yearling sheep," are a reference to the 15 kings of Yehudah starting with Rechavam, son of Solomon and concluding with Tzidkiyahu, the last king of Yehudah prior to the destruction of the Temple. Some of these kings had been thoroughly righteous, some had been lukewarm in their adherence to Torah, whereas others had been fiercely heretical in their beliefs and their behaviour as rulers. This then comprised the thoughts which ran through the mind of Nachshon as he presented his offering.
    Netanel ben Tzuor had some other thoughts. Seeing that the tribe of Issachar excelled in Torah knowledge, it was obvious that the thoughts occupying the mind of its prince when he presented his (physically identical) offering would focus on different meanings associated with the individual items he presented. In his mind, “the silver bowl,” which had a connotation of the ocean to Nachshon, reminded him of Torah, as Torah is considered as לחם, bread, and bread is served in a silver bowl. The expression occurs specifically in connection with the show-breads in the Temple, such as in Exodus 25,29 ועשית קערותיו וכפותיו וג', “you shall construct its bowls, its ladles, etc.” Just as Netanel was preoccupied with symbols pertaining to his tribe’s favourite subject, so the prince of Zevulun, Eliav ben Cheylon, was preoccupied with thoughts of his tribe’s favourite occupation, seeing they were mariners. The same applied to the princes of each and every tribe. In effect, we find that although each prince offered the exact same materials in the exact same quantity, the כוונה accompanying each prince’s offering lent it individuality. Nonetheless, each prince addressed the offering to the same attribute of Hashem, acknowledging Him in the same way. 
    We need to understand why it was necessary for the Torah to write such a lengthy chapter repeating the precise details of each tribe’s sacrifice word for word when weighty matters of Torah legislation had only a few letters devoted to them! The true reason is that G’d acknowledges the efforts made by sincere people and He reciprocates by honouring these people with what appears to be superfluous verbiage in the written Torah. This is the practical application of Samuel I 2,30: “For I honour those who honour Me.” If, at the end of giving the details of Nachshon’s offering, the Torah had written: “this was the offering of Nachshon, and the other princes offered similar offerings,” the Torah would thereby have downgraded the efforts of all the princes who had followed Nachshon. 
    An additional reason for listing each prince’s offering separately was the fact that each offering was accompanied by individual thoughts of the owner. It would not have been possible to lump together all these different כוונות, meanings, intentions, in one paragraph. Moreover, by listing each offering separately the Torah also wanted to get across to its reader that just as the components of all of these offerings were identical, so the reward which each prince qualified for in bringing them was also identical. Each prince qualified for the same degree of recognition by Hashem. 
    Although it was quite clear to G’d that in the almost immediate future each one of these princes would become guilty of participating in the uprising of Korach and his 250 collaborators, G'd does not judge man except according to the deeds he has already committed, not what he may or may not become guilty of in the future (compare Rosh Hashanah 16).
    A rational approach: The Torah had to repeat the list of each of these princes as otherwise the linkage to the twelve horoscopes would not have been apparent. Each zodiac constellation contributes an influence to the domain to which it has been assigned by G’d. The reason each prince made the silver bowl part of his offering was to allude to the planetary system involved, each planet being perceived as a globe, just like the shape of the bowl. The number 130 which is given as a weight measure of this bowl describes the 130 known stars. [I suppose this was the number of stars whose orbits had been tracked by astronomers at the time. Ed.] The reason that the weight of each silver basin was 70 shekel is an allusion to the fact that these signs of the zodiac exert their influence on the seventy nations on the world, decreeing their various fates. The golden ladle whose weight was 10 shekel was an allusion to the planetary system known as שכל, a superior planetary system. The fact that it was made of gold also alluded to the disembodied celestial forces such as the chayot hakodesh, seraphim, fiery angels, whose appearance in prophetic visions resembled gold so that we think of them in such terms. 
    
    7,87. כל הבקר לעולה, “all the cattle for the burnt-offering, etc.” This offering of the princes on the occasion of the inauguration of the Tabernacle comprised 12 bulls, 12 rams, 12 male sheep, 12 he-goats  corresponding to the twelve tribes in the celestial spheres. You are aware already that the attribute כבוד which descended on Mount Sinai was the same which now had taken up residence in the Tabernacle. Just as at the time this attribute descended onto Mount Sinai it was accompanied by myriads of ministering angels, so the journeys of the Jewish people with the Tabernacle took place under the auspices of flags. Just as at Mount Sinai G’d had warned the people not to touch the mountain (Exodus 19,13), a similar restriction was placed against entering the sacred domain of the Tabernacle when the Torah writes: “any stranger (non-priest) who approaches shall die” (Numbers 1,51).
    Here too during the inauguration of the Altar and the Tabernacle, we have a replay of some of the events which occurred at the revelation at Mount Sinai. Twelve sacrifices were offered on this occasion, corresponding to the 12 monuments on behalf of the twelve tribes of Israel which Moses had erected in Exodus 24,4. On this occasion 24 bulls were offered (as peace-offerings); it is likely that at Mount Sinai there were also 24 bulls offered as the wording פרים “bulls (pl.) applied to 12 altars means there could not have been fewer than 24. This number 24 would correspond to the חיל השמאלי, which I discussed in connection with the priestly blessings on 6,27. [this was part of the kabbalistic aspect of the blessings in which the author described each of the names of G’d as represented by the tetragram as “an army.. I had condensed that section. Ed.]. The fact is that the Torah did not spell out precisely how many bulls had been offered at that time.
    The reason that in addition to the bulls also 60 rams, 60 he-goats, 60 sheep in their first year were part of this inaugural offering has been touched upon in my commentary on Shir Hashirim 3,7 about the 60 bodyguards surrounding the bed of King Solomon. I stated there that the number 60 is a symbolism for the maximum degrees of rapprochement to the essence of G’d which may be achieved by the concept of קרבן. We had explained repeatedly that G’d extends His influence in six directions, i.e. the four directions East, West, North and South, plus down and up. It is perceived that in each direction this influence extends in ten stages until it reaches the outer perimeters of the universe. If one wants to approach the centre at which G’d’s essence is perceived to be, one has to progress from the outer perimeter of each direction inwards, i.e. a maximum of sixty stages, ten from each direction. There is a seventh “extremity,” i.e. a purely spiritual concept as distinct from the terrestrial concepts discussed when we mentioned the number 60. This seventh extremity, also comprising ten segments is alluded to by the seventy elders, of whom the Torah spoke at the revelation at Mount Sinai but who are not featured here seeing there was a difference between that manifestation of Hashem and the manifestation of the Shechinah in the Tabernacle (compare Exodus 24,1). [I have used my own phrasing of these concepts in this paragraph to facilitate understanding what the author has in mind. Ed]. The words: “when Moses arrived at the tent of Meeting” (verse 89), may be understood as parallel to Exodus 34,34 where Moses is described as removing the veil from his forehead in anticipation of speaking with G’d (or G’d speaking with him).
    
    7,89. וישמע את הקול, “he would hear the voice speaking with Him(self);”  the letter ה at the beginning of the word הקול, makes it plain that this was the same voice that had spoken to Moses at Mount Sinai; he recognised it as such. The principal reason for this verse is to inform us that this voice emanated from between the cherubs on top of the kapporet, the lid over the Holy Ark. From that location the voice filled the Tent of Meeting; this is the meaning of the additional words אל אהל מועד לדבר אתו, “to the Tent of Meeting in order to speak with him (Moses).” Anyone standing outside the walls of the Tabernacle would not hear this voice at all. According to Rashi the reason that the Torah concludes this chapter with the words וידבר אליו, “He spoke directly to him (Moses),” is to make sure that we understand that Aaron was not included
    it is possible to explain these apparently redundant words  to mean that Moses was the subject. These words would demonstrate the enormous spiritual stature of Moses compared to all other subsequent prophets. He was not taken aback by being addressed by G’d; on the contrary, he engaged in conversation with G’d as attested to by G’d Himself in Exodus 33,11: “Hashem would speak to Moses face to face, as a man would speak with his fellow.” How does a man speak with his fellow? The former initiates the conversation whereas the latter responds. Our verse here would report a similar message to that in Exodus, i.e. that Moses engaged freely in conversation with Hashem. Proof that Moses was on this level is supplied in Numbers 9,8 where Moses had not known the answer to the question how the people who had not purified themselves in time for the Passover should conduct themselves. Instead of telling the people who had raised the point to come back on the following day so that he would have a chance to get a ruling from G’d, Moses simply said עמדו ואשמעה, “stand still and I will hear (G’d’s reply) immediately.” This stature of Moses is mentioned here just as it had been mentioned at the time the people stood at Mount Sinai where the Torah wrote Exodus 19,19 משה ידבר והאלו-הים יעננו בקול, "Moses would speak and G'd would respond in an audible voice." The meaning of those words is that "Moses would respond after G'd had addressed him audibly.” Basically, the Torah reveals here that Moses had attained the ultimate level of spirituality that it is possible for man to attain while alive on earth. His knowledge of G'd was similar to that of a trusted butler long in the service of the same master who is thoroughly familiar with the way of life of his employer. This is what G’d had in mind when He said of Moses in Numbers 12,7: “not so My servant Moses; he is trusted in My entire household.”
    2
   בהעלותך
    
   אור צדיקים ישמח ונר רשעים ידעך, “The light of the righteous rejoices; the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished” (Proverbs 13,9). King Solomon compared the soul of a righteous person to אור, “a great light,” seeing that the soul provides spiritual light. It is derived directly from the celestial throne of glory. This light is not a derivative, but originates with G’d’s essence. By contrast, Solomon compared the soul of the wicked to a lamp, suggesting that it is merely a derivative, has no staying power of its own. It depends on oil and wick to keep it going. It is not a “self-starter.” As soon as either the oil supply fails or the wick develops some problem, the lamp is extinguished, i.e. the person dies. In other words, the body serves as the oil and wick of the soul of the wicked and it cannot survive the failure of his body. The reason is that the soul of the wicked does not derive his joy except from matters innately related to his body Although, technically speaking, a soul does not die, the punishment such a soul experiences may be far worse than death (compare author on Leviticus 18,29).
    Seeing the wicked person did not pursue the path of light but the path of darkness, the attribute of darkness will be applied to him. This is a kind of destruction of the soul, an ongoing process involving unending painful afflictions.
     Solomon stated this explicitly when he said in Proverbs 11,7: “when a wicked man dies his hopes perish.” Note that he did not say במות רשע, “when the wicked dies,” but במות אדם רשע, “when a wicked man dies.” The word אדם is meant to alert us that anyone who patterns his life after the attractions provided by what is earthly, אדמה, is considered a wicked individual. This is why, at the time of his death, he loses all the things he put his hopes in. After all, his hopes had focused only on matters of the body. He had not displayed any interest in matters spiritual, matters which should have been the prime concern of his soul. The word ידעך “will be extinguished,” is most appropriate to describe the demise of such a soul as it implies the cessation of light and constitutes the punishment of the sinful soul.
    We may consider that the word דעיכה does not describe a total extinction of light but rather that the soul in question no longer experiences the amount of light which would be appropriate for it. We find the word used in Job 18,5 where Bildod speaks of the light of the wicked failing, (ידעך), “in that the flame of his fire does not shine.” In other words the meaning of that word is not exactly the same as כבוי, which would be a total extinction of the light. Isaiah 43,17 supports our point. The prophet says: ישכבו בל יקומו דעכו, כפשתה כבו, “they lay down to rise no more as they were extinguished; quenched like a wick.” It appears that the prophet speaks of two successive stages of light going out, the last stage כבו being the absolute extinction of any light.
    However, in lauding the virtues of the righteous, Solomon mentions the wordישמח , “rejoice.” The righteous rejoices with the reward he receives for his righteousness. The expression שמחה is invariably applied to spiritual enjoyment due to the soul having attained new dimensions of Holy Spirit. Examples of such in Scripture are found in Psalms 104,31, ישמח ה' במעשיו, ”may the Lord rejoice in His works.” Another such example is found in Psalms 104,34 אנכי אשמח בו, “I will rejoice in Him (the Lord).” Seeing that the righteous serve the Lord joyfully while they are on earth they will enjoy an added degree of joy in the hereafter.
    There is yet another reason why Solomon compared the soul of the righteous to light; the reason is that the souls were created on the first of the six days of creation simultaneously with the original light. (compare author’s commentary on Genesis 1,4, our translation page 24). There is a specific verse speaking about the souls in Chronicles I 4,23: ”these were the potters who dwelled at Netaim and Gederah; they dwelled in the king’s service.” (According to Bereshit Rabbah 8,6 the reference is to the souls of the righteous in the proximity of the King of Kings, the Lord). These souls were meant to benefit from this light which was created on the first day. In that particular passage in Genesis the Torah spoke of five different categories of light; we also find the נפש, “soul” appearing under five different names they are: רוח, נשמה, נפש, חיה, יחידה. Concerning this relationship between light and soul, David said in Psalms 119,130: פתח דבריך יאיר מבין פתיים, “the words You inscribe give light and understanding to the simple;” our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 3,1 comment on this verse that  the opening words of the verse i.e. פתח דברים mean that as  soon as G’d opened His mouth light came forth. The message is that as soon as “G‘d opens His mouth,” illumination, wisdom emerges. When the Torah writes; “G’d said let there be light, and there was light,” the meaning is that that this light came forth from the original darkness. It was quite unlike light produced by man. When man produces light he lights one candle from another, i.e. he adds light from an existing source of light. This matter is clear from the Torah’s description that there was only darkness over the entire expanse of the “deep” (Genesis 1,2). Job 12,22 confirms this state of affairs; “He draws mysteries out of the darkness and brings obscurities to light.” Another verse along the same lines is found in Daniel 2,22: הוא גלא עמיקתא ומסתרתא ידע מה בחשוכא ונהירא עמה שרא, “He reveals deep and hidden things, knows what is in the darkness, and light dwells within Him.” The word עמיקתא, “hidden things,” are understood by our sages as a reference to the מעשה מרכבה, “the mystical dimensions of what goes on in the celestial regions.” The word וסתרתא, on the other hand, refers to the mysteries of the process of creation. Seeing that G’d produced light out of darkness, it is quite clear that He does not need man-made light (such as supplied by the Menorah in the Tabernacle). In Psalms 139,12 David spelled this out when he said: ”darkness is not dark for You; night is as light as day; darkness and light are the same.” [the author quotes more such verses which I omitted. Ed.] Although we have seen that G’d is certainly not in any need of light supplied by man He legislated that the Tabernacle, His residence, be lit up internally by means of the lampstand, מנורה. 
    
    8,2. בהעלותך את הנרות אל מול פני המנורה יאירו שבעת הנרות, “when you kindle the lamps, toward the face of the Menorah shall the seven lamps cast light.” The Torah’s choice of the word בהעלותך, [as opposed to כאשר תדליק Ed.] is a reference to the flame, שלהבת, which rises of its own accord (Shabbat 21). The sages consider the words as a form of עלוי, “spiritual ascent,” quoting Bamidbar Rabbah 15,5, G’d said: “it is not that I need your light but I want that you light up in My presence just as I lit up  the path for you in the desert when I sent My pillar of fire ahead of you.” It will enhance your stature in the eyes of the Gentile nations when they observe that although it is G’d who provides light and illumination for the entire world, the Israelites provide light at His disposal. In order to understand the phenomenon of creating light out of darkness consider two things. 1) The human eye has a white surface surrounding a black pupil. Contrary to what you might expect we do not see with the white of the eye but with the black part. 2) Lightning is a derivative of celestial fire. It emerges from those regions and brilliantly lights up the entire horizon. We find this reflected in the vision of Ezekiel 1,13: “Such was the appearance of the creatures. With them was something that looked like burning coals of fire. This fire, suggestive of torches, kept moving about among the creatures; the fire had a radiance, and lightning issued forth from the fire.”
    In this paragraph Aaron was commanded to light the Menorah, both at this time and as a procedure to be followed for all times when the Temple was standing. The words דבר אל אהרן “speak to Aaron, etc.,“ convey the commandment as it applied in the desert in the Tabernacle, whereas the apparent repetition ואמרת אליו, “and say to him,” conveys the thought that the legislation being formulated here was for all future priests to observe. Seeing that this commandment of keeping the interior of the Tabernacle/Temple lit was not limited to the Tabernacle this paragraph does not mention the word אהל מועד, “Tent of Meeting.” This is in contrast to Exodus 27,21 where the details of the Menorah are spelled out and the Torah writes: באהל מועד יערך אותו אהרון הכהן ובניו, “in the Tent of Meeting Aaron and his sons shall arrange it, etc.” People might have thought that seeing there were no windows inside the Tabernacle there was a need for the lights of this Menorah, whereas in the Temple which was equipped with windows (Kings I 6,4) there was no need for interior illumination. The Book of Kings makes a point of stating that the windows in the Temple were very narrow on the inside and wide on the outside suggesting that their purpose was not to let light enter, but on the contrary, to illuminate the outside world with the spiritual light contained therein. Our sages (Tanchuma Behaa-lotcha 2) phrased it thus: when the average person builds himself a house he arranges for the windows to be narrow on the outside and wide on the inside in order to admit the maximum amount of daylight. Solomon did the reverse. He made the windows narrow on the inside and wide on the outside in order for the Temple to radiate the maximum amount of spiritual light to the outside world. This conveyed the message that the entire Temple was a source of light, and that G’d most certainly did not require man-made light to light up the interior for Him. The meaning of the words שקופים אטומים in the verse from Kings I 6,4 we referred to earlier is: ”they were open toward the outside, but closed toward the inside,” i.e. short. This prompted Ezekiel 40,25 to write that both it and its vestibule had windows כהחלונות האלה. The extra letter ה in the word כהחלונות, is an allusion to something “faint, dim,” in other words these windows provided faint light. The prophet indicates that the windows are in the shape of the letter ה, narrow on the inside and wide at the outside. This was to enable the light to escape to the outside.
     This is the reason the Temple was also known as the אריאל,  (Isaiah 29,1) an allusion to the lion which is narrow at its rear but broad at its front.
    This paragraph teaches us three things: 1) the lamps should be facing the centre shaft of the Menorah. This light on the centre shaft is known as the נר המערבי, “the lamp of the West.” 2) The Menorah ought to be constructed of gold, if at all possible; in the absence of suffficient gold, other metals would be acceptable (Sifri Nasso 61). The principal restriction was that one must not have more or fewer than the seven lamps prescribed. The third lesson we learn from this paragraph is that the whole Menorah was to be cast in one piece of metal. In order to make this point clear the Torah repeated the words מקשה היא, “it is to be a (single) casting.” Whereas a Menorah of more than one piece would not be acceptable for use, a Menorah which was not of gold would be acceptable.
   אל מול פני המנורה יאירו שבעת הנרות, “toward the centre of the Menorah its seven lamps shall shine.” If you will examine the text closely you will note that the Torah should have written יאירו ששת הנרות, “the six lamps shall shine,” seeing that the seventh was in the centre. How could the centre light be described as “facing the centre of the Menorah?” According to the plain meaning of the text you will have to understand our verse as follows: “when you kindle the lamps facing the centre shaft of the Menorah you will kindle them in such a way that altogether seven lamps will shine.” This is the meaning of יאירו שבעת הנרות, “the seven lamps will shine.” The Torah could not write the words יאירו ששת הנרות, “the six lamps shall shine,” as in fact seven lamps shone.
    A kabbalistic approach; in terms of Kabbalah the wording of the Torah is most appropriate as the subject is the corresponding Menorah in the celestial regions. The words אל מול mean that the Meorah in the terrestrial Sanctuary is to correspond to the celestial Menorah which consists of seven emanations (the lower seven of the table of emanations). The author sees in the words העלה נרותיה a mystical dimension of elevating terrestrial light to the level of celestial light. Something parallel is found in the vision  of the High Priest described by the prophet (Zecharyah 4,2). It is remarkable that in the spelling of the word מנורה, only in verse 2 is that word spelled each time with the letter ו. This suggests that in that verse the Torah speaks of the celestial Menorah, whereas in the subsequent verses where the letter ו is missing this is to remind us that there the Torah speaks of the terrestrial Menorah in the Tabernacle. You will observe that the expression מנורה occurs four times in our paragraph, the first two times with the letter ו indicating that the Torah speaks of the celestial Menorah, whereas the last two times the Torah mentions מנרה it is spelled without the letter ו, indicating that the Torah speaks of a different Menorah, the terrestrial one. Moreover, such descriptions of the Menorah as “golden,” and “from its base to its flower,” also clearly hint that the Torah now speaks of the terrestrial Menorah in the Tabernacle. It is interesting that also in the verse in Zecharyah dealing with the vision of the High Priest Joshua the word מנורה is spelled with the letter ו, indicating that it was not a terrestrial Menorah which the High Priest saw in his vision. In the entire Torah  the word מנורה is spelled with the letter ו only on three occasions, the two instances here and the verse in Exodus 25,31. We have a statement to this effect by the Massoretes in connection with Exodus 25,31.
   שבעת הנרות, “the seven lamps.” The entire subject matter of the Menorah is wrapped in many mysteries and I have already alluded to this in my commentary on Exodus 25,39 in connection with the commentary by Rabbeinu Chananel [pages 1260-61 in my translation. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach to the words שבעת הנרות, based on Tanchuma Behaalotcha 6. The matter is best approached by means of a parable. A king had a close friend, and one day he told this friend that he planned to have a meal at his house. He asked the friend to set a place for him at his table. The friend prepared for his honoured guest to the best of his ability. When the king arrived he brought with him an entire entourage of servants, butlers, fancy candlesticks, etc., etc. When his host saw all this splendour he was so ashamed of his comparatively puny effort that he hid whatever he had set out for his guest. When the king saw that the friend apparently had not made any preparations to receive him, he said to his host: “did I not tell you that I was going to have a meal with you, so why did you not make suitable preparations?” The host told the king that he had indeed made preparations to the best of his modest ability but that when he saw what the king’s servants brought he felt so inadequate that he removed his inferior dishes, etc. Upon hearing this the king said to his friend: “I am going to abandon all the fancy chandeliers and other vessels which my servants have brought, and instead I am going to use only your vessels, all in appreciation of your fondness of me.” Seeing that G’d is all “light” in the most brilliant form, He decided not to use His own light in the Tabernacle but to allow His “friend” the Jewish people to provide Him with the kind of light they are able to provide. This is why G’d commanded the Menorah to be kindled daily in the Tabernacle to demonstrate His fondness of His host, the Jewish people. Seeing that Moses had constructed the Tabernacle for G’d and all its appurtenances and this constituted the best he was able to do and when the Shechinah did arrive Moses found himself unable to enter, (Exodus 40,35) G’d now called to Moses to the Tent of Meeting and spoke to him. What was the subject of this conversation?  The instruction to kindle the Menorah regularly, etc. Israel was pleasantly surprised, saying: “G’d who illuminates the entire universe wants us to provide light for Him?!” When the Temple was destroyed the Menorah was hidden (because of the powerful sanctity it exuded). This reflects what our sages told us already in the Tanchuma that Moses had extreme difficulty in compre-hending exactly how the Menorah was to be constructed. In the end, G’d commanded Moses to throw the requisite amount (1 kikar) of gold into a crucible and the Menorah emerged completely formed. This is the meaning of the words תיעשה המנורה, “the Menorah emerged ready.” There is no mention made of Betzalel or anyone else fashioning the Menorah. (compare Exodus 25,31) The expression מקשה normally translated as “cast” also alludes to the difficulty קשה Moses had with the concept of the Menorah. [Although Exodus 37,17 gives the impression that Betzalel had made the Menorah, the absence of his name may indicate that although G’d made it he received credit for it seeing he was so dedicated. (compare Shemot Rabbah 50,5 Ed.]
    These were the details of the Menorah: it was 18 tefachim high, corresponding to the numerical value of the letters in the word וזה (verse 4). Concerning the word מקשה, our sages state that Moses had difficulty with four different instructions by G’d until He had to show him with a “finger” what the finished product was going to look like. The Menorah, the sacrificial offerings, the shekel contribution, and the new moon were the four pieces of legislation which Moses did not understand in the mere abstract. Each of these pieces of legislation has been described at one point or another by the Torah with the word זה, “this,” meaning that Moses was given help by being shown a graphic illustration. (compare Leviticus 6,13 regarding the sacrifice of Aaron; Exodus 12,2 regarding new moon; Exodus 30,13 regarding the shekel, i.e. half-shekel, and our verse here).
    Even though our sages said in connection with such verses as Leviticus 11,29 וזה לכם הטמא, and “this will be impure for you,” that G’d took Moses by the hand and showed him the animals in question, in those instances Moses did not have conceptual difficulties and this is why the Midrash spoke only of four examples (compare Chulin 44).
    
    8,6. קח את הלוים מתוך בני ישראל, “take the Levites from among the Children of Israel, etc.” The paragraph dealing with the separation of the Levites was written  immediately after that of the Menorah, as the former was the exclusive domain of the priests, whereas now the Torah prepares the Levites for assuming their duties. The next paragraph deals with the Passover as an historical commandment remembering the Exodus, a commandment involving every single Israelite. This is the meaning of 9,2: “The Israelites shall make the Passover.” You will observe therefore that these paragraphs have been arranged in a careful manner in a descending order of those to whom they apply, i.e. the Priest, the Levite, the Israelite. The reason that G’d had to say: “take the Levites from among etc., etc.,” was that until then they had been an integral part of the other tribes.
    
    8,7. וכה תעשה להם לטהרם הזה עליהם מי חטאת, “so you shall do to them to purify them.” The מי חטאת refers to the ash of the red heifer. The need for this was due to people who had been contaminated through contact with the dead of the people who had been executed due to their involvement in worshipping the golden calf. At the time Moses had issued instructions to the Levites to kill the guilty persons even if they were close relatives of the Levites (Exodus 32,27).
    The instructions to pass a razor over the entire flesh of the Levites includes the beard but not the five corners which one must not shave with a razor as we know from Leviticus 19,27. The Levites replaced the firstborn who had previously functioned as priests. Even surviving firstborn who had become disqualified for further service due to their involvement in that sin were considered as having been associated with זבחי מתים, offerings addressed to the dead (as opposed to the living G’d). When someone is afflicted with tzoraat he is also considered as equivalent to the dead. These Levites had not yet been purified and in their present state they could not have commenced their sacred duties. This is why the Torah writes: “after that the Levites may come and perform their service,” in connection with the Tabernacle (verse 15).
    
    8,11. והניף אהרן את הלוים תנופה, “Aaron shall wave the Levites as a wave-service.” The word תנופה, “waving,” appears three times in this paragraph It appears in verse 11 as “Aaron shall wave the Levites...in the presence of the Lord.” It appears again in verse 15 ”you shall perform a wave-service with them.” It appears a third time in verse 13 in a similar connotation. According to Rashi the reason it appears three times is once each for the Kehatites, once for the Gershonites and once for the Merarites. This is the reason why the Torah varies the job-description of the Levites each time, once speaking of עבודת ה', i.e. the Kehatites who carried the Sanctuary (literally), i.e. the sacred vessels including the Holy Ark. When the Torah justified the other wave-offering describing the Levites in question as כי עבודת הקדש עליהם (7,9), this was a job description of the Kehatites. Concerning the Gershonites the Torah merely writes תנופנה לה', “a wave-offering for the Lord,” seeing that they too carried the woven materials of the roof and the courtyard. The third group of Levites, the Merarites who transported the beams, the sockets, etc., are referred to simply as undergoing a תנופה waving, but there is no mention of the word לה', “for the Lord,” seeing that this group was furthest from the centre of sanctity. At the end of the whole paragraph (verse 21) we find once more that “Aaron waved (all) the Levites as a wave-offering in the presence of the Lord,” in order to show that all the Levites had qualified. As to the meaning of the words נתונים נתונים המה לי, “for presented, presented they are to Me,” in verse 16, this means that they have been presented to the Lord to perform either the song and music or the work of transportation, as the case may be at different times. Alternatively, these words are a justification for the appointment of the Levites to these sacred tasks in recognition of when they had presented themselves as totally dedicated to G’d during the golden calf episode. 
    
    8,19. ולא יהיה בבני ישראל נגף  בגשת בני ישראל אל הקודש, “so that there will not be a plague among the Children of Israel when the Children of Israel approach the Sanctuary.” The plague will be prevented as the Levites ensure that the Israelites do not cross the line into sacred precincts which are out of bounds to them. You will find the word ישראל five times in this verse. Whenever the name of a person or group of persons is repeated in this fashion this reflects the extreme fondness of the author writing this comment about the people concerned. Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 2,4 illustrate this point by means of the parable of the father who has a young son just about ready to begin his schooling. The father constantly inquires about his son whether he drinks properly, eats properly, sleeps properly, etc. This is why we also find that all matters pertaining to the Tabernacle have been written in the Torah five times (compare author’s comment on Exodus 35,1 where he points out that most matters have been written repeatedly). The reason the Torah wrote these matters five times was to correspond to the five Books of the Torah the Jewish people observe. These Books are what keep the world going, seeing the world was created with the letter ה, as we pointed out in connection with the under-sized letter ה in Genesis 2,4 בהבראם. These five Books were not designed for any nation other than the Jewish people. We know already that the Tabernacle was a microcosm of the terrestrial world so that referring to its details five times makes excellent sense.
    
    8,20. ויעש משה ואהרן וכל עדת בני ישראל ללוים, “and Moses and Aaron together with the whole congregation of the Children of Israel did to the Levites, etc.” Moses was putting the Levites on their feet, whereas Aaron was “waving” them. This is the meaning of the words in verse 13 והעמדת את הלוים לפני אהרן ולפני בניו. The fact that Aaron performed the “waving” is mentioned specifically in verse 11 והניף אהרן את הלוים תנופה לפני ה’. This procedure consisted of Aaron personally lifting up each individual Levite, waving him in different directions. This reflected the fact that Aaron possessed exceptional physical strength. [it was one of the 5 qualifying attributes of a High Priest that he be  physically strong. Ed] Lifting 22,000 people individually all in one day was certainly no mean accomplishment. Alternatively, the entire procedure took place with a heavenly assist, i.e. a miracle. Aaron may have been able to call upon such assistance as he represented the attribute of Mercy and was able to command assistance from the attribute of חסד as well as that of גבורה. The attribute of Mercy is composed of large parts of חסד, and a smaller part of גבורה. (compare author’s comment on Leviticus 21,10 under the heading “a kabbalistic approach”) This is also the meaning of the words in Maleachi 2,6 בשלום ובמישור הלך אתי, “he (Aaron) walked with Me in peace and equity.” The reason that Aaron at the time had chosen the zodiac sign of the ox was also that this was the chayah which appeared to the prophet Ezekiel on the left in his famous vision of the merkavah, the divine entourage. He used to atone for the iniquities of the people of Israel, sins which had their origin in the North [compare our author’s explanation on Exodus 32,4 page 1345 our translation. Ed.] 
    The Israelites placed their hands on these Levites investing them with the authority to be their “agents.” This is the meaning of verse 10: “the Israelites shall place their hands on the Levites.” It is most likely that the entire procedure relied heavily on G’d’s miraculous assist.
    8,24. זאת אשר ללוים, ”this shall apply to the Levites, etc.” according to the plain meaning of the text the word זאת refers to the limitation (in age) when they are on active duty. 
    A Midrashic approach (based on Vayikra Rabbah 21,8): Whenever the word זאת appears it refers to the Torah. Compare Deut. 4,44 וזאת התורה. “זאת“ is the Torah.” The Levites were the teachers of the Torah. This has been made clear already by Moses in his blessing in Deut. 33,10 where he said: “They shall teach Your ordinances to Yaakov and Your Torah to Israel.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words זאת אשר ללוים are to be understood in the same vein as Psalms 118,23 מאת ה' היתה זאת, “This (covenant) emanated from Hashem.” We know this from Genesis 17,10: זאת בריתי, “This is My covenant.” In connection with the tribe of Levi the Torah writes ובריתך ינצורו, “they have observed Your covenant meticulously” (Deut. 33, 9). When the Levites were counted the Torah wrote the words על פי ה' (Numbers 3,16), an expression we do not find in connection with the census of the other tribes. The idea is that the מדה, the particular attribute applicable to the Levites is that they are the transmitters  of the פי ה', the word of G’d, the Torah.
   מבן חמש ועשרים שנה ומעלה יבא לצבא צבא בעבודת אהל מועד, “from twenty-five years old and up he shall join the legion of the service of the Tent of Meeting.” In Numbers 4,23 the Torah had described the years when a Levite serves as between 30-50. How do we reconcile this? What is written here refers to when the Levite enrolls in the training program, i.e. at the age of 25. He does not qualify for active service, however, until he reaches the age of 30. This arrangement prompted our sages (Chulin 24) to say that when a Torah student does not seem to make proper progress by the time he has studied for five years, he is not likely to accomplish much by remaining in the academy. According to the plain meaning we could make a distinction between two kinds of service. The service within the Tent he may commence at the age of 25, whereas he does not qualify for the labour of carrying the parts of the Tabernacle until he reaches the age of 30, traditionally the age at which the body reaches full strength.
    
    9,5. ויעשו את הפסח בראשון, “They prepared the Passover in the first month, etc.” Nachmanides writes that in accordance with the opinion of the sages this was the only time that the Israelites celebrated the Passover during all the years they were in the desert. The reason was that they had uncircumcised slaves and children whom they could not circumcise due to the hazard of infection in the desert conditions. The matter is discussed in Yevamot 72. However, in Sifri Behaalotcha 67 the word בראשון is understood as a criticism of the Children of Israel for having celebrated the Passover only on that occasion. Similarly, Amos 5,25, where the prophet speaks of “did you offer sacrifice and oblation to Me those forty years in the wilderness?,” is also seen as a criticism of the Israelites for not offering all these sacrifices. This criticism is based on the unnecessary words “in the first month, the fourteenth of the month, in the evening in the desert of Sinai.” It would have sufficed for the Torah to write that the Israelites offered the Passover in accordance with the rules laid down by G’d. The additional details provided are a hint that this was the one and only time the people did observe the Passover. Thus far Sifri.
    The reason that the Torah saw fit to write this passage at this point was that the inauguration of the Tabernacle and the Altar took place in the first month (of the second year); this was the month the Levites were set apart. Seeing that in connection with the Passover observance the Torah wrote (Exodus 12,25) “it will be when you come into the land, etc.,” and in Exodus 13,11 the Torah also appeared to tie the observance of the Passover to the Israelites coming to the Holy Land, the Torah here had to legislate its observance now as otherwise the people would have thought that the desert was not a suitable location for offering the Passover.
    
    9,8. עמדו ואשמעה מה יצוה ה' לכם, “stand still while I will hear what Hashem will command concerning you (your problem).” According to Rashi the word עמדו means that the people concerned were to wait at the entrance of the Tabernacle and Moses would immediately relay to them G’d’s response. He adds that a human being who can give such an assurance that G’d will respond to him without delay is really one that is blessed. It appears that Rashi gleaned all this because Moses should merely have said: “what Hashem is going to say to me.” By saying “what Hashem is going to command to you,” Moses demonstrated his humility, making it appear that it was on account of the questioners that he expected such a prompt reply.
    The reason that Moses added the letter ה to the word ואשמעה, instead of saying ואשמע, may have been an allusion to the last letter ה in the tetragram, a phenomenon we have encountered repeatedly. The voice he expected to hear was the one of which G’d had said in Exodus 15,26 אם שמוע תשמע לקול ה' אלוקיך וגו', “if you will surely hearken to the voice of the Lord your G’d, and do what is right in His eyes. etc.” From that attribute embodied in the letter ה, G’d’s directives would issue forth. Onkelos hints at that in his translation when he translates עד דאשמע מה אתפקד מן קדם ה' על די לכון, “until I hear what it (this attribute) orders from Hashem concerning you.” If Moses did not know the answer himself this is not held against him as it was when he did not know the answer to the query of the daughters of Tzelofchod (Numbers 27,1). In that instance the answer did not need divine guidance as even the Gentile nations appreciate that before the brothers of the deceased are entitle to inherit him, daughters as next of kin take precedence. If Moses nonetheless did not know, this was a punishment for his having made a careless remark when he told the chiefs of tens, fifties, hundreds, and thousands that when they encountered a matter too difficult for them they should submit it to him and he would deal with it (Deut. 1,17). Seeing that Moses had not known the answer to a simple question, the sages considered this as a form of punishment for him. The law involving a possible postponement of the Passover celebrations for individuals who through no fault of their own could not participate on the date set aside for it, was something that had to be legislated and could not be arrived at by use of one’s intellect. Not knowing the answer could not therefore be considered a failing on the part of Moses and therefore a form of punishment.
    
    9,10. או בדרך רחוקה, “or on a distant road;” The Massoretes placed a dot on the last letter of this word to teach us that the subject is not physical distance but that even if the person in question stood barely outside the threshold to the courtyard of the Temple during the entire period permitted for the slaughtering of the Passover, he is halachically considered just as distant as if he were miles distant from the Temple.
    The observance of פסח שני, “an alternate Passover,” involves eating unleavened bread while leavened bread is in the house and does not need to be removed. The date is not considered a Yom Tov, i.e. a festival, with the attendant work prohibitions. The eating of chametz is prohibited only as part of the Passover meal. This is Rashi’s comment..
    I have already explained the reason that chametz is prohibited on the (regular) Passover in a kabbalistic way (Exodus 13,3 our translation pages 910-911). The principal reason is that one should not think that only the attribute of Justice was involved in orchestrating the Exodus and that the attribute of Mercy did not have a part in it. Anyone thinking otherwise is guilty of a severe form of heresy. Seeing that the “second” Passover is on a date which is historically unrelated to the date of the Exodus, there would not be any significance to not eating chametz at that  time. Seeing that both the attribute of Mercy (as  represented by the matzah, and the attribute of Justice as represented by the chametz) were involved in the Exodus there is no question of heresy involved by keeping the chametz in the house. Nachmanides sees in the dot by the Massoretes merely a hint that distance is subjective and that what appears distant to one person may be considered nearby to another younger one, someone equipped with transportation, for instance. This is why the Torah repeats that “he was not on the way,” i.e. although the way was not even distant from the Temple. 
    
    9,18. על פי ה' יסעו ועל פי ה' יחנו, “they would journey at the command of the Lord and they would make camp a the command of the Lord.” The Torah only had to write the words: “the Children of Israel would journey or make camp at the command of the Lord.” The additional words על פי ה' יחנו appear quite superfluous. Seeing that we know all this from Exodus 13,21 where the Torah wrote that “G’d walked ahead of them by day in a pillar of  cloud etc.,” the meaning of our verse here has to be that the words על פי ה' יסעו are a reference to the attribute of Justice. The very word  has a connotation of the attribute of Justice seeing the word is always used in connection with going to war. By contrast then, the words על פי ה' יחנו, is reminiscent of the attribute of Mercy, the very word יחנו, reminding us of מנוחה, rest, calm, quiet, the opposite of war and warfare. We have a parallel situation where both the attribute of Justice and that of Mercy appear side by side. When the Torah speaks of ויהי בנסוע הארון in Numbers 10,35-36 the word נסע refers to he attribute of Justice and Moses‘ call for G’d’s foes being scattered clearly shows that forces of the attribute of Justice must be at work. When Moses continues speaking about the Ark coming to rest this indicates that now the Torah speaks about the attribute of Mercy. Whenever the Israelites are assembled in their thousands and tens of thousands the attribute of Mercy is nearby. At any rate, we must not perceive of these two attributes as separate and independent entities, rather they are bound up with each other, sometimes one attribute predominating, sometimes the other. Concerning this arrangement the prophet Jeremiah speaks of the kindness demonstrated by Israel in its youth when it followed G’d into the desert an area full of agents of the attribute of Justice in the form of harmful animals. The  fact that the Israelites were always saved in such surroundings testifies to the attribute of Mercy being present although the habitat “desert” is that of agents of the attribute of Justice. Similarly, in Egypt, among all the negative influences Israel was exposed to they did not perish, proof of the presence of the attribute of Mercy (in some degree) even there. This is what Hoseah 13,4 had in mind when he said: “only I, the Lord, have been your G’d ever since the land of Egypt.” When the Israelites were being redeemed from Egypt, the Torah testifies that this occurred as an intervention by G’d with a “strong hand.” References to this “strong hand” appear in Moses’ prayer after the golden calf episode (Exodus 32,11) at the sea of reeds, (Exodus 15,2), in Exodus 15,6, etc. There is a constant interchange of references to the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice, each appearing at the most unexpected times and places. All this demonstrates that both forces are constantly on the alert and circumstances determine which force asserts itself as dominant. At the very moment when the attribute of Mercy appeared at its most near, when G’d took up residence in the Tabernacle, Moses could not enter, as if rebuffed by the attribute of Justice. Having appreciated all this, we must not be surprised when the words על פי ה'  are understood as the attribute of Mercy instead of as the attribute of Justice.
    
    9,19.בהאריך הענן , “and when the cloud remained stationary for a long period,” the Torah describes these matters at length to compliment the Israelites who were guided in their journeys or lack of movement by the behaviour of the cloud. The desert was not uniform; some places where the Israelites camped were more pleasant than others, and it would have been understandable for the people to be restless to get away from the less pleasant sites. Proof that there were distinct differences in the natural habitat are such descriptions as “the bitter waters at Marah” contrasted with the pleasant oasis Eylim which was liberally supplied with date palms (Exodus 15, 23 and 27 respectively). The Torah testifies that as soon as the cloud would move, even if the camp was a very pleasant site, the Israelites would get ready to move. To sum up: the Israelites instead of arranging their journeys in accordance with their own preferences submitted willingly to the decision made on their behalf by G’d as expressed by the movement of the cloud. The Torah here also describes another act of kindness by G’d in that all occasions when the people broke camp were in the morning. We derive this from the words או יומם ולילה, “or a day and a night,” instead of או לילה או יום, “or a night and a day” (verse 21). According to the report of the creation (Genesis 1,5 as interpreted by Chulin 83), day followed night, i.e. ויהי ערב ויהי בוקר. However, had the Torah followed that script, we would have concluded that at least on some occasions the Israelites were required to break camp in the evening.
    
    10,2. עשה לך שתי חצוצרות כסף, “make for yourself two silver trumpets, etc.”  According to the plain meaning of the text these two trumpets were made of silver, a single casting each as directed in our verse by the words מקשה תעשה אותם,”make them hammered out.” These trumptes had two functions 1) they served to call the people or the princes to an assembly. 2) They provided the signal for the people to break camp and commence their journeys. This is the meaning of the words: “they shall be yours for summoning the congregation and to cause the camps to journey.”
    When both trumpets would be sounded simultaneously this would be the signal to assemble the people; if only one of the trumpets was blown this was the signal that only the princes need assemble. This is the meaning of the words in verse 4: “when they will blow in one (trumpet), the princes will assemble to you, the leaders of the thousads of Israel.” Seeing that these people were special, unique amongst their peers, only a single trumpet was blown to call them to an assembly. The kind of blast blown was that known as tekiah, a smooth unbroken tone. The smoothness of the sound was a reminder of the attribute of Mercy, reminding people that G’d’s right hand is outstretched waiting to welcome penitent sinners.
    In order to make the camps start journeying the kind of sound blown was the teruah, shorter broken sounds, staccato-like. We know this from verse 6: “a teruah they are to blow for their journeys.” The reason, as we explained already, is that journeys called מסעות mean marching into war, i.e. involving the attribute of Justice. Basically, the journeys of the people of Israel were directed at dislodging the seven Canaanite nations from their homeland. It is the attribute of Justice which grants one victory in battle, and the Jewish people therefore alerted the attribute of Justice whenever they set out on their journeys. This is why in that connection you wll always find the words על פי ה', “at the command of the Lord.”
    When the people got ready to journey the trumpets would be blown in each direction of the four camps seeing that the four  camps faced the four directions (winds) of the earth. This is why we have separate verses describing the different camps breaking up at different times (verses 5-6).
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Behaalotcha 9-10: [in order to understand this one must remember that the word חצוצרות is related to חצץ which also means crushing stones into pebbles. Ed.] According to this Midrash there is a connection with Psalms 24,7 where Solomon prayed for the gates of the Temple to raise themselves, seeing they were too low to admit the Holy Ark. When the gates demanded to know who was going to enter that they had to change their posture, Solomon said  that “the king of glory wants to come in.” This did not satisfy the gates and they demanded again who this king of glory was. Solomon replied that it was ה' עזוז וגבור ה' גבור מלחמה, “the Lord, mighty and valiant, the Lord valiant in battle.” This still did not prove enough to persuade the gates to raise their heads until Solomon added that the king of glory he spoke about was ה' צבאות הוא מלך הכבוד סלה, that it was “the Lord G’d of hosts, He is the king of glory, Selah.” Up until that moment the gates had threatened to crush Solomon. When they heard the latter description of G’d, they opened up immediately. Seeing these gates had shown this honour to G‘d, G’d in turn promised to reward them saying that if and when He allowed His Temple to be destroyed these gates would not fall into the hands of the enemy or into the hands of any other creature.
    You should know that when the Babylonians took King Yehoyakim into captivity together with most of the furnishings of the Temple (Daniel 1,2), the gates were hidden. This is the meaning of Lamentations 2,9: “its gates sunk into earth.”
    The reason G’d is referred to as the king of כבוד, “glory,” is because He shares some of His glory with His creatures.  How do we observe this in practice? We know that G’d is called אלו-הים. We find that G’d accorded the title Elohim to Moses when He told him: “here I have made you Elohim for Pharaoh” (Exodus 7,1). We know that it is G’d’s prerogative to kill and bring to life. Yet we find in Kings I 17,23 when Elijah told the mother: “here your son is alive (again)” that G’d had transferred this power to revive the dead to the prophet Elijah. G’d is known as “king” as we know from Psalms 47,6-8 עלה אלו-הים בתרועה....כי מלך כל הארץ אלו--הים, “G’d ascends as part of the teruah; ....for the king is king over the whole earth.” Moses has also been accorded the title “king,” as we know from Deut. 33,5 ויהי בישורון מלך, “he was king in Yeshurun (the Jewish people). Just as people herald the impending arrival of a king by blowing trumpets so G’d told Moses to make for himself two silver trumpets that were to be blown at the time the Israelites would be assembled (compare verse 3). 
    The words עשה לך, “make for yourself,” mean that they will be yours exclusively; you will make them and no one else is to use them. Even Moses’ successor and foremost disciple, Joshua, never used the trumpets to blow in but only ram’s horns, such as when he was about to capture the city of Jericho (compare Joshua 6,3). In fact we have reason to believe that Moses hid these trumpets already during his lifetime as we read in Deut. 31,28: that Moses commanded the Levites to assemble the people to him so he could address them. If the trumpets had ben available at the time, why did he not sound the trumpets to assemble the people?  Obviously, they had already been hidden in order to fulfill the statement in Kohelet 8,8 that there is no authority exercised by a ruler on the day he dies. [Deut. 31,28 quotes happenings on the last day of Moses’ life. Ed.]
    We find a verse in Chronicles II 29,26 discussing matters which took place in the Temple during the time of King Chiskiyahu. ”The Levites stood equipped with the musical instruments of King David and the Priests were (blowing) the trumpets.” In verse 28 of the same chapter we read והשיר משורר והחצוצרות מחצצרים, “and the song was sung and the trumpets were blown, etc.” This was in contrast to David personally who favoured playing the harp as we know from Psalms 57,9 “awake, O my soul (my glory), awake, O harp and lyre, I will wake the dawn.” We are told that he had a harp hanging over his bed and that as soon as midnight arrived and the North wind began to blow the harp would start playing on its own. As soon as this occurred David would rise from his bed and together with all the other students they would study Torah and chase the sleep from their eyes until dawn. 
    According to the Tanchuma the reason the verse in Psalms speaks about “waking dawn” in connection with his soul awakening was to demonstrate that David’s personal כבוד was nothing compared to G’d’s כבוד, glory. David “woke” dawn not just for himself but he wanted to shake up people from their slumber.
    A more kabbalistic approach: the two trumpets symbolised the tekiah and teruah, i.e. the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. When G’d said to Moses “these shall be for you an instrument to call the congregation to journey,” this is equivalent  to His saying to Moses: “they shall be for you as either tekiah or teruah.” If so, this is clear proof that the journeys and campings of the Israelites were subject to the two attributes mentioned, i.e. that the words על פי ה' יחנו ועל פי ה' יסעו את משמרת ה' שמרו which are written adjoining the paragraph instructing Moses to make the trumpets are conceptually closely connected, and that the words על פי ה' refer to both attributes, as the case may be.
    If we consider that Moses was entrusted with these two trumpets and what they symbolised you can appreciate his elevated status, i.e. that he could call upon either the attribute of Justice or the attribute of Mercy at will, so to speak. This proves his status as king.
    The reason the trumpets had to be made only of silver, and that no other metal was acceptable as a substitute (as opposed to the Menorah), is discussed in Menachot 28. The Talmud says that the silver used for their construction was a silver bar. Whereas smaller pieces of silver scrap were acceptable as the raw material, other metals were not. The reason there had to be two such trumpets was in order for Moses to be able to address and be addressed by the attribute of Mercy on a “face to face” basis,” as sort of a vision within a vision, there had to be two. The construction is described in the Torah as מקשה, “hammered, beaten work,” This is the mystical dimension of what is written in verse 3 ונועדו אליך כל העדה, “the tekiah element when blowing both trumpets” is the signal to assemble the entire congregation to be exposed to the communication from the attribute of Mercy which addressed the Israelites out of the fire. This is what Moses had in mind when he told the people in Deut. 4,15: “on the day the Lord spoke to you at Chorev out of the fire.” When the tekiah was blown out of only one of the trumpets this was the signal for the princes who were unique people to be assembled around Moses. Moses who was unique, would hear the voice of G’d who was unique. He was the only one who could understand the voice of the attribute of Mercy speaking to him.
    The teruah sound would be blown to signal that the people were to get ready to journey, part of their campaign to conquer the Holy Land. The fact that the attribute of Justice (symbolised by the teruah sound) was called upon is a compliment to the stature of the Jewish people. Seeing that no other prophet had attained the stature of Moses to be addressed both by the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice on a “face to face” basis by means of the trumpets, these trumpets had to be “hidden,“ so that no one else would use them. The very words והיו לך, “they shall be yours,” which G’d said to Moses concerning these trumpets mean that only Moses would have access to these two attributes of Hashem in such a manner. Seeing these trumpets were so sacred they had to be hidden prior to Moses’ death.
    Do not wonder why they were made of silver (and not of gold). The manner in which they were hammered out of one piece made it impossible to construct them of any metal other than silver. The cherubs on the kapporet of the Holy Ark were also constructed in a similar manner, (out of gold). In the case of the cherubs the attribute of Justice was subordinate to the attribute of Mercy contained within it. Hence a soft metal, gold, was used. By the same token seeing that in the case of the trumpets the situation was the reverse, i.e. that the attribute of Mercy was subordinate to the attribute of Justice which was part of it, a hard metal, silver, had to be used to symbolise that concept. Joshua was not allowed to use the trumpets and he used the shofar instead to symbolise the attribute of Justice which was poised against his enemies, the inhabitants of Jericho. David also was not allowed to use the trumpets and used the harp instead which corresponded to his principal attribute, virtue. The author draws a comparison between the word כנור and the lake called ים כנרת, (sea of Galilee). The blue applied to the tzitzit is drawn from a fish in that lake, this is why his attribute is known as כנור דוד. (Rabbi Chavell found a source in the Zohar Beshalach 48 for this.) There are kabbalistic writings explaining why תכלת represents these attributes of Justice. [Remak, (Rabbi Moshe Cordovero) quotes a saying that any colour one sees in one’s dream is acceptable except techelet, as this represents the attribute of Justice in its full power. Pardess Rimonim discusses the colours and their mystical significance in a chapter called שער הגוונים. Ed.]. What we learn from the above is that every great historical personality was given the tools appropriate to his spiritual level to use in communicating with G’d or on behalf of G’d.

    10,29. ויאמר משה לחובב, “Moses said to Chovav, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the Chovav mentioned here is identical with Yitro, Moses’- father-in-law. He was given a new name when he converted to Judaism. It is customary to give converts a new name when they are accepted into the Jewish religion. This is what happened to Tzipporah’s father. Her grandfather’s name was Re-uel. This is based on Isaiah 65,15 that “His servants will be known by another name.” This is the meaning of Exodus 2,18: “the said to Re-uel their father,” i.e. to their grandfather. The reference to a grandfather as a “father” is not unusual; we have seen this already in Genesis 32,1 where Yaakov speaks about “the G’d of my father Avraham.” We also find that Belshazzar was described as the son of Nevuchadnezzar although he was the grandson of Nevuchadnezzar (Daniel 5,2).
    On the other hand, our sages in the Mechilta at the beginning of Parshat Yitro claim that Yitro had seven different names.
    
    When Yitro said in verse 30: “I will not go but I will return to my country and my birthplace I will go,” Moses had turned to him without specific proposals just saying the Jewish people would  treat him well (verse 29). Yitro understood this remark in terms of the Israelites giving him money, that they were going to let him share in the loot to be gained as a result of the conquest of the land of the Canaanites. He did not think that Moses’ promise would include land in the conquered country. This is why he declined the offer. He pointed out that in his own country he was better of, owning inalienable pieces of land, enjoying prestige, etc. When Moses became aware of this he told him: “please do not abandon us, etc.” He implied that Yitro’s knowledge of the desert etc., made him invaluable to the Jewish people. He assured him that he would share in all the advantages that would accrue to the Jewish people. He hinted that there would be a proper heritage for Yitro and his family in Eretz Yisrael in return for his assistance in conquering the land. I believe that Yitro agreed to this proposal. Thus far the commentary of Nachmanides.
    
    10,31. והיית לנו לעינים, “you will act as our eyes,”  to show us the way. Seeing that the Israelites had been journeying exclusively at the direction of the cloud and the cloud showed them the way, what need was there to employ the services of Yitro? The reason Moses said the words quoted was to reinforce the minds and hearts of the people whose faith in the miraculous guidance of the cloud was somewhat limited, people who preferred to rely on leaders of flesh and blood.
    Another meaning of the words: “you will be our eyes” was that they referred to Yitro testifying to the Gentiles what he had observed while traveling with the Jewish people. Yitro was to report all the miracles he had observed while traveling with the Jewish people. Upon hearing all this it was hoped that more Gentiles would be moved to convert to Judaism This is the approach of Onkelos who translates וגבורן דאתעבדין לנא חזיתא ויהי טבא ההוא יוטיב ה' עמנא ונוטינ לך, “the great deeds which have been done for us you have seen and the good that you have seen we will confer upon you.” 
    A Midrashic approach (Sifri Behaalotcha 80) the words “you will be our eyes” mean that “anything which had thus far been concealed from our eyes you will reveal to our eyes.” Still another approach: “you (Yitro) will be as dear to us are our own eyeballs.” The background to such a sentiment is the commandment in Deut. 10,19: “you shall love the proselyte.”
    
    10,33. ויסעו מהר ה', “they journeyed from the mountain of the Lord.” The Israelites journeyed away from Sinai, the cloud leading the way. The Ark was being carried by the Kehatites behind the cloud. The cloud did not stop moving until the evening of the third day as it had been searching for a suitable site to make camp. This is the meaning of the words לתור להם מנוחה, “to search out for them a place to rest.”
    Our sages in Shabbat 116 interpret the words מהר ה' as meaning מאחרי ה', that as soon as they left the environment of Sinai the people deviated from following G’d, they literally fled from the nearness of G’d. Different desires began to surface. These desires surfaced on the 22nd day of Iyar seeing that on the 20th of that month the cloud had risen from the Tabernacle and commenced to move. The first day of the three days which is mentioned here was the 20th of the month, the day the cloud started moving. The overpowering desire to eat meat surfaced on the 22nd of the month; the meat materialised on the same day and the people kept eating of the quail for 30 days until the 22nd of Sivan. Why did the sages in Shabbat have to interpret events in this manner? It was to teach us that as soon as the people moved away from Mount Sinai they no longer felt that they were under the immediate benevolent supervision of Hashem. They believed that this kind of supervision existed only right at the Mountain of G’d. The expression הר ה' as opposed to הר האלו-הים is so unusual that the sages felt the essence of the move was “away from the Torah element associated with that mountain.”
    
    10,35. ויהי בנסוע הארון, “When the Ark would journey,” the Torah interrupted its narrative with these two verses. By rights the Torah should have continued writing here ויהי העם כמתאוננים וגו', i.e. the first verse of chapter 11 which would have made the proper continuation for the words בנסעם מן המחנה, “when they journeyed from the camp.” As long as the Israelites were encamped around Mount Sinai they were not far from civilisation, whereas the direction the cloud traveled took them deeper and deeper into the desert. The people reacted negatively to this journey becoming afraid of the discomforts they expected to encounter. Seeing that chapter 11 is a direct continuation of verse 35 in chapter 10 there should not have been any interruption of the subject matter.
    The reason for this insertion of verses 36-37 according to the plain meaning of the text is this: we know that the terrestrial world is divided into three parts, i.e. sea, civilised areas, desert. Our sages in Pessachim 94 (Tossaphot) said: “one third of the surface of the globe is oceans, one third is land that is cultivated, and inhabited; one third is desert. When the Israelites entered the land of Israel they had already traversed all three kinds of the globe. The Israelites had had a visible manifestation of the fact that G’d created the world as something entirely new seeing G’d had demonstrated miracles both on sea, on land and the miracles which occurred when the seven Canaanite nations were driven out of the land of Canaan.
    Seeing that when one comes face to face in nature with high mountains, etc., etc., one forms the impression that these phenomena have existed for eons of years and have preceded man and G’d historicallly, it is necessary to counter such impressions among the people. This is why the Torah inserted the two verses 36-37 at this point as it had become aware of the impression that the wilderness had begun to make on the Israelites. The words ויפוצו אויביך וינוסו משנאיך, “may Your enemies scatter and those who hate You be put to flight,” are aimed at the people who believed that forces in nature are more powerful than G’d. The Torah which is deposited inside the Holy Ark testifies to the fact that G’d preceded all phenomena known to man. When the enemies of the Israelites are scattered this is the most potent proof of G’d’s having preceded all. This is the reason G’d performed so many miracles in the desert in order to demonstrate precisely in an environment which would otherwise lead people to believe that it had existed forever, that our G’d exercises full control over such phenomena. This is also the reason that the members of the Great Assembly who formulated most of our liturgy included a statement in Berachot 54 that benedictions are to be recited when one sees the ocean, the mountains, and deserts. The formula is generally: “blessed be the One Who created the universe.” The point of such a benediction is to confirm that in spite of appearances to the contrary the universe was created out of “nothing,” not out of pre-existing bodies of matter.
    A Midrashic approach by our sages in Shabbat 115 concentrates on the inverted letters נ in order to demonstrate that this paragraph is not in its proper place. Rabbi said that these inverted letters did not really belong here but that they signal that what is within them is really a whole Book by itself. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel does not agree with Rabbi seeing that he is on record as saying that in the future the Torah will be revised and these verses will be removed from here and be written at an appropriate place. The reason that they have been inserted here in the meanwhile is to provide a break between one disaster and the next. The first disaster was the fact that the physical departure from Mount Sinai coincided with a spiritual departure from what Mount Sinai stood for, something which occurred on the first day of the journey. The second disaster is the one commencing with verse 1 in chapter 11, that the people were looking for something to complain about. Thus far the Midrash.
    There are three opinions concerning this subject among our sages (according to Rashi on that folio). The first opinion holds that the appropriate place for these two verses would have been where the flags are described, adjoining Numbers 2,17. This is where the journeys are described for the first time. There the Torah mentions the Tent of Meeting, and the Ark about which these verses speak, was in the tent of Meeting. If the Torah inserted the inverted letter נ it was to alert us that these verses really belonged elsewhere. If you will count the number of paragraphs between where these two verses should have appeared and where they did appear you will find that there are fifty paragraphs between them. This is alluded to by the Torah employing the letter נ whose numerical value is 50 as the dividing symbol.
    The second opinion is that of Rabbi who holds that this short paragraph was written in its appropriate place in the Torah. Seeing that it is part of the journeys of the Children of Israel it is in its proper place. The paragraph had commenced with the words: “it was in the second year in the second month on the twentieth of the month that the cloud rose ....and the people journeyed” (10,11). The Torah continues here to enumerate the order in which the flags were journeying. Rabbi said: לא מן השם הוא that the reason that these two verses are enclosed in these inverted letters נ is not because they appear out of context but because the message is so important that the two verses constitute a whole Book of the Torah by itself. Rabbi holds that by means of these inverted letters נ the Torah was divided into a total of seven Books, or the Book of Numbers into three Books.
    The Talmud in Shabbat 116 inquires who is the source for the opinion of Rabbi Shemuel bar Nachmeyni who reported in the name of Rabbi Yochanan that the words in Proverbs 9,1 חצבה עמודיה שבעה, ”she has hewn her seven pillars,” is a reference to the seven Books of the Torah. The answer given is that this was Rabbi’s interpretation of this verse in Proverbs.
    Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel disagrees with Rabbi in a minor detail; he agrees that the two verses are in the right context, but believes that in the future, after the arrival of the Messiah, the sequence of these verses will be changed seeing there will no longer be any reason to recall all these disasters. Seeing that at that time the evil urge itself will have disappeared, recalling these disasters as a warning against the evil urge will no longer be necessary. The reason that these verses were inserted here in the manner in which they were inserted was to separate between one disaster and another.
    A kabbalistic approach: These two verses contain allusions to the entire history of this terrestrial universe, i.e. its existence of a total of 7,000 years. The hint consists of the seven times the letter א which is equivalent to אלף, 1,000, appears in these two verses. This is parallel to the very first verse in the Torah (Genesis 1,1) in which the letter א also appears seven times.[Actually in Genesis the letter א appears only 6 times in that verse, giving rise to the statement of the sages that the universe G’d created at that time was to endure in its present form for 6,000 years compare Rosh Hashanah 31). After these 6,000 years there will be another 1,000 years during which the universe will be in ruins. We have to understand that seeing the entire Torah is built on the premise of creation ex nihilo, that just as the universe came into existence, had a beginning, it will also have an end. This is what is meant by Isaiah 44,6 quoting G’d as saying: “I am the first and therefore I am the last.” The prophet meant that just as G’d was first, i.e. before any creatures, so He will survive all creatures. This verse in Isaiah is proof that the terrestrial universe as we know it will have an end. If there would be a single surviving creature in the universe, how could G’d describe Himself as being the last?
    David explained this in greater detail when he said (Psalms 102, 26-27: “of old You established the earth; the heavens are the work of Your hands. They shall perish but You shall endure; they shall all wear out like a garment; You change them like clothing and they pass away. But You are the same and Your years never end.”
    The letter relating to the sixth millennium is the letter א in the word אלפי of the sequence רבבות אלפי ישראל. This is the sixth word in that verse. The seventh word, i.e. ישראל, in this instance alludes to a withdrawal of the forces which had kept the universe a going concern during the previous six thousand years, and a hint that during that millennium there would be ruin. This millennium is the one of which the Talmud said חד חריב, “one which is desolation.” We also find an interesting anomaly in Hoseah 9,12 where the prophet writes the word בשורי מהם spelling the word with the letter sin instead of with the shin. The idea is that the “turning away by G’d from Israel” will not be total. Seeing that the wordישראל  can depict the absence of positive forces or the presence of positive forces depending on the context in which the word appears, it is possible that just as on occasion that word alludes to destruction, it may allude to reconstruction on occasion, i.e. a marshaling of positive, constructive forces. The word in our verse would therefore also allude to a rebuilding of the universe including the people of Israel. This is the mystical dimension of Psalms 24,2 על נהרות יכוננה, “He founded it on subterranean streams.” The psalmist did not write כוננה, “He founded it,” in the past, parallel to the word יסדה, in the same line where we read: “for He founded it on the oceans,” כי הוא על ימים יסדה, but יכוננה, “He will found it,” in the future. This reflects that at the beginning of this psalm David spoke about the fact that eventually the whole universe would return to the state it was in before the Creator created light. All of this proves that G’d had originated the universe not merely improved it or expanded it.
    You will also find that in the hymn dedicated to the Sabbath (Psalms 92,1) David said in verse 13: “the righteous bloom like the date-palm,” an allusion to an existence after the Sabbath (the seventh millennium). This is the mystical dimension of the verse in Genesis 2,3. I have already mentioned this concept when commenting on that verse commencing with the words ויכלו השמים והארץ, a verse which concludes with אשר ברא אלו-הים לעשות, “which the Lord had created in order to continue to perfect it.” The time when this will occur is “after the Sabbath,” i.e. after the seventh millennium. When David said in Psalms 72,7 that יפרח צדיק בימיו ורב שלום עד בלי ירח, “the righteous will bloom in his days and there will be much peace (well-being) until the cessation of the moon,” the meaning is that the world as we know it will continue until the great Yovel at which time the forces of nature as we know them will cease to exist. This cessation of the forces of nature will include the function of the sun and the moon. At that time the earth will revert to its state of Tohu Vavohu prior to G’d having given the directive: “let there be light.” As to the verse in Genesis 8,22: “as long as the earth will exist, seed-time, harvest-time, cold and heat, summer and winter, shall not cease” is concerned,  this is merely confirmation that there is a time limit to the phenomena mentioned in that verse. The time set for these phenomena expires during the great Yovel, i.e. the seventh millennium. This is  also the opinion of Solomon who said in Kohelet 1,4 “and the universe continues forever.” The word עולם used by Solomon in that verse is the עולם היובל, the “world” as perceived of as a cycle of seven Shemittah cycles followed by a year of Yovel as spelled out in Leviticus 25,8-10, where the microcosm is discussed, whereas Solomon referred to the macrocosm. All of this is due to the principle that things which have a beginning must be perceived to have an end. Solomon’s father David was of the same opinion as his son when he wrote about G’d’s handiwork perishing in Psalm 102, 26-7 whereas G’d Himself would endure.
    There are some verses in Psalms which at first glance appear to contradict the concept we have outlined, such as Psalms 145,1, 65-6 or Psalm 104,5  When the psalmist speaks about the phenomena mentioned enduring forever, he does not mean that they will actually endure forever but that they have been so constructed that they would not disintegrate on their own unless by an act of G’d.
    Seeing that we cannot perceive of the sequence of Shemittah cycles followed by the Yovel as being something which continues indefinitely, this small paragraph is encapsulated in the inverted letters נ, to indicate that such a progression as we experience will come to an end after 50 cycles. The great Yovel occurs at the end of 1,000 generations at which time the earth will revert to a state of chaos. The reason why the letter נ has been reversed is that just as when letters are written in the normal manner this is an indication of matters described by these letters continuing to exist, when you turn the letter upside down you are giving notice that what had been perceived as continuing indefinitely does in fact come to an end. In order to reinforce our appreciation of what these inverted letters mean the Torah wrote two of them in order to drive home the point, as well as in order to hint that not only earth as we know it will undergo the metamorphosis described but heaven will too. (‎After all, heaven was created on the second day, after the light. Ed.] The reason that the Torah wrote the word ויהי “it came to pass,” each time after one of these inverted letters נ appears is to convince us that there will be a new existence after the great Yovel during which this metamorphosis will occur. The Torah wanted us to appreciate these concepts. In order for this to become easier for us it legislated in the microcosm, i.e. in our life cycles the Shemittah and Yovel legislation concerning the sale of slaves, return of land which had been sold as the result of the owner’s distress, etc., etc. Once concepts such as Shemittah and Yovel, both of which represent different degrees of reversals of natural processes have become part of our daily lives, the macrocosmic principles which we described are much easier to visualise. Let me now try and explain to you the underlying reason for these cataclysmic events which will occur at the end of each cycle of 6,000 years and again at the end of 49,000 years. It is generally known that six of the ten emanations were active during the six days of creation. The first day was under the aegis of the emanation בינה, whereas the second day was under the aegis of the emanation חסד. The third day was associated with the emanation גבורה, and so on until the seventh day, the Sabbath, was under the aegis of the emanation יסוד. This emanation commenced its work which was to provide עונג ומנוחה, Sabbath entertainment and creative rest. The rest provided by this emanation was both in respect of the Sabbath itself and in respect of the preceding six days. When the emanation יסוד was at rest on the Sabbath, all the other emanations were at rest also. This is the meaning of Exodus 20,11 כי ששת ימים עשה ה' את השמים ואת הארץ וינח ביום השביעי, “for during (a unit of) six days the Lord made heaven and earth and on the seventh day He rested.” The words ששת ימים describe the six emanations which G’d created and employed to do His work; the “rest” occurred on the seventh day by means of the emanation יסוד. Something similar will occur at the end of the six thousand years  when the cycle will repeat itself with the interval being a period corresponding to the rest of the original Sabbath. Each millennium will be under the aegis of the respective six emanations we already referred to. Seeing that every emanation has completed its work at the end of one thousand years, it follows that the world will then become chaotic seeing all the emanations are inactive.
    This means that in our terrestrial, or “lower” world, a world governed by the relatively low emanation בינה, continuity has come to an end, all the “lower” emanations striving to return to the emanation בינה, their immediate origin. Once this has occurred the cycle renews itself; this whole cycle of 6,000 plus 1,000 years repeats itself six times until at the end of the seventh such cycle we come to the “great” Yovel. One of the reasons that during the first six such cycles there was a relative חורבן at the end of each 6,000 years is that the emanations תפארת and כבוד which govern the orbits of sun and moon respectively, return to their immediate origin the emanation בינה, and terrestrial earth cannot function unless both sun and moon are active in their orbits. Nonetheless the seventh millennium during these six cycles does not mean total chaos, i.e. תהו ובהו, seeing that these forces will rejuvenate themselves forthwith after having received input from the emanation בינה. At the end of the seventh such cycle all emanations including the ones above בינה revert to the אין סוף, G’d’s essence, necessitating a return to total תהו ובהו in the process. This is what Isaiah referred to when he wrote: “all the host of heaven shall molder, the heavens shall be rolled up like a scroll and all their host shall wither like leaf withering on a vine, etc”. Another verse in Isaiah 51,6 describes something similar happening to earth. The reason for these phenomena is the withdrawal of sun and moon, i.e. the emanation תפארת and כבוד.
    This subject was revealed to David in Psalm 24 where he speaks about “the earth being the Lord’s as well as all that it contains, the world and its inhabitants.” The author proceeds to show that verses 7 and 9 in that hymn describe the developments which we have been describing. [Since the author himself imposes restrictions upon himself in going into details, I will also refrain from translating the remainder of his comments on that psalm. Ed.]
    
    11,1. ויהי העם כמתאוננים, “The people were as if looking for a pretext to complain.” The word מתאונן occurs in Lamen-tations 3,39 where it means “complain.” As the people entered the desert they experienced a variety of uncomfortable sensations. These complaints were very displeasing in the ears of the Lord, seeing they were caused by the fact that instead of marching joyfully towards their destiny and the Holy Land, the people marched only grudgingly. The reason the word מתאוננים is spelled with the prefix כ i.e. a preposition describing something in relative terms, i.e. “as if,” is because at that stage they did not yet dare verbalise their feelings of discontent. They did not want Moses to hear their complaint. This is why the Torah describes G’d as “hearing” unspoken complaints by the people. Moses had not heard these complaints.
    11,4. והאספסף, “and the rabble,” these people were the fellow travelers, they were not natural born Israelites. They were described elsewhere as ערב רב, “a mixed multitude.” The word אספסף, is a doubling of certain letters just as we find in the word סחרחר, or חמרמרו מעי in Psalms 38,11 (reeling) or in Lamentations 1,20  (my entrails are distressed).
    11,5. את הקשואים ואת האבטיחים, “the cucumbers and the melons, etc.” The people spoke in a desultory way of the superior food the Lord had provided, the manna. In order to belittle the manna they compared it unfavourably to such food as is universally considered as inferior such as cucumbers and melons. We know that the land of Egypt produced excellent food, seeing the Torah had described the land of Egypt as “a garden of the Lord” in Genesis 13,10 when describing the fertility of the Jordan valley. In order to emphasise their disdain for the manna the people did not compare it unfavourably with Egypt’s best produce but they compared it to Egypt’s most inferior produce. Moreover, the fact that they mentioned fish was an outright insult against the manna seeing the only kind of fish the Israelites had been given in Egypt were the fish which had already begun to decompose and to stink. They were given only fish which had been caught at least 4 or 5 days previously. This is the reason they spoke about remembering הדגה instead of דגים or הדג, “the fish.” The word הדגה means that these fish were recognisable only as a species not individually. We know that this is an appropriate distinction from Jonah 2,1 where the prophet describes G’d as commanding דג גדול, “a large fish” to swallow Jonah. However, when the Torah refers to the fish in the river Nile at the time the river was turned into blood, the dead fish are described as דגה. The river is described as “stinking with these dead fish.” (Exodus 7,17). When Jonah prayed inside the belly of the fish, that fish is described as דגה, because Jonah describes himself as praying from “Sheol,” i.e. from the grave (Jonah 2,3). If someone sits inside a dead belly he is equivalent to sitting in a grave. If, later on, we read that G’d commanded Jonah to be spewed out and to be swallowed by a second (smaller) fish, this was only because it was not dignified for Jonah to sit inside a dead fish. The second fish was then ordered to spew out Jonah on dry land (Jonah 2,11).
    To get back to our main subject: The Israelites expressed their disgust at what was a most valuable gift from G’d. The people  were not so much wanting something as expressing their dissatisfaction with what they had. Significantly, throughout this episode the Torah speaks of the people as העם, “the people,” a term describing the lowest common denominator. They are not referred to as either עדה or בני ישראל, which would have pointed at people on a spiritually higher level. Eventually (verse 5) the בני ישראל, the elite of the people, also became infected with this discontent.
    The place referred to in verse 34 as קברות התאוה is none other than תבערה which was mentioned in verse 3. The meaning both times is that at the very site where their unjustified desires surfaced they were punished. The “fire” is none other than their “burning desire.” The reason these two paragraphs dealing with תאוה desire, is written adjacent to the story of Miriam making uncalled for comments about Moses and his family life or lack thereof, is because Miriam too made inadmissible comments, just as had the people who had denigrated the manna or who had wanted to stuff themselves on a meat diet. The paragraph reporting Miriam’s inadmissible comments is followed by the one with the spies who also made inadmissible comments about Eretz Yisrael being a country which devours its inhabitants, etc. 
    It is also possible to see in the fact that the Israelites referred to cucumbers and melons at this time proof of their bad character and the strength of their desire. Not only the rabble but also some of the elite of the people were caught up in this irrational desire. This is reflected in the doubling of the words התאוו תאוה with which the Torah describes these feelings of the people. It means that the people drew on reservoirs of desire, the source of their animalistic soul. They allowed their feeling free reign. Our sages in commenting on the words בוכה למשפחותיו captured the underlying feelings of the people when they translated these words as: “they cried because certain incestuous sexual unions had become forbidden at Mount Sinai” (Yuma 75). When they said בלתי אל המן עינינו, “our eyes are focused only on the manna,” they meant that just as the manna was composed of a single element as distinct from earth which is composed of four elements, they felt very keenly they had been denied these other elements and what they would contribute to their well being.
    The fact is that the very fact that the manna was not מורכב, composed of several elements, made it close to abstract, helping to sharpen the people’s wits seeing it was intellectual in essence. Instead of appreciating this aspect of the manna as a valuable asset, they considered it as a serious shortcoming to their well being.
    In picking on specific examples of food that they were nostalgic about, i.e. fish and cucumbers, one reminiscent of the element of earth, dust, the other of the element of water, they indicated their desire to feel close to these elements. This is the reason they made no mention of fruit grown on trees. Fruit grown on trees also contains parts of the element רוח, the very element they felt they already had too much of.
    The Talmud in Yuma 75 explains that the reason the Israelites mentioned five categories of food here, i.e. cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic was that although the manna could assume the taste of any food under the sun, it could not assume the taste of these five plants. G’d had arranged it thus as the taste of these five plants is potentially harmful to both pregnant women and women who are nursing babies. We know ourselves that doctors recommend that pregnant women and nursing mothers should abstain from certain foods out of consideration for their babies or fetuses.
    Nachmanides adds that the reason the Torah adds the word חנם when the people described the conditions under which they ate fish, i.e. “for free, without having to pay for them,” was because the Egyptians employed the Israelites to pull the fish out of their nets and instead of paying them wages, they gave the Israelites some of the fish for free. This was an established custom in Egypt. Thus far Nachmanides.
    Our sages in Yuma do not see it in this light at all. They say that the word חנם, “for free,” means that these  fish had not had owners and G’d arranged for the fish to be caught in the nets or jugs of the Israelites. This is spelled out in Sotah 11.
    A Midrashic approach based on Sifri Behaalotcha 87. The Midrash asks: how could the Israelites’ argument that they ate these fruit and fish for free be taken at face value when we know that the Egyptians did not even supply the Jewish labourers with the straw they needed for their brickmaking for free (Exodus 5,18)? Therefore we cannot understand the word חנם to mean “free” in the sense of “without payment;” rather the meaning is that they did not have to undertake any obligations of a ritual nature in order to eat fish. By using the word חנם here, the people indicated that the commandments of the Torah were a burden for them and that they wished themselves free from that burden. It is a reminder of the description of the Exodus when the Torah mentioned how difficult it was to extract one nation from amidst another nation, i.e. the Jews and the Egyptians had been so intermingled culturally (Deut. 4,34). The Israelites had practiced idolatry no less than their masters the Egyptians.
    
    11,8. שטו העם ולקטו וטחנו ברחים או דכו, “the people would stroll and gather it, and grind it in a mill or pound it in a mortar.” We know the expression שטו from Job 1,7  when Satan described himself as roaming all over earth. This indicates that when the people went out to collect the manna they did not do so in groups, but each one pursued a different path. The word ולקטו “and they collected,” means that the manna was ready to be eaten forthwith. It did not have to be cooked, baked, or fried. Most foods lend themselves to one method of preparation for eating it. If a new method is tried this food will often not be tasty. Not so with the manna. This food was amenable to all known ways of preparing food and it would be equally tasty. It would be at least as tasty as baked goods made with dough kneaded with oil. The Torah quotes this example to contrast it with what some of the people had said, i.e. “our soul is dried out” (from eating manna, verse 6). The Torah provides objective rather than subjective yardsticks. According to the Torah’s description it would be impossible for a person to “dry out” from dough which contained both oil and honey. According to one opinion the word לשד is an acronym of the three words לישת שמן דבש, “something kneaded from oil and honey.” According to another opinion the letter ל in the words לשד השמן is part of the root of the word לשד. We find that word in Psalms 32,4 לשדי בחרבוני קיץ, “my vital juices in the summer drought.” Applied to our verse it would mean that far from dehydrating a person the manna would do the reverse as it tasted like something soaked in oil. The word השמן as opposed to merely שמן, suggests that this was the highest quality oil.
    In this verse you will find an interesting allusion if you take one letter each from the words העם ולקטו וטחנו ברחים או, yielding the name of the major angel מטטרו-ן, the name of the angel running the universe on behalf of G’d and responsible for rainfall, i.e. ממטיר which is mentioned in connection with the מן. The word שטו is an allusion to the “employer” of Mattatron who sends him to “roam” (לשוט) over earth in his efforts to discharge his duties.
    
    11,15. ואם ככה את עושה לי, ”And if this is how You will deal with me, etc.” The word את in this verse is a reference to the attribute of Justice. Moses refers to the reaction of G’d described in verse 10 where the Torah wrote ויחר אף ה' מאד, that “G’d had become exceedingly angry.” The word את as describing the attribute of Justice is also found in Deut. 5,24 when the people expressed their inability to endure the sound of the voice of G’d. It is also found in Ezekiel 28,14 את כרוב ממשח הסוכך, “You are a great protective cherub.” This is a pseudonym for the second highest ranking angel known as כבוד, his partner being the angel known as תפארת. [compare author’s comment on Exodus 25,18 on the subject of the cherubs, my translation page 1245 -1247. Ed.] 
    I have already explained that seeing the written text of the Torah does not contain vowels, it is possible to supply the vowel kametz when reading the word עושה with the vowel kametz under the letter ש, so that it sounds as “ossah.” The reason we have been forbidden to write the vowels in the written text of the Torah scroll is to enable a person to understand a variety of meanings in the text which he could not find if he were bound to a specific vowel pattern under or over the consonants.
    For instance, in Genesis 22,12 the word ידעתי in the sequence עתה ידעתי כי ירא אלוהים אתה, normally translated as “now I know that you are truly G’d-fearing,” would have a different meaning if the letter ד in ידעתי had a dagesh in it. It would become transitive in meaning, i.e. “Avraham made known (to the world) who and what he was in relation to G’d.” Another example where a minor change in vocalisation makes a substantial difference in meaning is found in Exodus 2,5 in connection with how the daughter of Pharaoh saved Moses. The conventional reading of the words is ותשלח את אמתה ותקחה, “she dispatched her maid and took it (the basket).” The word אמה then would have the same meaning as the word שפחה. However, one can understand the wordאמתה  as meaning “her arm” indicating a miraculous lengthening of her arm; this is the way the sages in Sotah 12 understood it as if the letter מ had a dagesh in it. There are numerous such examples throughout the Torah.
   הרגני נא הרוג, “please kill me (now).” It is possible to explain the repetition of the infinitive here as referring to the original person whose soul had been reincarnated in Moses’ body, i.e. Hevel. He meant that he preferred to be killed by G’d now and not by the hands of mortal man later on. He pleaded with G’d to “kill the one who was already dead” [seeing that his original incarnation had been killed this would not account as a death wish which is halachically inadmissible. Ed.] He implied: “if I speak to the Israelites opposing their demand) they will kill me. If I fail to carry out Your instructions I will make myself liable to the death penalty. In other words, I am dead already.”
    
    11,16. אספה לי שבעים איש מזקני ישראל אשר ידעת כי הם זקני העם ושוטריו, “gather for Me 70 men from among the elders of Israel whom you know to be elders of the people and its officers.” G’d meant that Moses was aware that the people in question had demonstrated empathy for the people in Egypt absorbing physical punishment on their own bodies rather than inflicting it on their charges. The officers were the ones of whom we read in Exodus 5,14 that “they were beaten by their Egyptian counterparts” for having displayed sympathy for the Jews they were in charge of. They had acquired experience in the qualities needed to deal with the people, and they had established a reputation for fair play.
    Even though the wording “gather for me” suggests that the people who were being selected now were a new phenomenon, this was not so. The number of Israelites who originally descended to Egypt was 70; this was the number of people who could spread blessing on their offspring. The number attained great symbolic significance, became an example of the concept that there were never fewer than 70 people devoted to the study of the Abrahamitic tradition. They were the ones whom Moses was commanded in Exodus 3,16 to take along for his first interview with Pharaoh, although there we are not given a number (compare Yuma 28). These same 70 elders mentioned here were also the ones mentioned in Exodus 24,8 where they are linked with Nadav and Avihu, Moses and Aaron, as the elite of the Jewish people.
    In spite of these seventy elders who had already practiced their leadership qualities, the ones whom G’d wanted Moses  to gather now were not the same as the ones with whom we are familiar. Those 70 elders had died at Taveyrah having been slated to die already from the time at Mount Sinai mentioned in Exodus 24 when they had feasted their eyes on a vision of G’d and had continued to eat and drink as if nothing extraordinary were taking place. G’d had not killed them at the time as it was a time of joy for the people. Although the Torah describes the elders Moses is to gather now as people whom Moses was personally familiar with, this must not mislead us into thinking that they were the same elders who were mentioned in Exodus. From the days the Israelites moved to Egypt throughout the period of even the first and second Temple there were never fewer than 70 such people who possessed all these qualifications for being the senior presidium of the people.
    These seventy people now selected plus Moses, i.e. a total of 71, corresponded to a similar quorum in the celestial spheres where 70 angels presided over by G’d Himself function as the highest tribunal. At the time when Yaakov descended to Egypt he also was the 71st person who presided over the 70 biological descendants of him who traveled with him. You find a statement in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 24 according to which when G’d said in Genesis 11,7: “come, let us descend and confuse their language,” the reference was to G’d and these seventy angels who form His inner cabinet, also known as His Sanhedrin. We derive this from the verse there starting with the word וה', i.e. G’d and some one else. Every time we encounter such a verse it means that G’d together with His Sanhedrin were involved in what follows. Having appreciated this we can also understand the first verse in the Book of Exodus where the Torah writes: “and these are the names of the Children of Israel who came to Egypt with Yaakov, etc.” The words: “with Yaakov” mean that their arrival and continued successful existence in Egypt was due to their patriarch Yaakov. When the Torah there adds the words איש וביתו באו, these words have an additional meaning, i.e. that the Shechinah and its entourage also accompanied the Israelites to Egypt, as I pointed out in my commentary on that verse. There are several occasions when the euphemism for the great name of G’d א-ד-נ-י is spelled with an additional letter ו in the middle to give us the numerical value of 71, i.e. the attribute of Justice with its full complement of the celestial Sanhedrin (compare Amos 7,7 where the word אנך also has the numerical value of 71 to make our point still stronger. [the prophet described a vision of the attribute of Justice threatening to lay waste Jerusalem Ed.]
    When the Torah in our chapter verse 24 instructs Moses to position these seventy elders around the Tent of Meeting, this is to symbolise the seventy angels which surround the throne of the Lord in the celestial regions. Just as G’d in heaven equips the seventy angels with His Holy Spirit, so G’d asked Moses to confer some of his Holy Spirit onto these seventy elders. The Holy Ark inside the Tent of Meeting represented the throne of G’d in the celestial regions. 
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Behaalotcha 11: the words אספה לי are reminiscent of 13 different items which G’d has an exclusive claim on as they are all associated directly with the name of the Lord. They are: silver, gold, the priests, the Levites, the Jewish people, the firstborn, the altar, the terumah., (first tithe of the grain harvest for the priests), the oil of anointing, the Tabernacle, the dynasty of David, the sacrificial offerings, the land of Israel, and the elders. The author lists 13 verses in each of which the word לי appears to signify that the phenomenon mentioned  is G’d’s.
    The Midrash  interprets Amos 9,6: “Who builds His chambers in heaven, and founded His vault on earth,” as describing a palace built on a number of ships which are tied together. As long as these ships remain closely linked together the walls of the palace remain intact. G’d built the heavens on the assumption that the twelve tribes of the Jewish people remain closely linked to one another. The celestial structure’s integrity is linked inextricably to the fate of the Jewish people, i.e. to their conduct.
    The Midrash extrapolates further on the appropriateness of the word אספה, “gather, assemble,” by quoting from Deut. 33,5: “then he became king in Israel when the people assembled.” The Midrash goes on to explain the function of these elders by quoting Kohelet 12,11: “the words of the sages are like goads.” Just as it is the function of the goads to prompt the animal to plough straight lines, so the function of the elders is to see to it that the Jewish people “toe the line,” i.e. obey the commandments of the Torah meticulously. They are to reveal different aspects of the Torah to the people. There are three Hebrew words, each of which means “goad;” they are דרבן, מלמד, מרדע. The word דרבן suggests that the sages instill some דר, i.e. בינה, insight, in the cow (people). The word מלמד suggests that the goad teaches the animal to plough properly. Finally, the word מרדע, suggests that the goad imbues the cow with some דעה, knowledge.
     The Talmud Chagigah 3, in commenting on these words of Solomon, says that the comparison of the words of the sages to a goad is because just as the goad ensures that the cow will contribute to life on earth through ploughing, etc., so the function of the teachings of the sages is to bring life into the world. After all, the whole purpose of Torah is to enrich life, to ensure that life continues, etc. They are to steer its students away from paths which lead to death to paths which lead to life. Just as the goad causes the cow to move forward, so the words of the sages teaching Torah prompt their listeners to move forward spiritually. The word used there, i.e. מיטלטל, also can be understood as  משמרות נטועים, “firmly embedded nails,” (continuation of the verse from Kohelet quoted above). Just as a well driven nail is permanent so should be the words of the sages. The word נטועים used by Solomon for the nails can also mean that just as that which is planted will produce new plants, fruit, so the words of the sages when properly planted will produce “offspring” in due course. Another view concludes that Solomon means that one must not study books other than those of the Bible as the word משמרות used here for “nails” is not spelled with the customary letter ס but with the letter ש, an allusion to the different divisions of the priests which were divided into 24 such משמרות parallel to the 24 Books of the Bible. 
    The בעלי אסופות, “masters of collections” mentioned by Solomon in that same verse are the people in charge of arranging these compositions of the groups of priests were the Sanhedrin seeing the Torah used the expression אספה לי here in connection with the selection of the elders. Solomon concludes his verse saying “they have all been given by one shepherd (G’d),” in order to forestall the thought that the different sages will arrive at different meanings of the Torah and would contribute disunity rather than unity. The sages are not to be classified as one group which issues edicts prohibiting things whereas a competing group concentrates on permitting that which is forbidden. If they were perceived as doing so the people would throw up their hands in despair asking how they could possibly study authentic Torah!?
    
    11,17. ואצלתי מן הרוח אשר עליך, “and I will increase some of the spirit which is upon you, etc.”  Basically G’d is saying that at the very moment He will be speaking with Moses He will transfer some of Moses’ spirit onto these elders so that they will be able to be true partners in carrying the burden of leadership. This was G’d’s answer to Moses’ complaint: “I cannot carry the burden all by myself.” When G’d said: “when I speak with you there,” He meant that these seventy people would hear G’d speak with Moses, something that had not happened before seeing that G’d’s voice used to be audible only to Moses. The whole procedure was a reward for Moses who had said הרגני נא הרוג thereby indicating that he was willing to give his life on behalf of the people. Moses had also said ואל אראה ברעתי, “so that I will not have to see my evil,” when in fact he had meant “I do not want to see the evil which will befall them!.” Through this procedure Moses’ stature was greatly enhanced  in that he and his quorum of seventy elders from now on could be perceived as parallel to the celestial quorum which we described earlier. Moses’ position relative to the seventy elders compared to G’d’s position relative to the seventy angels who form His Sanhedrin. Any transfer of Holy Spirit from Moses occurred only at times when G’d would speak with Moses. This is clear from the wording of the Torah, i.e. “when I descend  to speak with you there (at the tent of Meeting) I will increase from the spirit which is upon you, and place some on them so that they will carry with you the burden of the people and you do not have to carry the burden of the people all by yourself.”
    This is also exactly what happened.  We read in verse 25 that G’d descended in a cloud and spoke to him (Moses) and He increased some of the spirit which was on Moses and transferred it to the seventy elders; when this occurred they began to prophesy but they did not do so again.” 
    This verse was the answer to Moses’ question: “where can so much meat be found for them (in a natural manner, without miracle)?” G’d implied that seeing Moses’ spirit was only that of one man he could not understand what the combined spirits of seventy men could understand. Seeing that G’d was able to increase the perceptions of all these people, supplying them with additional spirit from Moses without depriving Moses of any of his spirit, surely G’d could similarly increase the amount of meat available in a natural way without creating “miracle” meat! 
    At this point the author raises the technical question of how the people constituting Moses’ Sanhedrin were seated, etc., if similar to what  the Mishnah describes that there was a נשיא, president, and an אב בית דין, a senior member of the Sanhedrin, sort of a deputy and the other members were seated opposite these two senior members in a semi-circle so that every member could see every other member of that quorum. Apparently, when someone was ordained a similar procedure was followed, all those participating in the procedure having full view of what was going on. (Sanhedrin 36 and Maimonides Hilchot Sanhedrin 1,3)
    You should know that the principal meaning of the word ואצלתי, is “the drawing forth,” i.e. continuing something by increasing it quantitatively. Clearly, this is the opinion of Onkelos who translates the word  ואצלתי as וארבי, “I will increase.” Onkelos again translates the word ויאצל in verse 25 as ורבי, “He increased.” This is the reason that the word appears as denoting something G’d gave, i.e. ויתן על שבעים זקנים וגו'. When the Torah speaks of ועץ השדה יתן פריו, “that the tree(s) of the field will ‘give’ its fruit”- as part of a special blessing- the meaning is that it will give more than its normal amount of fruit (Leviticus 26,4). The word אצל means “an increase of spiritual values,” whereas the word יתן פריו refers to an increased material contribution. This is also the opinion of the philological experts, i.e. that ויאצל refers to המשכה, a continued and therefore increased presence of something.
    It is well known that the term אצילות and ויאצל is distinct in that increasing, giving, transferring described by this term imply that the original source or owner of what is being given or increased does not suffer a reduction in what he had before. In Sifri Behaalotcha 93 Moses is described as similar to a Menorah at that time from which many people draw light without the light of the Menorah being in any way diminished. Another description quoted by Tanchuma compares what occurred in our passage to the owner of an orchard who had hired a manager to supervise it. After a while, the supervisor told the owner that the task of looking after the entire orchard was too much for him and that he needed assistants The owner told the supervisor: “I have handed the orchard to you and now you tell me to give you assistants! O.K. I agree; however, you should know that the salaries needed to pay the assistants will be deducted from your salary. I am not going to allocate additional funds to supervising the orchard. The remarkable thing in this situation was that although the seventy elders derived their spiritual inspiration from Moses, Moses’ own Holy Spirit was in no way diminished.
    You should know that when after forty years G’d told Moses to place his hand on Joshua and to transfer to him some of his Holy Spirit (Numbers 27,18), the Torah describes what happened in these words: “Joshua, son of Nun, was filled with a spirit of wisdom because Moses had placed his hands upon him” (Deut. 34,9). G’d said: “in this present imperfect word only select individuals are given the gift of prophecy. There will come a time, however, when all the Israelites will prophesy.” We know this from Yoel 3,1: “it will be after that time I will pour out My spirit on all flesh and your sons and daughters will prophesy, your elders will dream visionary dreams and your young men will experience visions.” You have to realise that there is another dimension to the word and concept of אצילות, i.e. it is a concept which preceded the creation of the physical universe, the three stages of the coming into existence of the physical universe, i.e. בריאה, יצירה and עשיה. The world of אצילות combines within itself all the powers of the three worlds which we just mentioned seeing that it preceded them. The Torah had referred to the seventy elders who had been killed at Taveyra as אצילי בני ישראל, indicating that these people had possessed knowledge of such a world and had seen the full extent of it.
    The subject of אצילות  has been dealt with both in scripture and in the writings of our sages but it appears under different headings. The terms used change according to the general context of where they appear. In Song of Songs 3,9 Solomon speaks about אפריון הנעשה מעצי הלבנון, “a palanquin made from wood of the Lebanon.” He means that something was derived from something else making it into something more valuable. The most important thing to remember when the term אצילות is used is that the one who “gives, provides, endows,” does not himself incur any loss through his conferring whatever it is he confers on someone else.
    Kabbalists use the term עקירה, “uprooting,” when they speak of something which experiences אצילות. The term “uprooting” is used in the sense of “transplanting” not in the sense of “destroying.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 15,1 speak of the verse in Psalms 104,16 “the trees of the Lord drink their fill, the cedars of Lebanon, His own planting.” According to the Midrash G’d uprooted the cedars and moved them to Gan Eden where He replanted them (i.e. in an even more ideal environment, thus adding to their stature, giving them אצילות) Rabbi Chaninah said that prior to being transplanted to Gan Eden these “cedars of the Lebanon were no taller than the feelers on certain types of grasshoppers. We must remember that vegetation on earth was the result of a directive from G’d to earth: “let the earth bring forth all manner of plants, etc.” (Genesis 1,11-12). When the psalmist speaks about G’d personally having planted these cedars there is obviously a question why G’d had to do this. Furthermore, when G’d is reported as having planted a garden in Eden (Genesis 2,8-9) the Torah does not say from where G’d took the plants for that garden. Solomon provided a partial answer to this question when he said that G’d planted these cedars in a place where G’d had done planting. Rabbi Yehudah describes the “promotion” of these cedars in the Lebanon as occurring in three stages, i.e. first according to the verse in Psalms “they drink their fill;” secondly, seeing that every plant requires irrigation, the  trees enjoyed a sufficient amount of life-giving water; thirdly they were transplanted to near the source of life itself. At any rate we deal with a form of אצילות experienced by these trees. 
    
    11,18. ואל העם תאמר התקדשו למחר, “and tell the people: ‘sanctify yourselves for tomorrow.’” According to Nachmanides the fact that G’d told Moses to tell the people to sanctify themselves without telling them what this sanctification was for 
2was (such as at Mount Sinai, or when the manna was about to descend) proving that G’d was not going to provide meat by means of a miracle but by natural means.
    
    11,19. לא יום אחד תאכלון ולא יומים, “You will not only eat it for a single day or two days, etc.” The numbers here are usually doubled up, i.e. not one but two, not five but ten, not ten but twenty. It is as if G’d were saying they will eat as much as they could, employing all the fingers on hands and feet in the process. The final statement “until a full month of days,” suggests that until the moon has come full circle the people will still be busy wolfing down the meat. The words: “until it will come out of your nose,” suggests that until the smell of the meat evaporates seeing that the smell is concentrated in the nose. The words: “it will become nauseating for you,” refer to the fact that that which had previously been the object of your irrepressible desire will instead become something nauseating for you. We find a similar phenomenon after Amnon had raped his half-sister Tamar when his erstwhile love for her turned into an abiding hatred (Samuel II 13,15). The reason the word  לזרא is spelled with the letter א at the end instead of the letter ה, is to describe the intense repugnance the people felt for the very meat they had craved so much only a month ago. Every time a word which is normally spelled with the letter ה is spelled with the letter א instead, the idea is to show the intensified measure of what the word represents. Examples are: when Naomi says she should be called the “bitter” one, meaning מרה, the author of the Book of Ruth spelled the word with the letter א at the end to demonstrate the depth of Naomi’s embitteredness. She spelled it out saying המר שדי לי מאד, “G’d has caused me much to be bitter about.” A similar example is found in Daniel 11,44 where  the word חמא, for anger or alarm, normally spelled חמה, is spelled with the letter א at the end to describe the profound alarm caused by the news described in that verse. What happened to the Israelites in this instance is only typical of what happens to people who overindulge their lust and craving for physical pleasures. They start out by complaining about physical pleasures denied them and neglect spiritual values in their headlong pursuit of these “apparent” pleasures only to find in the end that their very pleasures are the reason that they die prematurely. Solomon defined such supposedly sweet pleasure as נפת, saying of the seductress נפת תטופנה שפתי זרה וחלק משמן חכה, “her lips drip honey; her mouth is smoother than oil” (Proverbs 5,3). In the verse following Solomon describes the conclusion of that seduction as “in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.” 
    
    11,21. שש מאות אלף רגלי העם אשר אנכי בקרבו, “six hundred thousand footmen are the people in whose midst I am, etc.” Moses did not bother to include the 3550 people who were in excess of the round number 600,000. When he mentioned that the task of finding meat for all these people was truly phenomenal, he did not mean to suggest that it was something beyond G’d’s ability to provide. He meant that such a large number of people deficient in faith in the Lord surely do not qualify for a miracle which G’d would have to perform to satisfy their request. He did not think that the required amount of meat could be found and served up by natural means. He did not think that all the livestock which the people had taken out of Egypt plus all the fish that could be hunted in the neighbouring rivers where they were marching would supply a sufficiently adequate meat diet for them. All of these comments were phrased as a question. Moses’ whole approach to the subject was that he considered the demands of the people totally unjustified; this was not asking for bread or water but for luxuries! Asaph echoes these sentiments in Psalms 78,18 where he writes of the Israelites at that time: “to test G’d was in their mind when they demanded food for themselves.” They had demanded something which they thought was impossible to provide by natural means.
    When G’d replied to Moses: “is then the power of the Lord inadequate?” He meant not only am I able to provide all this for them by means of a miracle, but I am able to provide it even by natural means. He told Moses that he would witness that this was the case. He quoted the very fact that Moses would imbue seventy additional men with Holy Spirit without his own spirit being diminished thereby as proof that what did not appear to be available could become available without even depleting the source where the meat came from. As soon as Moses heard this he went and told the people what G’d had said; he gathered the seventy mean and positioned them around the Tabernacle as he had been instructed to do in verse 16 already. The next thing that happened was that G’d descended in a cloud and provided the seventy men with prophetic powers. The Torah then deals with Eldod and Meydod at length. The lesson to Moses was that although his spirit (רוח) was only one and yet it was sufficient to supply from it to seventy elders so G’d can provide sufficient meat for the people from a single natural source. This is the meaning of the verse that “a רוח went forth from Hashem and blew, etc.” The quails which flew in from the direction of the sea appeared to be a totally natural phenomenon. They had previously been congre-gating on the beaches at the sea and now were carried by the wind in the direction of the camp of the Jewish people. The expression ויגז שלוים מן הים, “it blew quail from the sea,” is related to the expression in Psalms 90,10  כי גז חיש ונעופה, “for it is soon cut off and we fly away.” This whole paragraph is a demonstration that G’d’s “hand,” (power) is unlimited, that He is able to provide such large quantities of meat not only by natural means but practically immediately.
    Regarding the expression היד ה' תקצר, “is the hand of G’d too short?” Why did G’d speak of His hand in the third person instead of saying: “is My hand too short?” Actually, the construction is not so unusual; we have already encountered it in Exodus 24,1 where the Torah wrote ואל משה אמר עלה אל ה', “and to Moses He had said: ‘ascend toward the Lord.’” There too the question would have been in place why did not G’d say: “ascend to Me?”
    Rashi  explains the words הצאן ובקר ישחט להם, “are sheep and cattle to be slaughtered for them?” (verse 22) as Moses asking: “why do the beasts have to die if instead of feeding the people and the food keeping them alive, the meat will actually cause their death!?” Moses based his question on G’d having told him previously that the meat would come out of the people’s noses (verse 20). He understood the words ומצא להם as “it will be their final meal!” Moses suggested it would not enhance G’d’s stature amongst mankind if He killed the people in the process of demonstrating His ability to provide them with meat. It is like saying to a horse: “eat a large measure of excellent barley and then we will cut off your head.” G’d answered him: “Do you think it is better for the people to think that I am unable to meet their demands? It is better that some of them die and not all of them think that I am unable to provide their requests.” G’d added: “now you will see whether My word comes to pass or not!”
    Rabban Gamliel, son of Rabbi Yehudah the prince (editor of the Mishnah), interpreted Moses’ question to mean that it is impossible to grant the people’s demands as they were not legitimate demands but attempts to discredit G’d. If G’d were to provide fowl, they would say that they wanted lamb; if He were to provide lamb, they would say they wanted beef. Seeing it was impossible to satisfy their demands, what was the point in even trying. They would anyway conclude that G’d was unable to meet their desires.
    Rabbi David Kimchi, quoting his father, has this to say on the subject: at the time when the Israelites uttered their demand for meat they possessed substantial herds of beef and large flocks of sheep. They could not eat any of these animals until they had been brought to the Tabernacle as sacrificial offerings (peace-offerings) first. After the slaughter the blood had to be sprinkled on the Altar and certain fat parts of the animals had to be burned there. A further restriction was the fact that anyone suffering from ritual impurity could not eat of such sacrificial meat until he had purified himself, a procedure which could take as long as seven days in the case of ritual impurity incurred through contact with the dead. Sacrificial meat must be consumed no later than 2 days after slaughter. This meant that many people would not be able to eat even the meat of their own animals. When Moses asked: “shall sheep and cattle be slaughtered for them?” He meant: “will the restriction that the people can consume only sacrificial meat be rescinded on account of their request?” When he added ומצא להם, “and be found for them,” he implied that in such an event there could indeed be an adequate supply of meat for the people by natural means. Moses implied that unless these restrictions were to be rescinded there could hardly be sufficient meat for all the people by natural means. G’d answered him that he would see that He was able to comply with the people’s request in a natural way without rescinding Torah legislation. There would not be a need to either provide sheep or beef or fish, and still the needs of the people would be met in full. The author accepts the part of the interpretation applicable to צאן ובקר, but does not think that it answers Moses’ question “if all the fish in the sea would be adequate?”
    
    11,25. וירד ה' בענן וידבר אליו ויאצל מן הרוח  אשר עליו ויתן על שבעים איש הזקנים, “G’d descended in a cloud and spoke to him, and He increased some of the spirit that was upon him and gave it to the seventy men, the elders.” Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes that Moses took six men from each tribe, a total of 72. Since G’d had told him to take 70 men, two of them were left out. This is correct. Thus far the wording of Ibn Ezra.
    According to Tanchuma Behaalotcha 12 Moses took 72 pieces of paper. On seventy of them he wrote the word “elder,”  whereas two pieces of paper he left blank. Every man drawing a slip of paper with the word “elder” knew he had been appointed. The two men who would draw blanks would have to conclude that  they had not been found worthy. Seeing Eldod and Meydod were aware of this and were very humble, they remained in the camp without either returning to their private tents nor assembling around the Tabernacle before the drawing of these slips of paper to ensure that none of the participants would be embarrassed by drawing a blank (seeing now Moses only had to prepare 70 such slips). They knew that if they had participated they would have been chosen as the Torah had testified והמה בכתובים, “they had been among the recorded ones” (verse 26). Seeing that they were so modest and humble they were rewarded with a measure of Holy Spirit. Concerning this the Torah wrote (verse 26) “they did not go  to the ‘Tent,’ but prophesied in the camp (the general encampment of the Israelites).” The ability to prophesy in an area of a lesser degree of sanctity than the proximity of the Tabernacle was remarkable.
    There is an explicit verse in Isaiah 61,1 indicating that the virtue of modesty and humility leads to its owner being imbued with prophetic spirit. The prophet writes: “The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me; He has sent me as a herald of joy to the humble.” The merit of their humility resulted in these two people Eldod and Meydod enjoying a higher degree of Holy Spirit than the seventy elders. Whereas the elders were able to prophesy only concerning events on the following day, i.e. telling the people to sanctify themselves in anticipation of events which would occur on the morrow (verse 18), Eldod and Meydod enjoyed prophetic visions extending to the time when the Messiah would arrive. They made statements regarding the downfall of Gog and Magog. as is written in Ezekiel 38,17: “Thus said the Lord G’d: ‘why, you are the one I spoke of in ancient days through My servants, the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for years (שנים) in those days that I would bring you against them.’” Our sages in Sanhedrin 17 suggest that the word שנים, ”years” in that verse be read as שנים, “two,” the reference being to the two people Eldod and Meydod in our verse here. [there is good reason for this as throughout the verse the word the prophet uses for “years” is ימים, not שנים. Ed.] Additional proof that Eldod and Meydod possessed superior Holy Spirit is the fact that whereas the Torah does not mention the names of the seventy elders, the names of these two men are recorded for all posterity. Furthermore, whereas the elders received their Holy Spirit via a human being, i.e. Moses, Eldod and Meydod had received it from G’d directly seeing Moses had not placed his hand on either of them. In addition to this, the 70 elders all died in the desert whereas Eldod and Meydod entered the Holy Land (Eldod was referred to as אלידד בן כסלון , and Meydod as קמואל בן שפטן, in Numbers 34,21 and 24). These men are described as having been appointed to help in allocating the land of Canaan to the Israelites. All this teaches you that  they were richly rewarded for their humility.
   ויהי כנח עליהם הרוח, “it was when the spirit rested upon them, etc.” This refers to the spirit of Moses which they received. Concerning the Holy Spirit received by Eldod and Meydod the Torah writes ותנח עליהם הרוח (verse 26), meaning this spirit came directly from G’d. 
    
    11,27. וירץ הנער, “the disciple ran.”  The lad in question was Gershon, son of Moses. The reason the Torah adds the words  “the servant of Moses since his youth,” in verse 28 is that he was one of the choicest among a number of men who acted as Moses’ disciples.
    
    11,28. אדני משה כלאם, “my lord Moses lock them up!” The reason Joshua said this was because Eldod and Meydod had prophesied that Moses would die (in the desert). Joshua would lead the people into the land of Canaan.
    Nachmanides feels that the reason Joshua wanted these men locked up was because they had refused Moses’ instructions to present themselves at the Tabernacle together with the other seventy men. They had failed to obey an order. He considered it possible that what they prophesied was a lie and that they were irrational, and had to be put under guard.
    Moses, in a typical display of humility, said that he wished that G’d would bestow prophetic spirit on the entire nation directly not merely using him as an intermediary.
    Another nuance in the exclamation by Joshua “lock them up” is that it was against accepted practice to prophesy in the presence of Moses. It had become an accepted norm that no prophet would prophesy about something in the future when there were prophets of greater stature alive among the people. The minor prophets would deport themselves as disciples of the leading prophet of that generation. They were the people often referred to in the Book of Kings as בני הנביאים, “the sons of the prophets” (Kings I 2,35). The Talmud Sanhedrin 17 also says that according to the opinion that what these two men prophesied, i.e. that Moses would die and that Joshua would lead the people to the Holy Land, we can understand why Joshua felt compelled to call for the incarceration of these two men. However, according to the opinion that Eldod and Meydod prophesied concerning matters related to the quails, why would Joshua be so concerned? His demand that these men be locked up would be tantamount to giving a ruling in the presence of a higher authority, something strictly forbidden (may be even on pain of the death penalty). The Talmud in Megillah 14 raises the same question when it asks by what right the prophetess Hulda prophesied at a time when Jeremiah was the leading prophet? The answer given there is that Hulda was biologically related to Jeremiah so that he did not mind.
    
    11,29. ומי יתן כל עם ה' נביאים, “would that the entire people of G’d be prophets!” It is possible that Moses alluded to the time of the Messiah when his wish would be realised. He wished for that time to occur soon so that the status of the people would be raised to the level of prophets. At such a time, the evil urge would disappear and jealousy would be unknown. In the words of Yoel 3,1: “at that time I will pour My spirit over all flesh.” It is also the time of which Isaiah 11,9 spoke when he said: “and the whole earth will be filled with a measure of the knowledge of the Lord like the waters which cover the oceans.” Even though these prophecies have not yet been fulfilled in our terrestrial universe, they will be fulfilled in due course in a world which will be more perfect.
    I have found a hint of this in Psalms 14,7 where the psalmist writes: “O that the deliverance of Israel might come from Zion! When the Lord restores the fortunes of His people, Jacob will exalt, Israel will rejoice.” Why did this same verse occur twice in the Book of Psalms, once here in the first Book, and then again in 53,7 in the second Book? You will have to answer that the first time the verse was spoken by the “teacher,” i.e. G’d, whereas the second time it was repeated by the student, i.e. by Moses.
    
    11,30. ויאסף משה אל המחנה  הוא וזקני ישראל, “Moses then reentered the  camp, he and the elders of Israel.” He went with the elders to accord them honour. The disaster did not strike until each one had returned to his tent. 
    
    11,33. מכה רבה מאד, “a very great blow.”  It was pestilence. We must ask why Moses did not pray to G’d to stop the plague as he had done at Taveyrah when G’d had sent fire? Perhaps he was ashamed seeing the sin was so great and the people’s faith so small, their guilt being their ingratitude. They had kept piling guilt upon guilt ever since they had moved from Sinai into the desert and had tried to induce physical desires in themselves. They had failed to learn the lesson from what had happened at Taveyrah where many of them had been burned to death. Moses was also ashamed so that he had been provoked into saying to G’d: “why have You done evil with Your servant?” (verse 11) He was afraid that if he started to pray he would give the attribute of Justice an opening against the people, seeing he had already noticed ויחר אף ה' מאד, “that G’d had become very angry” (verse 10).
    
    11,38. ויהיו בחצרות, “they remained at Chatzerot.” These words belong to the next paragraph as the people remained in Chatzerot until Miriam had been cured.
    
    12,1. ותדבר מרים, “Miriam spoke out.” She spoke and that is why she was punished; Aaron remained silent or agreed with her and we find that he was punished also. This is the meaning of verse 9 ויחר אף ה' בם, “G’d was angry at them.” Wherever the Torah reports that G’d became angry at someone this is followed by a noticeable phenomenon. Seeing that Miriam had commen-ced speaking לשון הרע, “unseemly comments,” the Torah spelled out her punishment. In Aaron’s case the Torah did not spell out his punishment out of regard for him.
   על אודות האשה הכושית, “on account of the woman of Cushite origin.” The woman in question was Tzipporah who was a Midianite. Midianites were descendants of the Ishmaelites, nomads, dwelling in tents. We base this on Chabakuk 3,7: “the tents of Cushan, shaken at the pavilions of the land of Midian.” There were no white-skinned people among the Midianites due to the sun being very hot in that country. The reason Miriam spoke out was because Moses had married a “black-skinned woman.” Miriam thought that the reason Moses had separated from Tzipporah was because he did not consider her attractive looking on account of the colour of her skin. If Onkelos translates the word כושית as שפירתא, “beautiful,” this is not to be taken at face value but is meant to save her embarrassment much as we call a blind person “as possessed of a good eyesight,” in order to save that person embarrassment. When the Torah writes immediately that Moses was very humble, this is the answer to Miriam’s suspicion, i.e. that Moses did not even know whether Tzipporah was beautiful or not. It is similar to Avraham who did not become aware of Sarah’s being physically attractive until they were at the boundary of Egypt (Genesis 12,11) [when he had been married to her for decades already. Ed.]
    Rashi, on the other hand, considers that Tzipporah was indeed beautiful but that the term כושית which implies the opposite was meant to ward off the evil eye, to make sure people would not be jealous of her beauty and want to harm her. Now Moses had divorced her. Incidentally, the numerical value of the word כושית (736) is the same as יפת מראה, “of beautiful appearance.”
    
    12,2. הרק אך במשה, “was it only to Moses?” Miriam meant that if Moses separated from his wife because of G’d communicating with him, there was no such law pertaining to prophets. The word הרק אך are a double negative, each word meaning a diminution of something. The expression Miriam used was meant sarcastically, just as when the Israelites had said to Moses in Exodus 14,11: “are there not enough graves in Egypt that you had to take us to the desert to die?” The word במשה must be understood as parallel to גם בנו “also with us” (Miriam and Aaron). The preposition ב instead of אל or something similar is in order, seeing that the prophet views himself as G’d’s vessel. The word במשה may therefore more accurately be translated as “within Moses,” and the words גם בנו as “within us.” One of the clearest examples of such a construction is found in Genesis 6,3 לא ידון רוחי באדם לעולם, “My spirit will not rule within man forever.” In that verse G’d made it plain that man’s body is to be perceived as a vessel for his spirituality. The word ידון is related also to the word נדנה which occurs in Daniel 7,15 where it means “sheath.” The body is the sheath of the spirit. 
   וישמע ה', “the Lord heard.” Our sages in Sifri Behaalotcha 100 state that Miriam and Aaron said what they said even in the presence of Moses as we should read the words וישמע ה' והאיש משה, together, i.e. “G’d and the man Moses heard.” Due to Moses’ extreme modesty he remained silent; this is why G’d had to react to such talk.
    
    12,3. והאיש משה ענו, “and the man Moses was humble, etc.” The word ענו is written defectively, i.e. the letter י being missing. This seems extraordinary seeing Moses is described as possessing the virtue of humility in its full dimension. The reason that the letter י is missing here is because on a different occasion Moses left out the letter י when it would have given honour to Hashem. In Numbers 20,10, at the rock which Moses was supposed to have spoken to but struck instead, he said to the Jewish people: המן הסלע הזה נוציא לכם מים, “are we supposed to extract water for you from this rock?” He should have said: המן הסלע הזה יוציא לכם מים, “is HE supposed to extract water for you from this rock?” Seeing Moses had been remiss on that occasion the Torah omitted the letter י when describing him as the most humble man on earth on this occasion. This is a fine inter-pretation. We read the word as if it had been spelled with the letter י in its appropriate position.
    Why did the Torah add the adverb מאד, “very” to the description of Moses’ humility? We have been taught concerning all other virtues, attributes, that we must not practice them excessively but must strive to tread the path called דרך הממוצע, striving not to veer to the right or to the left. The attribute of humility, modesty, by contrast is one which one should practice in the extreme. The Torah alludes to this by complimenting Moses on doing just that (compare Maimonides Hilchot Deyot 2,3). This consideration prompted the sages in Avot 4,4 to say מאד מאד הוה שפל רוח, “be exceedingly humble in spirit.” The additional words “of any man on earth,” have been added to remind us that only amongst human beings did Moses qualify for this title. Had the Torah written על פני הארץ, instead of על פני האדמה it would have included the creatures in the celestial regions as the word ארץ is often used as a term describing the universe. It is comparable to Genesis 6,6 where the Torah writes וינחם ה' כי עשה את האדם בארץ, “G’d had second thoughts about having made man on ‘earth.’” There was no real need for the word בארץ, but it was introduced as an overall term for the world. When G’d speaks about precisely what He is going to do, the Torah uses the word אדמה in Genesis  6,7 אמחה את האדם אשר בראתי מעל פני האדמה, “I will wipe out man whom I have created from the face of the earth.” I have elaborated on that difference in connection with that verse. האדם, “Man” as a concept will not be wiped out from the universe, only “man” whom G’d placed on terrestrial earth will be wiped out at that time.
    When David (Psalms 145,12) speaks of להודיע לבני האדם גבורותיו וכבוד הדר מלכותו, “to make His mighty acts known amongst man and the majestic glory of His kingship,” these words which are the only time in the hymn that the author does not use direct speech, i.e. address G’d, we need to understand why the sequence commences with individual acts instead of with G’d’s overall majesty. David means that in order to comprehend the overall majesty of G’d one must first learn to appreciate individual mighty acts He has performed. Before addressing G’d directly one needs to acquire knowledge of Him indirectly. 
    
    12,4. פתאם, “suddenly.” Rashi explains that G’d surprised them in state of ritual impurity occasioned due to their having had marital relations with their respective spouses. They then exclaimed: “water, water,” implying the need to purify themselves as well as recognition that Moses had been correct in separating from his wife so as not to be ritually impure when G’d would choose to address him. Seeing that there were no fixed periods of time when G’d would appear, Moses had to be in constant readiness for such a communication.
    Some commentators understand the word פתאם as meaning that the suddenness of G’d’s reaction was designed to prevent Miriam and Aaron from repenting on what they had said at that time. Their sin included desecration of the name of the Lord, a sin which is so severe that people guilty of it are not presented with opportunities to repent. Miriam and Aaron had to know that speaking out against G’d’s prophets was considered as on a level with speaking out against the Shechinah. The author appears to attribute this comment to his grandfather a Rabbi Nathan. It reflects the statement in Kidushin 40 that “no credit is extended in matters pertaining to desecration of the Lord’s name.”
    
    12,6. אם יהיה נביאכם ה', The meaning is similar to Chronicles II 15,8: והנבואה עודד הנביא, “the prophecy was that of Oded the prophet.” The meaning of our verse is: “even if someone amongst you is a prophet of the Lord he does not prophesy using My Ineffable Name, but through mediums such as mirrors, riddles, etc.” Your prophetic inspirations are transmitted by what is known as רוח הקדש, “Holy Spirit.” We find a reference to this level of prophecy in Samuel II 23,2 רוח ה' דבר בי, “the spirit of the Lord spoke through me” (David speaking). This was also the same as the יד ה' which the prophet Ezekiel describes as speaking to him (on occasion). [We know that Ezekiel had also attained a higher level of prophecy when he had visions. Ed.]
    The fact that the Torah writes במראה אליו אתודע, “I will be known to him by means of a mirror,” instead of writing במראה אליו אראה, “I will be visible to him by means of a mirror,” may be compared to  Exodus 63, where the Torah did not write as we could have expected ואתודע אל אברהם ואל יצחק, but wrote וארא אל אברהם ואל יצחק instead. The emphasis in both verses is on the fact that neither category of prophet experienced that בשמי הגדול אתודע, “that I revealed Myself to him directly my means of My Ineffable Name.”
    When G’d said that communications with prophets on a lower level than Moses took place in a dream, He meant that seeing Moses was familiar with all of G’d’s attributes, he did not need to be addressed in a dream in order to lower the impact of such a revelation on his psychological equilibrium as he was already נאמן בכל ביתי, “fully trusted i.e. “at home,” in “My entire House.” Basically, G’d taught Miriam and Aaron a lesson in the difference between the prophetic stature of Moses and that of other prophets including themselves.
   במראה אליו אתודע, “in a vision do I make Myself known to him.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reference is to a nocturnal vision; this is why G’d elaborated: “in a dream I speak  with him.”
    A kabbalistic approach: the expression במראה refers to the emanations which are known as נצח, הוד or sometimes צבאות. G’d explained the limit of perceptions other prophets could attain in terms of the respective emanations. These prophets are perceived as entering through a “gate” of perceptional ascents  assigned to prophets. There is an upper limit where these prophets cannot expand their perceptional powers further. Perhaps we may best describe this limit in terms of במראות הצובאות, “the mirrors which were piling up in heaps” in Exodus 38,8. These mirrors “piled up” at the entrance to the Tabernacle.
    It is appropriate for you the reader to appreciate that when G’d sums up here the various levels of prophecy from Moses down to “minor” prophets, that He spelled the word מראה, generally translated as “mirror” with the vowel kametz instead of the vowel segol with which it is familiar to us. G’d contrasts His appearances to Moses by spelling the word מראה as a masculine in connection with him, whereas in connection with the other prophets the same word is spelled as if it were a feminine noun. Using the feminine is a hint that visions experienced by other prophets were weaker, i.e. more confused, the message not being totally clear. G’d may have wanted to illustrate the limitations of other prophets by the comparison with seeing things by means of a mirror instead of seeing things directly with one’s eyes without any intermediaries. Perhaps we can understand this better when we recall the halachah that on the Sabbath one must not look in the mirror (Shabbat 149). [if the mirror is made of metal, enabling the viewer to use its sharp edges to trim unwanted hair. Ed.] The author speaks of a mirror (with the vowel kametz) made of glass whose polished surface reflects images which have no substance but appear so real that though they are but reflections they are apt to deceive the viewer into believing that they are alive, real. When Moses looked at such a “mirror” he realised  that what he saw was abstract, i.e. that he was shown a concept as opposed to a two-dimensional reflection of something material, “real.” This is the meaning of the words ותמונת ה' יביט, “he looks at a divine image.” in other words, the difference between different levels of prophecy is in the prophet’s perspective. If G’d attributes the “image” of G’d to Himself, this must not be misunderstood anymore than the expression that man was created בצלם אלו-הים in “the image of the divine” (Genesis 1,27). None of these words mean that there is something “physical” or “physical image” in connection with G’d the totally abstract. The prophet Hoseah 12,11 had also spoken about providing His prophets with “images” when he said of G’d וביד הנביאים אדמה, “by means of the prophets I provide images.” [If a “parable” is an abstract image, then a mirror reflection is a quasi material image. Ed.] 
    Our sages in Yevamot 49 phrased it thus: “all the prophets experienced murky visions whereas Moses experienced a clear vision.” They brought proof for their statement from Ezekiel  where many different visions of G’d are reported by the prophet. The fact that Ezekiel experienced different levels of images and visions (Ezekiel 1,1--1,27, etc. etc.), is proof of the distinction between what a prophet of his calibre (high) experienced and what Moses experienced. This is what G‘d meant when He emphasised looking at a mirror with the vowel segol as opposed to viewing things through a mirror with the vowel kametz.
    
    12,7. בכל ביתי נאמן הוא, “in all My house he is trusted as loyal.” According to the plain meaning of the text  this means that just as a member of the family has access to all parts of his  father’s house and can speak without asking for permission to do so, so Moses had the right to address G’d at all times without having to make an “appointment.”
    A kabbalistic approach: when the Torah speaks about “in all My house,” this is a reference to the house known as בית אל, recalling the time G’d had identified Himself to Yaakov (Genesis 31,13) as אנכי האל בית אל, “I am the G’d whom you have encountered when you called the monument you built for Me בית אל.” The word “My house” was also a reference to “all My goodness “ of which G’d had spoken when He had told Moses (on the Mountain) “I will let all My goodness pass before you” (Exodus 33,19). It is also reminiscent of the place where Adam had sinned, i.e. had proven that he was not trustworthy in “My house.” Seeing that there had once been a human being who had been given free rein in “G’d’s house” i.e. Gan Eden, and had to be expelled, G’d contrasts Moses’ stature by saying that he is trusted in all parts of “G’d’s house. We may perceive the word הוא, “he,” in our verse as a contrast to Moses’ “father” Adam who had not proved trustworthy.” Some Kabbalists understand the expression בכל ביתי as a reference to the ב in בראשית, i.e. the house of prayer, such as in ושמחתים בבית תפלתי, “I will make them rejoice in the House of My prayer,” (Isaiah 57,7) The meaning of the word תפלתי in that verse is similar to כי ביתי בית תפלה יקרא, ”for my House is known as a House of prayer” (same verse). This is what Hillel had in mind when he said: “G’d meant that “if you come to My house, I will come to your house.”
    
    12,8. פה אל פה אדבר בו, “I speak to him mouth to mouth, etc.” The meaning of these words is that G’d communicates with Moses without an angel as an intermediary. The word ומראה means: “I show him matters as they are in reality.” Just as G’d had shown Moses an illustration of the Tabernacle and it served as his blueprint, so whenever G’d speaks to Moses He illustrates matters for him in an unmistakable manner. Of the illustration (in the sky) of the Tabernacle the Torah had told us in Exodus 25,40: וראה ועשה בתבניתם, “see and make according to their form.”
   בעבדי במשה, “against My servant, against Moses.” Our sages in Tanchuma Tzav 13 comment on the emphasis on both these words that even if My servant were not Moses you have no right to speak against him. Seeing that he is of the stature of Moses you have even less right to speak against him.
    
    12,10 והענן סר מעל האהל, “and the cloud departed from above the Tent.” If the Torah referred to the cloud which had descended onto the entrance of the Tabernacle in verse 5, the Torah would now have had to describe it as “the cloud departed from the entrance of the Tent.” Seeing that the word מפסח is missing, we must assume that the cloud the Torah speaks of is the one which always signaled that the people should either move or make camp. Seeing the cloud departed the Israelites thought that they were meant to break camp and start moving. However, G’d commanded them to wait for seven days. This is the meaning of the words תסגר שבעת ימים, “let her be quarantined for seven days” (verse 14). When the Torah reported afterwards that the people did not journey this is equivalent to saying that the cloud had not actually traveled away from the Tabernacle any distance at all. It only departed to show that ordinarily, if not for Miriam’s quarantine, the people would have been on the way already. In other words, the Torah made it clear to everyone that the entire people’s progress toward the Holy Land had been delayed for seven days in honour of Miriam.
    
    12,11. אשר נואלנו, “for we have been foolish” vis-a-vis you (Moses) ואשר חטאנו, “and we have sinned“ (against You G’d). The reason for the unusual expression נואלנו, is that raising this whole subject by speaking about it was an act of foolishness on the part of who spoke about it.
    Zevachim 101 raises the question of who quarantined Miriam. If you were to say it  was Moses, how could he do this seeing he was not a priest? Only priests are allowed to inspect such skin afflictions and pronounce them as purified or not. If you were to say that Aaron quarantined her, how could he do that seeing that he was related to Miriam and therefore biased in his judgment? We have a clear rule that no blood relation is allowed to inspect the status of such skin afflictions and to pronounce them as healed, etc. G’d showed Miriam respect by announcing that seeing that He was a Priest, He could determine the length of her quarantine.
    
    12,12. אל תהי נא כמת, “do not let her be like a dead person!” Aaron told Moses: “I am not qualified to rule on when her affliction is healed seeing that I am her relative. There is no other priest in the world at this time who is qualified to rule on this; therefore, unless you pray on her behalf she will remain thus afflicted indefinitively” (compare Tanchuma Tzav 13). This is why Aaron used the words: “like one who leaves his mother’s womb with half his flesh consumed.” Aaron meant that people born in a state of tzoraat are not subject to being healed ever. Aaron concluded that due to such considerations Moses had to pray on Miriam’s behalf so that his sister would not suffer from the same status as a baby born with this affliction.
    
    12,13. ויצעק משה אל ה', “Moses cried out to the Lord:” he expressed his pain over Miriam’s fate and prayed for her. The reason the Torah continues with the word לאמור, was to tell us that this prayer by Moses was not merely in his heart but that he verbalized it. This is the meaning of Berachot 31 “if someone prays he must move his lips and enunciate the words of his prayer.” The reason is that by moving one’s lips the letters one says assume a certain shape (in the atmosphere) through the use of voice, breath, and verbalising them. When such a prayer has assumed a certain shape it ascends to the celestial regions and arrives in the presence of the Lord.
   אל נא רפא נא לה, “O Lord, please heal her.” The attribute El which Moses prayed to is the one with the power  to heal; it is part of the attribute of Justice “wrapped” in Mercy. In most instances when this attribute is mentioned it represents חסד, “G’d’s loving kindness." Examples are: Psalms 22,2 אלי אלי למה עזבתני, “My G’d, My G’d why did You forsake me?” or Psalms 50,1  אל אלוהים דבר וירא ארץ, “G’d the Lord G’d spoke, and summoned forth the earth.” The sequence of these attributes is חסד-דין-רחמים, the attributes which were employed by G’d when He created the universe. We also have a verse in Psalms 99,8 where G’d is described as relating to the Jewish people as אל נושא היית להם “You related to them as a G’d who forgives.” If, in apparent contradiction to the aforementioned, we find a verse in Psalms 7,12 which describes ואל זועם בכל יום, “a G’d who pronounces doom each day,” the meaning is that only on such days as the attribute of Justice is manifest does G’d pronounce doom. There are many days when that attribute is not in evidence seeing that the attribute of חסד has displaced it as we know from Genesis 18,23. (where Avraham prayed for the good people in Sodom).
    
    12,14. ואביה ירק ירק בפניה, “were her father to spit in her face, etc.”  If her father were angry at her so that he would spit in her face, would she not be banned from his presence for at least a week? Is it not only logical that she deserves to be banned from G’d’s presence for at least as long a period seeing she has incurred G’d’s displeasure! She should by rights be quarantined seven days for angering G’d and seven days for speaking out against G’d’s prophet. However, seeing that we do not impose a greater penalty based on mere logic, she  will be quarantined only for seven days. This is what the Talmud Baba Kama 25 writes.
    From the description in the Talmud it seems clear that the “spitting out” does not describe the sin involved but is merely an example of the anger expressed by the party who has been insulted. Were it to refer to the sin committed, the Torah should have written: “if she had spat out in the face of her father, etc.” After all, Miriam was the sinner in this episode.
    Actually, the sin consisted of unseemly speech, similar to someone spitting out, a form of unseemly use of his mouth. We have encountered the example of spitting out in connection with חליצה when the widow who has been rejected by the brother of her deceased husband spits out in front of him to show her disdain for his conduct (Deut. 25,9). We must understand the fact that G’d punished Miriam with tzoraat as parallel to spitting out in front of her as a response to the insult He had endured. G’d’s reply to Moses therefore was that seeing He had already demonstrated His reaction to her insult by afflicting her with this skin eczema, He could not heal her immediately, but she had to remain quarantined for at least as long as she would have been banned form the presence of her biological father had she insulted him.
    Our sages (Moed Katan 16) describe the incident with Miriam as one called נזיפה, “rebuke.” There are three degrees of such rebukes. The mildest form of such rebuke results in one’s being an outcast for a single day; a more severe case of such a ”rebuke” involves in one being an outcast for seven days. The most severe case of such a “rebuke” involves that the guilty party is an outcast or 30 days. The Talmud reports that two students who had discussed matters which should have been treated as confidential in public incurred the anger of their teacher and were banned from his presence for a day. When someone has caused grief to a Torah scholar and he knows that the Torah scholar is aware of this he has to impose such a “rebuke” upon himself for a full 24 hour period. Having done so he does not need a “release” from another rabbi or tribunal to readmit him to the presence of that scholar. The self-inflicted rebuke only served to assuage the hurt feelings of the injured party. If someone spoke out against a prophet or a leading personality of his generation he must inflict seven days of such “rebuke” upon himself. This is based on what happened to Miriam. We do not treat the seventh day of this period as we do the seventh day of mourning, i.e. that partial observance of such ostracism is accounted as a whole day. Finally, if someone speaks out against the president or head of the Jewish community he deserves to be ostracised in this manner for 30 days. Again, the last of these 30 days is also to be observed in full. To help remember this the sages used the words האבן האזל in Samuel I 20,19 as a reminder. In the word האזל the letter א symbolises the Torah scholar, the letter ז represents the prophet, whereas the letter ל represents the head of the community. Insulting such a person results in one’s being ostracised for 30 days.
    The Jerusalem Talmud Moed Katan 3 does not recognise a “rebuke” of less than seven days. It bases itself on the example of Miriam who was quarantined for seven days and treated very mildly. At the same time the sages there do not allow for someone being outcast, נדוי, for a period of less than 30 days. They base this on what happened with the quails in 11,20 where the Torah describes G’d’s disgust with the people’s reaction to meat as extending for up to thirty days.
    The reason that G’d’s response to Moses’ prayer commences with the conjunctive letter ו, i.e. ואביה, instead of אביה, is merely an indication that this is the beginning of a verbal communication. It is not an isolated occurrence. The author quotes Numbers 18,8, Genesis 27,28, Number 9,2, Kings II 2,9 as examples of such constructions in the Bible. No doubt in each such instance there is a compelling reason why the author chose to commence a sentence with a conjunctive letter ו. 
    Seeing the principle called קל וחומר, an inference arrived at by means of simple logic, is one of the thirteen methods of valid exegesis and it is the first one mentioned in the famous list by Rabbi Yishmael which we recite in our prayers daily, I have decided to list all thirteen principles at this point. The principle of the קל וחומר is derived from our verse here as well as from Exodus 23,5 where the Torah commands us to assist our enemy whose beast has collapsed under its load in unloading it. If we are to do this for our enemy, the Torah implies that we most certainly have to do this when the animal in question is the property of a friend of ours.
    The second principle which is a legitimate vehicle for arriving at a valid interpretation of Torah legislation is called גזרה שוה, and is almost the precise opposite of the former, seeing that it is based on similar expressions in matters which have no conceptual relation to each other; the words used for comparison are words which the text could have done without, hence they are perceived as alerting our attention to such legislation. In Leviticus 18,10 the Torah writes ערות בת בנך או בת בתך לא תגלה ערותן כי ערותך הנה; “do not uncover the nakedness of either the daughter of your son or the nakedness of the daughter of your daughter, for they are the same as your own nakedness. There is a pointed absence of mentioning that uncovering the nakedness of your daughter is prohibited. In Leviticus 18,17 the Torah writes: ערות אשה ובתה לא תגלה, את בת בנה ואת בת בתה לא תקח לגלות ערותה שארה הנה זמה היא, “you must not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter; you must not marry either the daughter of her son or the daughter of her daughter as they are close relatives, it is a depraved plot to do so.” In either instance no mention is made of not sleeping with, i.e. marrying one’s daughter. The words הנה “they are,” are superfluous in each verse. The sages therefore derive the prohibition of marrying or sleeping with one’s daughter from these superfluous identical words. These two words made it unnecessary for the Torah to write a verse prohibiting marrying one’s daughter (or one’s son).
    The third category of valid exegetical tools is called בנין אב and implies that if the Torah permitted a particular procedure or prohibited it, say on one festival, then, unless there was a verse disallowing such a conclusion the rule applying to the first procedure mentioned also applies to similar procedures on other festivals. If, say, the Torah permitted using fire on the Passover in order to prepare food, then it is presumed that on other festivals where a general work prohibition exists also the preparation of food is excluded from such a prohibition. An example of such an exegetical tool is Exodus 12,16 אך אשר יאכל לכל נפש הוא לבדו יעשה לכם, “except that which must be eaten by any person-- only that may be done for you.” Our sages considered this verse as a precedent, בנין אב, for all the festivals. Another example for something similar is Leviticus 20,9 where the Torah discusses the penalty for cursing father and mother, concluding with the words דמיו בו, “his blood is upon himself.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 54 state that wherever this wording appears either in the singular or in the plural, i.e. דמיהם בם, this means that the applicable death penalty is סקילה, “stoning to death of the guilty party.” They use as the precedent the word in Leviticus 20,27 (where sorcery etc. is discussed)  מות ימותו באבן ירגמו אותם דמיהם בם, “they shall die by execution, they shall pelt them with stones, their blood is upon themselves.” This method of exegesis is known as בנין אב מכתוב אחד, “a textural precedent based on a single verse.”
    There is a similar principle where the same rule is derived by the Torah having employed two verses to teach us the precedent, a sub-category of what we just explained. The example is found in connection with blemishes of human beings which disqualify a priest afflicted by them from functioning in the Temple or Tabernacle. In Leviticus 21,20 the Torah lists או גבן או דק או תלול בעינו או גרב או ילפת או מרוח אשך, “or who has abnormally long eyebrows, or a membrane in his eye, or a blemish in his eye, or a dry skin eruption, or a moist skin eruption, or has crushed testicles.” In that context a blemish known as יבלת (split eyelid) is omitted although that blemish is listed as disqualifying a sacrificial animal from being offered on the altar (compare Leviticus 22,22). Our sages concluded  that wherever a blemish is mentioned in the Torah, be it in connection with an animal or a human being, such blemish is disqualifying regardless of whether it is written in connection with animals or humans. This exegetical method is known as a בנין אב משני כתובים, ”precedent based on two verses.”
    A fourth exegetical method in the list by Rabbi Yishmael is called כלל ופרט, a general rule mentioned in the Torah followed by an example illustrating that rule. The Torah writes in Deut. 22,11: לא תלבש שעטנז, “do not wear a garment made of two different kinds of materials.” It proceeds to give an example, i.e. a mixture of wool and linen. The reason the Torah gave us this example is that this is the only combination of the principle not to wear a mixture which is forbidden, i.e. subject to the principle enunciated in the general rule. Whenever the Torah first writes a general rule followed by such a detailed example, the rule applies only when it also corresponds to what is mentioned in the detailed example which followed the rule.
    The fifth exegetical rule is the reverse of that which we just described, i.e. the Torah lists a specific item as being either forbidden or permitted, and then follows that example by a general rule. We find this rule illustrated in connection with the legislation to restore lost property (which one has found) to its owner. In that connection the Torah writes in Deut. 22,3: “thus you shall do to all the lost property of your brother.” It is understood, based on the wording of this verse, that only items which correspond to the example mentioned by the Torah first are subject to the general rule of restoring lost property to the owner. The words: “thus you shall do to all” are understood as the general rule, whereas the words: “lost property of your brother,” are the specific detail. In all such instances the general rule determines the application of the legislation contained in the detailed example.
    A sixth rule is known as כלל ופרט וכלל, “a legislation couched in general terms, followed by an example, followed by a reiteration of the general principle mentioned first. In such instances the general rule is applicable only when it corresponds to the main features present in the detailed example mentioned by the Torah. We read in Exodus 22,8:על כל דבר פשע , “concerning all matters involving misappropriation, etc.” This is a general principle involving any wrongdoing. The Torah follows this by citing examples such as oxen, sheep, etc., which are the subject of theft or other kinds of misappropriation. The Torah concludes by repeating once more ”concerning any lost object, etc.,” that disputes like this must be adjudged before a judge. The examples cited all have the following common denominators: they are portable, are chattels. This excludes a slave and landed property both of which are not considered as chattels from the legislation described in that paragraph. We have a special verse in the Torah comparing the status of slaves to that of landed property (compare Leviticus 25,46) “you may bequeath them to your children” (the slaves) [just like you bequeath property].  Due to such considerations documents which though they declare that something belongs to someone are not comparable to chattels as the documents have no inherent value other than the paper they are written on.
    Another instance of the principle of כלל ופרט וכלל, occurs in Deut. 14,27 in connection with מעשר שני, the second tithe. Concerning what may be done with the money which was realised in redeeming the produce of the second tithe which was too bulky to transport to Jerusalem, the Torah wrote in verse 26 that “you may spend this money (in Jerusalem) for all that your heart desires.” It proceeds to give examples of what your heart desires such as “beef, sheep, wine, alcoholic drink,” repeating once more “and all that your heart desires.” In such a situation where the general rule is followed by examples only to be followed again by the general rule, the substance of the items cited as the examples is the guideline for what is included in the general rule. In this case, the examples are all edibles, produce of the ground (animals which feed on produce of the ground are considered as in the same class). It follows that any other edibles which are produce of the ground are included in the general rule though they have not been enumerated here in detail. Synthetic foods might not qualify as matters for which money from the proceeds of the second tithe may be spent.
    The seventh rule is known as כלל שצריך לפרט, “a general rule which is indispensable for understanding the detailed examples.” We find an example of this principle in Numbers 3,40  פקוד כל בכור זכר לבני ישראל, “count every male firstborn of the Children of Israel.” Had the Torah written the word “male” without also writing the word “firstborn” would have assumed that all the males whether firstborn or not  have to be included in that census. Had the Torah only written the word “firstborn”, I would have thought that female firstborn are also included in that legislation. Therefore the word בכור in that verse is a general rule which is indispensable for understanding what is included in the detailed example.
    Rule number eight is described as כל דבר שהיה בכלל ויצא מן הכלל ללמד לא ללמד על עצמו יצא אלא ללמד על הכלל כולו יצא, “any matter which was included in a general rule but is singled out to teach something pertaining to this legislation does not teach only regarding this specific example but teaches something regarding the general rule from which it was singled out.” In connection with the prohibition of sacrificing children to the Moloch cult the Torah writes in Leviticus 20,2 “if any man (person) from among the Children of Israel or from a resident stranger (proselyte) hand over any of his children to that idol, such a man shall be executed. The common people shall pelt him to death with stones.” Up until the appearance of this verse the Moloch cult was just one of many forms of idolatry and the death penalty had already been provided for anyone serving idols. In this verse this particular form of idolatry (abomination) was singled out by the Torah. Why was the penalty spelled out in detail here? [the kind of death penalty]. Rabbi Yishmael teaches that the Torah did not mean that only this particular form of abomination qualifies for the most severe death penalty; rather, it was singled out as an example of the kind of death penalty applicable to people guilty of performing other abominations. 
    Rule number nine: כל דבר שהיה בכלל ויצא לטעון טען אחר שלא כענינו יצא להקל ולהחמיר, “any matter which had already been included in a general rule but was singled out in order to teach something out of the context in which it had appeared, does so in order to either reveal an advantage or a disadvantage as the case may be.” In Exodus 21,2 the Torah writes: כי תקנה עבד עברי שש שנים יעבד ובשביעית יצא לחפשי חנם, “when you purchase the services (labour) of a Jewish servant he will serve with you for six years and will leave in the seventh year free of charge.” It is clear that a female Jewish servant was not included in this legislation as the Torah details rules applicable to the release of female Jewish servants when it writes in verse seven of the same chapter what the rules are when a father sold the labour of his daughter while she was a minor. Why was the word אמה mentioned in verse 7 seeing that a Jewish girl was already included in the general legislation mentioned in Deut. 5,12 when the Torah spoke about a Jewish servant with these words: “if your brother  a Jewish man or Jewish woman is sold to you, etc. etc.?” The only reason the Jewish maid servant was singled out from the general rule governing both male and female Jewish servants is to legislate certain advantages she enjoys vis-a-vis her male counterpart. Whereas a male Jewish servant does not leave the service of his master merely by displaying signs of puberty, his counterpart the female Jewish servant does so. A male Jewish servant does not leave the employ of his master when the master dies but only at the end of six years service. In other words, one reason the Torah singled out the female once more was to reveal certain advantages she enjoys as compared to the general rules pertaining to the service of Jews who have been acquired by Jewish masters. At the same time there is also an aspect which is to the disadvantage of such a maid servant in that her master can marry her against her consent while she is in his service, seeing that at the time she was sold this was the understanding with her father.
    Rule number 10. כל דבר שהיה בכלל ויצא לטעון דבר אחר שהוא כענינו יצא להקל ולא להחמיר, “any legislation which was part of a general rule and has been singled out to describe an example pertaining to the context of that legislation, has been singled out only in order to introduce an ameliorating circumstance, not the reverse.” In Deut. 19,5  where the Torah discusses the law about involuntary manslaughter, we read: “or who will come with his fellow into the forest to chop down trees and his hand swings the ax to cut the tree and the iron slips from the handle, etc.,” such a person has to seek refuge in the city of refuge to protect him from the avenger of the slain party. Nonetheless, the Torah makes it clear that such involuntary manslaughter is under the general heading of “murderer,” seeing the Torah wrote in Leviticus 24,21 (without mentioning an exception) ‘anyone striking dead a human being is to be executed.’” The example cited in Deut. 19 then teaches that there are exceptions to the death penalty, namely when the killing was under the heading of involuntary manslaughter. Both verses speak of the same subject, i.e. killing; however the involuntary killer is exempt from the death penalty seeing his situation was singled out by the Torah which provided cities of refuge.
    Rule number 11. When a matter which had been subject to legislation of a general rule had been singled out by the Torah to provide a totally new perspective, it will not again become part of the original general rule unless the Torah writes so specifically.  An example is Leviticus 22,11: “when a priest acquires a slave who becomes his physical property he may eat (terumah) just as may someone born in his house, etc.” In the verse following the Torah writes that such a priest’s daughter cannot eat such terumah anymore once she marries a husband who is not a priest. Seeing that up until her marriage she had been part of her father’s household, the Torah had to inform us that her status changes drastically upon her marriage. Once she has forfeited the right to eat terumah there is no way she can regain this right unless the Torah legislates so specifically. This is why in verse 13 the Torah writes that if this daughter who had forfeited her right to eat terumah through marriage to a non-priest had become widowed or divorced she may again eat terumah in her father’s house.
    Rule number 12. דבר הלמד מענינו ודבר הלמד מסופו, “A legislative matter derived through study of its context or from its subsequent passage.” We find an illustration of this principle in connection with the laws of the Sabbath. The Torah writes (Exodus 16,29) שבו איש תחתיו, “let every man remain in his place;” this does not mean that one is not to move for the entire period of the Sabbath but that one must not distance himself from one’s home (starting from the city’s boundary) for a distance of more than 2,000 cubits (1300 yards approx.) in any one direction. This is an example of deriving something from the context in which the passage is written. Seeing that the Israelites had to walk up to that distance to collect the manna during the week days and there was no manna on the Sabbath, it is reasonable to interpret the word ממקומו, “from his place,” as meaning the distance he had to move in a certain direction on days other than the Sabbath. We now have to show an example of deriving legislation by studying a passage in conjunction with the passage following it. In Leviticus 18,6 the Torah writes: איש איש אל כל שאר בשרו לא תקרבו לגלות ערוה, “any man shall not approach his close relative to uncover nakedness;” on the face of it this is a prohibition against sexual contact with any blood relative. Later on, in verses 7-18, the Torah spells out the list of blood-relations which are covered by the general statement in verse 6. This list enables us to derive which blood-relations are permitted as marriage partners, i.e. any not included in the verses 7-18. This is an example of what Rabbi Yishmael means when he says that deriving something from the end of a passage is a legitimate exegetical tool.
    Rule number 13 deals with two verses in the Torah which appear to contradict each other and which require a third verse for clarification. The Torah writes in Genesis 1,1 that “G’d created heaven and earth.” From this verse it appears as if the creation of the heaven preceded the creation of the earth. On the other hand,  we read in Genesis 2,4: “these are the products of ....on the day the Lord G’d created earth and heaven.” This verse creates the impression that earth preceded heaven at the time of creation. We therefore need a third verse in Scripture which resolves this apparent contradiction. This verse is found in Isaiah 48,13: ”My own hand founded the earth, My right hand spread out the skies. I call upon them, let them stand up.” Another example of apparently contradictory statements in the Torah occurs in Exodus 20,22: “You have seen that I spoke to you out of the heaven.” This verse gives the impression that G’d’s voice at that time did not emanate from Mount Sinai but from the celestial regions. On the other hand, in Deut. 5,4 the Torah writes: “face to face the Lord spoke to you at the Mountain out of the fire.” The third verse which resolves the apparent contradiction is found in Deut. 4,36: “From the heaven He let you hear His voice to discipline you; on earth He let you see His great fire; and from amidst that fire you heard His words.” A third example of such a need for a third verse reconciling two apparently contradictory ones is the subject of consumption of fat and blood. In Leviticus 3,17 the Torah writes: “you must not eat any fat or blood.” This verse gives the impression that the prohibition applies equally to free-roaming beasts and to domesticated animals. On the other hand, in Deut 12,22 we read that the free-roaming beasts may be consumed (apparently without restriction). In Leviticus 7,23 the Torah writes that “all the fat of ox sheep or goat you must not eat.” This verse indicates that it is in order to consume the fat of free-roaming animals.
    
    12,15. והעם לא נסע, ”and the people did not journey.” The reason was that the cloud had not risen. [the author writes: “the cloud had not risen;” I think that this is a mistake and he means that though the cloud had risen it did not move from that spot. After all, we had read in verse 10 that the cloud had moved from its position immediately above the Tabernacle, Ed.] It was a great compliment for Miriam that both the cloud and the people waited for seven days until Miriam was cured. Our sages in Sotah 8 state that a person is “measured,” i.e. treated, in accordance with the way he treats others. Shimshon was in the habit of judging matters based on what his eyes saw, as we know from Judges 9,2 where he told his parents that he insisted that they arrange for his marriage to a Philistine girl seeing “she seems right in my eyes.” As a result of the yardsticks he applied the Philistines in due course gouged out these very eyes which had misled him (Judges 14,3). Avshalom was very proud of his hair. As a result, when he was punished for rebelling against his father David and sleeping with 10 of his father’s concubines he was hung up by his hair (Samuel II 18,15). The same “measure for measure” principle works also in reverse, i.e. positive character traits displayed by individuals usually are rewarded by G’d in kind. Joseph who had taken a great deal of trouble to bring his father’s bones to burial in the Holy Land, was rewarded in Moses securing his casket and the people taking it with them to the Holy Land during their 40 year trek through the desert (compare Genesis 50,7 and Exodus 13,19). The most illustrious Israelite ever personally looked after keeping the promise made to Joseph by his brothers in this regard. Seeing Moses had taken so much trouble, he was rewarded by G’d Himself burying him (compare Deut. 34,6). We must not be surprised therefore that Miriam experienced the same kind of treatment. When her brother Moses had been lying in a basket in the reeds alongside the river Nile, she had kept watch from a distance in order to see what would develop (Exodus 2,4). Having kept watch for an hour or so at the time, she was now rewarded by the entire Jewish people waiting for seven days with their journey until she could rejoin the main body of the nation. In this connection our sages in Sotah 8 have said that although in practice the four kinds of death penalty in the Torah can no longer be applied seeing we do not have a Temple and our judges do not have that authority while we are in exile, the principle of such kinds of deaths has not been abrogated. When certain people die violent deaths this may reflect the fact that had there been a chance to convict them of the death penalty they would have been executed by a method parallel to that which caused their death. This is an ongoing miracle proving that what we call השגחה פרטית, “G’d’s individual supervision of each of our fates” is still very much in evidence. This is the meaning of Isaiah 30,18: ”for the Lord is a G’d of Justice; happy are all who wait for Him.” 
    
    
   שלח  לך  אנשים
    
   סוס מוכן ליום מלחמה ולה' התשועה, ”the horse is prepared for the day of battle; but victory comes from G’d” (Proverbs 21,31). In this verse Solomon warns everybody to do whatever is in his power by using natural means to achieve his success (in a military encounter when such is unavoidable). Beyond that he must leave things to G’d. A miracle occurs only when all the natural means have been exhausted and have proven to be inadequate to produce the desired result. Man was created in such a way that he can cope with most problems by using natural means. If one plans to secure victory over an adversary in a confrontation one must strive to equip oneself with the amount of weapons and the quality of weapons needed to give one an advantage. In other words, in the days of Solomon one needed horses and chariots. If one left everything to heaven one will find that heaven does not intervene on one’s behalf. If someone is sick and one prays for him to be healed such a prayer is useless unless one has first taken the measures known to help the patient to get well, such as giving him the type of food he needs, Only after one has taken all the measures known to medical science which are capable of curing such a patient does one ask heaven to do its part in curing the sick person at hand. This is the deeper meaning of Psalms 147,3 הרופא לשבורי לב ומחבש לעצבותם, “He heals their broken hearts, and binds up their wounds.” It is also written in verse 10 of that same psalm that “He does not prize the strength of horses, nor value the fleetness of men.” We have a third verse (Psalms 33,17) in which David expressly ridicules those who place their trust in their horses by saying: “horses are a false hope for deliverance, for all their great power they provide no escape.” When we reflect on all these verses we can understand why G’d agreed to the dispatch of the spies in spite of the fact that He Himself would deal the mortal blows to the Canaanites. The Israelites were right in doing what is humanly possible to gird themselves for war against the Canaanites including spying out how best to invade the land of Canaan at minimum risk. Setting ambushes, sending undercover agents, etc., are all legitimate ways for preparing an invasion and maximising the chances of success. Once all these steps had been taken G’d would add whatever measure of supernatural assistance was needed to ensure success. The Torah does not make the performance of miracles the cornerstone of its dealings with mankind or the Jewish people. Miracles are exceptions, not norms. This is why G’d had commanded Noach to build an Ark (Genesis 6,15) although G’d could have let all the people whom He wanted to save walk on water or save them in some other miraculous fashion. All the detailed instructions of what material to use for the Ark, how long and how high it was to be, etc., etc., are proof that G’d wanted Noach to do everything humanly possible to make his salvation appear compatible with natural law. Nonetheless, in spite of man’s best efforts, this most likely would not have been enough for all the inmates of the Ark to endure a whole year inside it without divine input, i.e. some form of miracle. This is what Solomon spoke of when he said that the horse should be prepared. When David asks the Urim and Tumim concerning whether he should attack the Philistines in the valley of Refaim (Samuel II 5,23), G’d told him not to mount a frontal attack but to wait until he would hear the sound of the leaves of the baca trees rustle before taking any action. At that time he was to go into action as G’d would march ahead of him attacking the Philistines. In other words, when David consulted G’d by supernatural means, the response was to proceed as far as posible according to natural means. His victory was supposed to be viewed by the other nations as a natural event. When G’d commanded Joshua to lay an ambush before mounting a renewed attack on the town of Ai, (Joshua 8,2), He also wanted the conquest to proceed along the laws of natural law (not like making the walls of Jericho collapse from the sound of the blasts of the shofar). This then is the reason that the Torah wrote that G’d had commanded Moses to dispatch the spies as we read in
     
    13,2 שלח לך אנשים ויתורו, “send out men on your behalf who shall tour, etc.” The Torah implies that seeing the people had asked that spies be sent as we know from Deut. 1,22: “let us send men ahead to reconnoiter the land,” G’d then said to Moses: “send out men for yourself, etc.” The men were to find out the best routes, which city to attack first, etc., etc.
    Rashi explains the words שלח לך, as “in accordance with your judgment.” G’d meant: “I am not commanding you to do this, but I leave it up to you.” What Rashi means is that although the dispatch of the spies took place at G’d’s “instructions,” על פי ה', the commandment did not originate in G’d’s mind but was an accomodation to a desire uttered by the people. It is similar  to Deut. 17,15 where the Torah commands שום תשים עליך מלך, “you shall surely appoint a king over you,” and proceeds to describe who is suitable to be king. The Torah, i.e. G’d, was not enthused about the idea of governing the Jewish people by a king of flesh and blood, but concurred knowing there would be political pressure to have such a king, and the alternative would probably be worse. We have the testimony of the prophet Hoseah 13,11 that appointing a king for the Jewish people was something that took place against G’d’s will and that the cessation of the Davidic dynasty when the first Temple was destroyed was also a display of G’d’s anger.
    Other commentators understand the word לך as meaning לתועלתך, “for your benefit.” It means something similar to when Moses was told to make himself the trumpets where the word לך, “for your benefit” is also mentioned. A similar word לך is used in connection with עשה לך ארון עץ, “make for yourself an Ark of wood.” According to that view the specific advantage that was to accrue to Moses from all these examples was that Moses would live long enough for all these things to be completed. Had it not been for the sin of the spies and what ensued afterwards, the Israelites would have entered the land of Canaan almost 38 years sooner after which Moses could have died seeing that G’d had hinted to him already in Exodus 6,1 long before he had failed to speak to the rock, that: “now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh,” implying that Moses would not live to see what G’d would do to the 31 kings of the land of Canaan. At the time this had been G’d’s reaction to Moses having said that things had got worse for the Jewish people after his appointment instead of better.
    The reason there were 12 spies although we note that later on in Joshua’s time two spies were enough and even these spies were sent in secret (Joshua 2,1) as were two spies when Moses sent them to spy out Yazer, is that G’d wanted that there should be a national consensus on the subject of the conquest of the land of Canaan. It  was necessary therefore to have every tribe represented in that first spy mission. If they would fail, all the people would bear an equal share of the responsibility and the penalty.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Shelach 1: the spies whom Moses sent out were fools. The spies whom Joshua dispatched were righteous people. We know this from  Joshua 2,1 where we read: “Joshua sent out from Shittim two spies secretly to say, etc.” What is the meaning of the word חרש, generally understood to mean “deaf,” i.e. something no one heard about?”  Those two men pretended to be potters offering their wares cheres, earthenware, for sale, calling for people to come and buy from them. They did all this in order not to arouse suspicion that they had come to spy. The two men in question were Pinchas  and Calev. When they came to the house of Rachav the innkeeper and wanted to stay the night the King of Jericho somehow heard about these men and presumed them to be spies. Rachav tried to hide them. Pinchas told her that seeing he was a priest he possessed some faculties similar to those of angels and could make himself invisible. He also claimed to have prophetic stature, which meant that if he wanted to he could become invisible. Although Rachav took both men up to the roof of her house she hid only one of them amongst the flax stalks put out there to dry seeing that Pinchas had made himself invisible. All this is based on the words ותצפנם, “she hid them,” followed by ותצפנו, “she hid him,” in Joshua 2,6. First the Book described Rachav as hiding two people, then as hiding one person. This one person was Calev.
    The twelve spies whom Moses had sent out were foolish by comparison. We know this because Solomon taught us that he who is מוציא דבה, engages in slander, is a fool (Proverbs 10,18). Thus far the Midrash. The Midrash means that these men who were righteous at the time Moses selected them managed to ruin their reputations, their future, no longer qualifying for the flattering description in Numbers 13,3 כלם אנשים, “all of them men of outstanding character.” When Channah (wife of Elkanah) prayed that G’d grant her a male child she begged for זרע אנשים, “seed who would grow into a worthwhile personality.” She used the word אנשים intentionally to describe the hopes she had for such a baby boy if and when G’d would grant him to her (Judges 2,1). Instead these 12 “men” aborted their mission, caused ruin to themselves and to a whole generation of Israelites; in his parting address to the Jewish people Moses described that whole generation as דור תהפוכות המה, “a generation that reversed itself, children who possess no loyalty” (Deut. 32,20). We learn from the whole passage how even a group of righteous men can turn into wicked people. This is what Solomon meant when he said that “he who engages in slander is foolish,” i.e. as soon as he engages in slander he becomes a fool.
    
    13,11. למטה יוסף למטה מנשה, “from the tribe of Joseph, i.e. from the tribe of Menashe.” In verse 8 the Torah  mentioned the tribe of Ephrayim seeing he was the more important of the two sons of Joseph, i.e. of the tribes which developed out of Joseph. The reason that Joseph’s name was associated with Menashe here was that Joseph too had been guilty of slander when he told his father about the activities of his brothers (Genesis 37,2). Gadi ben Sodi, the spy representing Menashe had been one of those guilty of spreading slander as opposed to Joshua the spy representing Ephrayim. The reason Joshua and Calev are not mentioned successively, seeing that these two were the only ones who did not slander the Holy Land, was so that by being “surrounded” by the names of spies who did spread slander, his failure to be influenced is highlighted even more.
    
    13,16. אלה שמות האנשים, “These are the names of the men, etc.” Why did the Torah repeat the introduction “the names,” seeing it had already written the words: “and these are their names” in verse 4? The reason is to tell us that all the other spies did not have their names changed since birth. Only Joshua had his name changed.
   ויקרא משה להושע בן נון יחושע “Moses called (renamed) Hoshea son of Nun “Joshua.” Our sages in Sotah 34 comment that Moses added the latter י to Hoshea’s name so that the letters י-ה at the beginning of his name represented a prayer that he should be saved from making common cause with the majority of the spies. Moses foresaw in his Holy Spirit that when the spies would return they would slander the land of Israel.
    Another reason cited (Tanchuma Shelach 6) for Moses adding the letter י to Hoshea’s name is that Joshua and Calev who remained loyal to G’d received their reward in the Holy Land. Calev was given the city of Chevron as we know from Judges 1,20: “they gave Calev Chevron.” Joshua received the reward which would have been in store for the ten spies who perished because of the slander they spread (Numbers 14,37), a verse which is immediately followed by “and Joshua son of Nun and Calev son of Yefuneh remained alive from among the men who had gone to explore the land.” The verse contrasts what happened to the slanderers and what happened to the loyalists. The addition of the letter י suggests that Joshua inherited the share of the other ten men. It appears from that Midrash that Joshua’s name prior to his joining the spies had been Hoshea. If so, we are entitled to ask why the Torah introduced this man already with the name Joshua in  Exodus 17,9, Exodus 33,11 as well as in Exodus 24,13 and in Numbers 11,28? It may be that when the Torah was written and Joshua had already had the letter י added to his name the Torah did not want to call him by his former name as a compliment to Moses. If, in this instance, the Torah does mention that his name had not always been Joshua  this was to tell us that it had been Moses who had changed his name for the sake of this mission, but that in principle his name had been Hoshea even where the Torah spells it as Joshua. We find something similar with Moses’ own name, a name given to him by the daughter of Pharaoh. G’d decided to always call Moses by this name as a compliment to her seeing she had converted to Judaism.
    
    13,17. עלו זה בנגב, “ascend here in the south.” According to the Zohar Shelach 160, Moses gave them his staff to act as protection for them. This is based on a [somewhat tenuous Ed.] comparison between the words ואת המטה הזה, in Exodus 4,17 and the words עלו זה in our verse. According to the commentators Moses revealed the secret of the 12-lettered name of G’d to the spies, the word זה having a numerical value of 12 and being a reminder of when G’d had said to Moses: זה שמי לעולם, “My name is זה forever” (Exodus 3,15). All of this was to help them maintain unity and to protect them against the giants in the land.
    
    13,22. ויבא עד חברון, “He arrived at Chevron.” The Torah wrote this in the singular as only Calev went to Chevron where he prostrated himself at the site of the graves of the patriarchs. He engaged in prayer seeking to fortify himself against the advice of his colleagues. Joshua had already been saved from being influenced by the ten spies seeing he had become the recipient of a special blessing from Moses who had told him:, י-ה יושיעך מעצת מרגלים,“may the Lord save you from the advice of the spies.” I have seen a comment in a Midrash (Zohar) that the words “he arrived at Chevron,” should be understood as “He arrived at Chevron,” i.e. G’d arrived at Chevron. He went there to inform the patriarchs that the time had come for their descendants to take possession of the land He had promised them.
   וחברון שבע שנים נבנתה לפני צוען מצרים, “and Chevron had been built seven years prior to Tzoan of Egypt.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah merely informs us that Chevron was historically older that the kingdom of Tzoan (Egypt).
    A Midrashic approach based on Sotah 34: Chevron was seven times more fertile than Tzoan in Egypt. The Torah wants to contrast the fertility of Chevron which was the worst agricultural land in Canaan, full of rocks, with Tzoan, generally presumed to be the most fertile part of Egypt which the Torah had described as ”like a garden of the Lord” in Genesis 13,10. The entire verse was meant to describe the excellence of the land of Canaan.
    
    13,23. וישאוהו במוט בשנים, “they carried it (the cluster of grapes) on a double pole.” The word בשנים is understood to refer to two poles. Eight men were needed to carry the cluster of grapes between them, one carried a pomegranate, one carried a fig; Joshua and Calev did not carry anything. The reason that they did not carry any fruit was that the other spies wanted to use the fruit as an illustration of how different the land of Canaan was from any other country. They planned to argue that just as its produce is different from any other country so its inhabitants are different from people in any other country. They wanted to show that whereas it took eight of them to carry a cluster of grapes, a local inhabitant carried such a cluster by himself. According to Rashi, if we want to get some idea of the weight carried by these spies, look at the stones the Israelites lifted as memorial stones from the river Jordan which, according to our sages, weighed 40 sa-ah each. (33,000 ccm). We are also told that the weight a person can carry when he lifts the load up himself is only a third of what he can carry when others lift the load unto his shoulder. All of this teaches that the weight of the cluster of grapes was extraordinary! 
    There is a Midrashic approach in the Zohar we already mentioned that the words וישאוהו בשנים במוט, refer to Joshua and Calev. A grape, while still attached to the soil is called זמורה, whereas when it has been cut it is called מוט. The Torah wants to tell us that whereas all the other spies combined were unable to lift this cluster of grapes after it had ben cut, Joshua and Calev managed to lift it and to carry it between them. This feat served as a hint to them that they would be chosen to enter the Holy Land and to receive their inheritance in that land.
    13,26. וישיבו אותם דבר, “they brought back word to them.” They did not first go to their respective tents upon their return after a forty day absence, but went immediately to the centre of the camp to make their slanderous report. The slander consisted of the words ארץ אוכלת יושביה, “it is a land which consumes its inhabitants” (verse 32). Our sages in Sotah 35 explain that this impression the spies formed was due to G’d at that time having brought a pestilence on the Canaanites so that they would be busy burying their dead and not pay attention to the 12 men who were spying out their country. The very miracles which had been performed on their behalf became the cause of these spies slandering the country. They caused the Israelites to become afraid of the Amalekites whom they reported seeing in the southern part of the country (verse 29). They hinted that there was no way of entering the land from the south as these people were all physically far stronger than the Israelites. Seeing that the powerful Canaanite people occupied the east and the west, this would also not be a good place to start the conquest. The Emorite in the mountain was certainly another reason for not attempting the invasion from that direction. They succeeded in frightening the people hinting that even Moses and Aaron were afraid and that is why they had agreed to their mission. 
    Calev silenced the people by pretending that he shared the views of the other spies before he had his say when he told them עלה נעלה וירשנו אותה, “we can certainly ascend and dispossess these people” (verse 30). He argued that if these people are strong then we are stronger than they. As soon as Calev made his statement the spies exclaimed that there was no chance to ascend as these people “are stronger than we.” This was something that they had not dared spell out previously when they had contented themselves with such hints as “the Amalekite is in the South,” etc. When they said in verse 31 “we cannot go up against these people,” instead of saying: “we cannot go into the cities,” this was a deliberate exaggeration. They meant that they would not even be able to prevail against these people if they left their fortified towns and came out to fight. The reason they used the term עליה in connection with conquest, a most unusual word for that purpose, is that  they referred to a military encounter in an open field. The word occurs in this context in reports of pitched battles in the field (Nachmanides). Having first undermined the people’s self confidence by hints and allusions, they proceeded to frighten them further by such statements as that the land (even if conquered) would consume its people (verse 32). Seeing that they had already referred to the inhabitants of that land as being powerful, they then said that these people were more powerful than G’d, i.e. the alternate meaning of the words כי חזק הוא ממנו, “it is more powerful than He.” They implied that the owner of the land would be unable to remove his property from there.
    They further frightened the people when they reported having seen the nefilim, people whom they had previously described as בני הענקים, “descendants of the giants.” When they now referred to these same people as נפילים, a word related to נופל, “falling,” they implied that at the very sight of these people the onlooker would fall down in sheer fright of them. They implied that these people were the same as the ones described in Genesis 6,4 and variously described as בני האלוהים, “the sons of G’d,” or “fallen angels,” at any rate super-human creatures with great power. As one may faint when beholding an angel, the sight of them would inspire shock and weakness in the beholder. Later they appeared to tone down their description by merely calling these people ענקים, “giants.” In fact, this was a play on words suggesting that the sight of these people inspired fear at the very sight of their height. The word reflects the awe that someone feels when he sees a very high tower. They referred to their experience of being allowed to view such giants with their own eyes. They implied that former generations such as the antediluvian people were of course familiar with such phenomena and were not overawed, whereas the present  generation which was physically so inferior could not behold such phenomena without becoming frightened of them. Due to the changed conditions on earth after the deluge, the remnants of these people were actually referred to by Moses as רפאים i.e. the “weakened ones” (giants). Deut. 3,11 describes examples being such giants as Og, King of Bashan. (compare Tanchuma  Chukat 25, and Sotah 34). Most of them had been killed by Amrafel, (Genesis 14,13), Og being the exception. The Talmud describes stunted giants of the calibre of Og as comparable to unripe olives which never attain their growth potential (Baba Batra 17). The reason Og had been saved from the deluge was for the sake of Avraham as well as for the sake of the Jewsih people. It was Og who had told Avraham that his nephew Lot had been captured  (Niddah 61), and at the time when he opposed the request of the Jewish people to traverse his land and attacked them (Numbers 21,33) he thereby provided the people with the excuse to conquer his territory and to annex it. G’d meant for this piece of land to be populated by morally superior people like the Israelites.
    This people who had so recently experienced miracles upon miracles at the hand of G’d on their behalf, had forgotten them or they had receded so far into their subconscious that they were once more קטני אמונה, lacking in faith, and even feared the Amalekites whom they had already defeated on the battlefield less than 2 years previously. (Exodus 17,13). Not only that, but they wished themselves to have died in Egypt rather than to have experienced the revelation of G’d at Mount Sinai, etc., when they exclaimed: “wish we had died in Egypt or the desert” (14,3). They actually accused G’d of having redeemed them from Egypt only to let them perish at this time. They preferred returning to slavery in Egypt to their present situation!
    At this point Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces in a profound feeling of shame that the people had so disgraced themselves that they had become guilty of publicly desecrating the name of the Lord. They could not believe that all the people had accepted the version of the ten spies. Concerning this event Solomon said in Proverbs 26,6: “he who sends a message by a fool, cuts off his own feet and drinks violence.” He meant that if someone pulls back his feet excessively (in the effort to avoid having to go to work), he will reap violence.” The effect will be conterproductive. Similarly, here; Joshua and Calev -who in a psychologically futile effort- tried to calm the people by telling them that with the help of the Lord the land would be conquered,- produced the opposite effect so that G’d had to rescue them from the wrath of the people who were about to stone them to death. Their vain attempt-though well-intentioned- resulted only in the people becoming guilty even of attempted murder in addition to their other sins.
    
    14,1. ותשא כל העדה ויתנו את קולם, “The entire assembly raised its voice,“ According to the plain meaning of these words the people commenced crying in the evening and kept crying all night long. We know that the spies had returned close to nightfall bringing with them a special kind of darkness, similar to the one we experience on the night of the ninth of Av when we mourn the destruction of the Temple. The prophet Jeremiah (Lamentations 1,2 ) refers to the repeated crying of the Jewish people on that night. Midrash Eycha Rabbati 1,28 points out that the dates when the people cried mentioned by Jeremiah coincided with the date they cried on this occasion.
    How is the date of this occurrence arrived at? According to Taanit 29 Moses constructed the Tabernacle during the first year of the Exodus and put it together during the second year when he also sent out the spies. The cloud lifted off the Tabernacle on the twentieth of the second month in that year. The month of Iyar is always only 29 days long. The Torah testifies (10,11) that the people commenced their journey away from Mount Sinai on the twentieth of that month and that they traveled for three days in the first instance. The first of these three days does not count in the calendar as it was identical with the day on which the cloud had lifted. According to Rabbi Chama in the name of Rabbi Chanina this (the third) was the day on which the people already departed from their obedience to G’d, as the Torah mentions in Numbers 11,4 that the rabble among them lusted after various cravings, which in turn caused even the elite (בני ישראל) to commence crying from discontent. This occurred on the 22nd day of Iyar. The meat provided by G’d as a result of this rebellion lasted for 30 days (11,20) which brings us to the 22nd day of Sivan. The Torah then mentions that further travel was delayed while Miriam was isolated for seven days (12,15) which brings us to the 29th day of Sivan. This is the day when Moses dispatched the spies who returned after 40 days, i.e. the 9th day of the month of Av. The month of Sivan had thirty days whereas the month of Tammuz had 29 days. This would mean that the spies actually stayed away only thirty nine days if they returned on the ninth of Av. The Talmud raises this point. The answer given is that during that particular year the month of Tammuz had thirty days so that the ninth of Av occurred on the fortieth day of the spies’ departure. The scriptural reference to this unusual length of the month of Tammuz is provided by Lamentations 1,15: “He proclaimed a set time against me to crush my young men.” This “time” was the thirtieth day of Tammuz which caused the spies’ return to occur on the fateful ninth of Av.
    When the Torah wrote in our verse that the entire congregation raised their collective voice in weeping, the reference is to the calendar date, the ninth day of Av. Rabbi Yochanan quotes G’d as saying that seeing that on the occasion of the spies’ report the people spent the night weeping without cause, He would give them cause to weep on a future occasion on that same date, i.e. the night of the destruction of the Temple. Starting from that night, the people would have many occasions to weep; this accounts for the repetition of the words בכה תבכה,“you will weep repeatedly, in Lamentations 1,2.
     Our sages in that connection also understand the repetition of these two words as referring to the weeping for the destruction of the first Temple as well as the weeping for the destruction of the second Temple. Midrash Eycha Rabbati 1,24 also comments that the repetition refers to weeping for the destruction of the Northern Kingdom (10 tribes which preceded the destruction of the Kingdom of Yehudah) and that for the destruction of the latter kingdom. Similarly, the words refer to separate weeping for Jerusalem and Zion respectively, i.e. the loss of our physical and our spiritual capital respectively. We have evidence that the destruction of the first Temple occurred at night as this is mentioned explicitly in Jeremiah 39,4: “When King Tzidkiyahu of Yehudah saw them, he and all the soldiers fled. They left the city at night through the gate between the double walls.” Jeremiah had already prophesied (Jeremiah 6,5) “up, let us attack by night, and wreck her fortress!” The destruction of the second Temple also occurred at night as the Talmud Taanit 29 interprets Jeremiah 6,4: “alas for us! For the day is declining, the shadows of the evening grow long,” as a reference to the destruction of the second Temple. When the wicked Titus destroyed Jerusalem and set it ablaze the Jews fled to the camp of Titus’ army and were exiled from their city. There were a number of Arabs in that army and they kidnapped 400 Jewish children and carried them to the sea at night and shipped them to their homeland as prisoners. (Gittin 57). The children debated among themselves if to commit suicide by jumping ship. They were afraid to lose their share in the world to come if they would commit suicide. To this argument other boys replied that there is a verse (Psalms 68,23):”The Lord said: ‘I will retrieve from Bashan, I will retrieve from the depth of the sea.’” [They meant that their share in the world to come would not be forfeited. Ed.] When the girls heard this they immediately jumped overboard drowning themselves. When the boys observed this they said to themselves that if even the girls who are no strangers to being sexually abused prefer death to being violated, they, the boys, who are not usually exposed to sodomy [an Arab specialty, Ed.] must certainly prefer death to such indignities being perpetrated upon them.
    All these tragic events occurred at night as a punishment for the weeping of the children of Israel on the night after the return of the spies. Even the eventual destruction of the Temples and the dispersion of the Jewish people was decreed on the night mentioned in our verse. This is the meaning of Psalms 106,25-27: “they grumbled in their tents and disobeyed the Lord. So He raised His hand in oath to make them fall in the wilderness. To disperse their offspring among the nations and scatter them through the lands.” The prophet Ezekiel also refers to this when he says in Ezekiel 20,23: “However, I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them through the lands.” So you have clear proof from all three parts of the Bible that this night was predetermined to become a night of weeping for the Jewish people throughout the generations.
    A Midrashic approach to our verse (Tanchuma Shelach 12): The wording of our verse corresponds to Jeremiah 12,8: ”My own people acted toward Me like a lion in the forest; she raised her voice against Me- therefore I have rejected her.” The voice they raised against G’d at that time became the cause of their future disasters. Concerning this generation Isaiah 17,11 says: “On the day that you plant, you see it grow, on the morning you sow you see it bud,- but the branches wither away on a day of sickness and mortal agony.” The prophet describes that while in the process of attaining their goal as a people, the Jewish people’s budding future was cut short by the tragic events of the ninth of Av of the second year of their wandering. The Midrash continues that on that night the decree that the Temples were going to be destroyed was already decreed by G’d as retribution for the unjustifiable weeping which occurred on the night described in our verse here. The verse in Psalms 106 we quoted is understood by the Midrash as equating the raising of Israel’s voice to the raising of G’d’s hand (oath) in a gesture decreeing reason for weeping in the future. Jeremiah 11,17: “verdant olive tree, fair, with choice fruit. But with great roaring sound He has set it on fire, and its boughs are broken.” The prophet means that the sound of the multitude in weeping on that night precipitated the eventual destruction of the Temples alluded to as olive leaves in the beginning of the verse.
    
    A kabbalistic approach: The words כל העדה in our verse refer to the כנסת ישראל, the Jewish people as a spiritual concept, a spiritual entity. This approach is also alluded to in Midrash Eycha Rabbati where the author suggests that the word tivkeh  is understood as capable of being vowelised so that it be read as tevakkeh, a transitive form of the verb בכה, to weep. It would then mean that the spiritual counterpart of the Jewish people will have cause to weep at the conduct of its people on earth. The additional words ויתנו את קולם, they raised their voices, would refer to the ministering angels joining in that weeping, whereas the words ויבכו העם, refer to the Jewish people in the desert weeping. The words בלילה ההוא, in that night, are to tell us that all these decrees were formulated during that night.
    
    14,9. אך בה' אל תמרודו, “only do not rebel against the Lord!”  This verse teaches that a nation afraid [of other nations, Ed.] is an act of rebellion against the Lord. We have a verse in Proverbs 29,25 in which Solomon expresses a similar sentiment, i.e. “man’s fear becomes his own trap, he who trusts in the Lord will be safeguarded.” This fear may lead the frightened person to forget about G’d altogether. This is what the prophet Isaiah 51,12-13 had in mind when he said: ”what ails you that you fear man who must die like grass? You have forgotten the Lord your Maker!”
   סר צלם מעליהם, “their protective shadow has departed from them.” The protective force active on behalf of the Canaanites in the celestial regions is referred to by Calev as “shadow.” This is because its function in protecting the people it represents is similar to the function of the shade which protects against excessive heat. Basically, Calev was telling his compatriots that  the collapse of a nation on earth is preceded by the collapse of its celestial representative; this is the meaning of the men who had fallen like flies whom the spies had seen. Calev added the word מעליהם, which can be translated as “from above them,” i.e. the protective force in the heavens.
    A Midrashic approach found in Song of Songs on chapter 2,20: “and the shadows have departed:” This is a reference to all the nations of the world.
    Nachmanides explains the words: “their shadow has departed from them,” to mean that their shadow had been removed from their heads. He refers to a kabbalistic tradition that on the night of Hoshanah Rabbah, the 21st of Tishrey when the seal is attached to the fate of the individuals for the coming year, anyone whose shadow cannot be seen in the moonlight is slated to die during the course of that year. That calendar date corresponds to the 26th day after G’d commenced creating the universe. Calev meant to say that death had been decreed for these people already on the previous 21st of Tishrey. Although Calev did not spell this out in so many words, this is what he alluded to. This is also the allusion contained in Song of Songs 2,17: “until the day blows past and the shadows have fled.” Solomon meant that when a person’s “day,” i.e. his lifetime on earth, approaches its end this is signaled by his shadow departing from him first. This “shadow” comes closer to the Lord (the Ineffable Name י-ה-ו-ה whose numerical value is 26, corresponding to the 26th day after commencement of the creation). When David writes this “name” it also is described as ה' צלך, “the Lord is your shadow” (Psalms 121,5). Actually it would have been sufficient to refer to ונס הצל, “the shadow (sing.) departed, fled.” The reason Solomon spoke about צללים, “shadows” in the plural, is that every human being has two shadows (compare Yevamot 122). The regular shadow is the one visible when the sun shines. The “secondary” shadow is the one visible at night. [The Talmud distinguishes between the ability of demons to cast a shadow, suggesting that they can cast a shadow when impersonating persons by day, but cannot do so at night. Ed.]
    When reflecting on the reason for these phenomena perhaps we must consider that any creature on this terrestrial earth is equipped with a shadow, even plants and inert objects. This is because the light of the sun penetrates into their domain when it shines from the domain of the planets into one that is not its own. Seeing that at that time the sun is like an invader into a foreign domain, it does not have the power to deprive the creatures on earth of their shadows. Rather, the sun itself is pushed aside by these shadows, i.e. the sun’s rays cannot reach areas in the shade. The fact is that shadows appear in areas designated for the sun to illuminate with its rays. G’d did not want that anyone of His creatures should interfere with the rightful domain of another creature. In order to make this clear, each creature has been equipped with its personal, individual shadow as proof of its entitlement to a certain place on earth. When the shadow of someone’s head is missing at night (not distinguishable), this indicates that the person or creature it belongs to has been deprived of this space on earth, will die during the course of the year after the night of Hoshanah Rabbah when such a decree 
has been issued. The moon became the manifestation of this decree as it had been appointed to exercise supervision of the living creatures on earth, something well known in scientific circles. Personally, I am surprised why it was necessary for the Torah to write such words as: “their protective shadow has departed from them, whereas the Lord is with us do not be afraid of them.” After all, if the Lord is with us what does it matter whether their protective shadow had departed or had not departed? Is G’d then unable to be with us unless their protective shadow had departed from them? Is not the power of the G’d of Israel greater than the protective angels assigned to any other nation or combination of nations? Have we not been told in Deut. 32,32 “not like our Rock is their  rock?”
    The answer to these questions is that Calev meant to say: “you have no reason to fear either them (the Canaanites) or their protective celestial representatives.” This is all included in the plural of “do not be afraid of them, i.e. either their terrestrial phenomena or their celestial protectors.” Calev then proceeded to supply the reason for his confidence by saying they should not be afraid of the inhabitants of this land seeing “they are our bread.” They had become “our bread” as their protective “shadow” had already departed from these people, i.e. their power in the celestial spheres had expired. The only reason the Jewish people had been afraid of these Canaanites was on account of their celestial protective angels. Calev countered this argument as invalid seeing “the Lord is with us,” and the Lord is stronger than any celestial force these people could call upon to help them. The Lord and His celestial court can defeat these people even while their protective angels were still active; therefore, Calev said: “you have no reason to fear them.”
    It is also possible to interpret the words: “for they are our bread,” as a reference to the merit the Israelites possessed as evidenced by  their fulfilling the commandment of eating matzah and dwelling in huts at the appropriate time. The word צל, would refer to the shade provided by the covering of the Sukkah. Whereas these people had forfeited the protection of their angels, we could count on the protection of the Lord by dint of having fulfilled the commandments of matzah on Passover and the dwelling in flimsy huts relying only on G’d’s shade to be our roofs. This thought has been paraphrased by David in Psalms 121,5 when he said: “the Lord is your guardian, the Lord is your protection at your right hand.” In view of these considerations, “you have no reason to fear them.”
    
    14,11. עד אנה ינאצוני העם הזה ועד אנה, “how long will this people provoke Me, and how long, etc.” The sages of the Midrash (Tanchuma Shelach 12) said that G’d said: “I had to exclaim My displeasure in two exclamations” (twice the words עד אנה), therefore they will have to exclaim their frustrations when being exiled to four different empires. The four occasions when these exclamations are found as being made by the Jewish people are found in Psalms 13,2-3: “how long, O Lord; will You ignore me forever? How long will You hide Your face from me? How long will I have cares on my mind, grief in my heart all day? How long will my enemy have the upper hand?”
     The second exclamation by G’d was in verse 27: “how long will this evil congregation provoke complaints against Me?” David paraphrased the exclamation by the Jewish people as retribution for causing G’d to make this latter exclamation in Psalms 6,4: “my whole being is stricken with terror, while You, Lord- O how long?”
   בכל האותות אשר עשיתי בקרבו, “through all the miracles I performed in its midst?” Significantly, G’d did not say: “in your midst,” plural, but “in its midst, singular?” 
    According to the plain meaning of the text the reference is to the time when all the people were united, of one mind, in their devotion to the Lord.
    A Midrashic approach to this wording based on Bamidbar Rabbah Shelach 16,15: the word “in its midst,” means that the people did not even have to turn around in order to witness the miracles G’d was performing. The meaning of the words קרב וכרעים is used in the Talmud Yuma 75 as an allusion to the manna being food which was totally absorbed by the bodies of the people eating it, there being no excrement, waste material from it. If this is true, the question is why the Torah legislated in Deut. 23,14 that the soldiers should be equipped with tools to bury their excrement in the earth in order to maintain the holy nature of a Jewish encampment even during war? What excrement did the soldiers have to bury, seeing they ate manna? Answer: they had to bury the excrement of the food they had purchased from the surrounding nations and had eaten it.
    Another view expressed on this subject is that even that food was absorbed totally together with the manna. However, when the Israelites had allowed themselves to become lax in their performance of the commandments the manna also did not dissolve completely. G’d said to them: “I have taken the trouble to enable you to stand in front of Me just like the ministering angels (who do not excrete) and now you have forced Me to legislate to bury your excrement three miles away from your camp!” This is the meaning of the words in Numbers 33,49: “they camped by the river Jordan as far as  Beyt Hayeshimot until the plains of Shittim, the plains of Moab.” [Although the commandment to take a shovel in addition “to your weapons” was written in connection with soldiers going out in a war of aggression, the questioner implies that the rule to bury excrement outside the Jewish camp applied to all the Israelites also in times of peace. Ed.] Rabbi bar Chana said that he had personally seen the site where the Israelites had encamped near Beyt Hayeshimot and it was three miles distant from the banks of the Jordan .
    
    14,13-14. ושמעו מצרים כי העלית בכוחך את העם  הזה מקרבו ואמרו אל יושבי הארץ הזאת מבלתי יכולת ה', “when Egypt will hear (about this) people whom you have taken out of Egypt with Your powerful hand...and they will tell the other nations that this was due to G’d’s inability, etc.” After the Torah had mentioned about the Egyptians hearing, the Torah continues  outlining the nature of the intimate relationship between G’d and the Jewish people, by pointing out that the entire people had seen G’d’s revelation with their own eyes.
    According to Nachmanides the mention of the word עין here is essentially the same as מראה. The word appears in a similar sense in the description of the appearance of the manna in Numbers 11,7. A similar meaning of the word occurs in Ezekiel 1,27 where the prophet describes his vision of the angel he had seen who came to destroy the city of Jerusalem. Thus far Nachmanides.
    
    From the fact that both here and after the threat of wiping out the Jewish nation after the sin of the golden calf Moses each time used the argument of how such an event would diminish G’d’s image in the eyes of the Egyptians, one might conclude that had it not been for this consideration Moses would have acquiesced in the destruction of the Jewish people, and would have accepted G’d’s proposal to make a new Jewish people with himself as the founding patriarch. Such an assumption is completely erroneous as Moses had already linked his own death to the death of the Jewish people asking G’d to wipe him out of G’d’s history-book  if He were to kill the Jewish people rather than his living to witness such a disaster (Exodus 32,32). When Moses appears to harp on the impression the demise of the people of Israel would make on the Egyptians and other nations, the point was that the deities of the Canaanites would be enhanced in the eyes of the Egyptians and they would ascribe superior power to them. G’d’s exertion of power in orchestrating the Exodus would be perceived as the maximum the Jewish G’d was capable of. If, nonetheless, the Israelites would not arrive at their destination, they would conclude that the deities of the Canaanites had the power to save themselves and their people from the hands of the Jewish G’d. This in turn would be a grave desecration of the name of the Lord and instead of the Exodus and all that took place in connection with it bringing the nations closer to monotheism the opposite would occur and the belief in certain deities would be immeasurably strengthened. G’d’s monopoly of power as recently manifested when He split the sea, etc., would be undercut. Moses rejected the proposal to become the founding father of a new Jewish nation as it would have been an act of desecrating the name of G’d to countenance the destruction of the Jewish people. Our sages said in Berachot 32 that as soon as G’d had told Moses to descend from the mountain as “your people have become corrupt,” his strength was greatly weakened just like that of a female. Why did the sages make this comparison to a female? They meant that just as the female receives, is passive by nature and receives all its strength through the male, Moses as the leader of a corrupt nation had become exposed as no better than a female, i.e. his greatness depended on the stature of the Jewish people, his charges. The peoples of the world would no longer perceive him or the Israelites as “males” but as female. The great Rabbi Shlomoh ben Aderet, may he live long, perceives this weakening of the power as referring to the perception of G’d’s power by the Egyptians who would no longer see in Him the prime force of the universe as they had done since the Exodus, but would conclude that the Jewish G’d was also only a secondary and not a primary source of power.
    
    14,17. ועתה יגדל נא כח ה', “and now may the strength of My Lord be magnified, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses meant that anyone who possesses the attribute of being slow to anger  (extreme patience) possesses the strength to conquer his anger; Moses therefore added: “as You have spoken, saying,” referring to the attributes of His which G’d had revealed to him after the episode of the golden calf. This is why he immediately added mention of the attribute ה' ארך אפים, “the Lord is slow to anger.” The reason he added the word לאמור was to show that this attribute would be invoked in a time of distress. This is similar to a statement by our sages in Bereshit  Rabbah 70,1 on Genesis 28,20 וידר יעקב נדר לאמור, “Yaakov vowed a vow saying,” is quoted as meaning that he found himself in a state of distress. The word לאמור is understood as referring to future occasions when Jews would find themselves in distress and when the making of a vow to invoke G’d’s assistance is advised by Yaakov as being appropriate.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bamidbar Rabbah 16,22 [not in our editions, Ed.] The words: “let Your strength be magnified” mean that Moses pleads that the attribute of Mercy should prevail over the attribute of Justice at all times in the future. Consider the fact that the letters א-ד in the word א-ד-נ-י as well as the letter י in the word יגדל are written in larger size letters. [I have found  editions with a larger י in the word יגדל whereas I have not found the word א-ד-נ-י spelled different from normal. Ed.] At any rate, the author uses the larger letter י in the word יגדל as an allusion that the attribute of Mercy as represented by that letter י should always be in the ascendancy. 
    This may be understood in terms of a parable. A friend of the bride (king’s daughter) entered the palace in order to sing the praises of the king’s daughter. When he entered the king’s chamber he found the king and the judges discussing some misdemeanour the daughter had been guilty of. The friend was now in a quandary as to how to proceed. He said to himself that if he would plead her case before the king the judge would be affronted, whereas if he pleaded her case in front of the judge the king would be affronted. What did he do? He pleaded the case before both the king and the judge addressing the king first. This is why the letter י as an allusion to the attribute of Mercy is spelled in larger script to indicate that Moses first addressed the attribute of Mercy before pleading with the attribute of Justice which was dealing with the Israelites’ sin. As a result of this ingenious approach the “king” i.e. the attribute of Mercy, immediately responded favourably saying: “I have forgiven in accordance with what you have said.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words יגדל נא כח א-ד-נ-י  mean that the latent power reposing in the attribute of Mercy should be reinforced so that it will not escape into the highest regions of the heavens, [a withdrawal from mankind or the people of Israel of that attribute. Ed.] The whole matter may be understood thus: when the Jewish people perform the commandments and therefore the will of the Lord, G’d will “ride the heavens,” as Moses said in Deut. 33,27 “He rides the heavens with your (Israel’s) help.” Israel’s conduct exerts influence on the manifestation of G’d’s powers. This is the meaning of Psalms 60,14 באלו-הים נעשה חיל, “we will perform valiantly for the sake of the Lord.” On the other hand, when the Jewish people do not observe the commandments He distances Himself from those of His attributes which are invoked often on behalf of Israel. This is the meaning of Deut. 33,29: ובגאותו שחקים, “He will adopt a haughty attitude by withdrawing to the level of the celestial domains known as Shechakim.” In other words, Israel’s sinful conduct causes the manifestations of G’d’s powers to wane. The meaning of the word יגדל in our verse then is that G’d’s powers should become manifest in ever greater measure.
    Another reference to the ability of the Jewish people to “weaken” the apparent power of G’d is found in Deut. 32,18 where Moses describes the rebellious Jewish people as causing צור ילדך תשי, “you caused the Rock Who gave birth to you to become ‘weak.’” Seeing that at this point the Israelites had all become guilty of death, Moses was forced to pray that the manifestation of G’d’s power should be great. In Psalms 40,17 David uses a similar language when he concludes with the word יגדל as the word the people who are in search of the Lord are to use when they look for G’d’s help. 
    The experts in Kabbalah have used the term עזר when referring to the drawing forth of G’d’s abundance on behalf of man (Shabbat 89). This is what is meant by the Talmud when we are told that when Moses ascended Mount Sinai he found that G’d was busy tying “crowns” to the various letters in the Torah. When Moses failed to extend a greeting to G’d, G’d asked him if in his city it was not customary to extend greetings to someone when one meets him. Moses replied that it is presumptuous for a slave to open his mouth in greeting to his master. G’d responded that in spite of this dictum it had been up to Moses לעזרני. [this word is usually translated as “to assist Me.” Ed.] In kabbalistic terms the word means “to provide a reason for My abundance to be channeled to my creatures.” When Moses ascended the Mountain a second time, he said: ועתה יגדל נא כח א-ד-נ-י upon arrival. So in our verse too the meaning of these words is that Moses appealed for G’d’s largesse to become manifest as proof of His power. 
    We are faced here with the failure of Moses to invoke another one of the attributes G’d had taught him after the debacle with the golden calf, I refer to the attribute ה' אל רחום וחנון, “the Lord is a gracious and merciful G’d.” He also did not invoke the attributes ואמת ונוצר חסד לאלפים, “Truth, preserving kindness and for thousands of generations.” He also failed to invoke the attribute called חטאה in Exodus 34,4 (a reference to G’d’s willingness to forgive unintentional sin). If Moses failed to mention the attributes we just mentioned, this was not an oversight but was quite deliberate. Moses taught us a lesson in how to structure our prayers and into the manner a supplicant has to pray if he wants his prayers to find a favourable echo in G’d’s ears. Moses invoked here only six of the thirteen attributes G’d had taught him as potentially designed to appease His anger. He omitted seven of these attributes. The reason he did not mention the attributes ה' אל רחום וחנון is because these attributes are invoked on behalf of people who are confident that their merits exceed their demerits. The Jewish people’s merits at this time were clearly in the minority and any mention of these attributes of G’d would have been provocative rather than designed to appease G’d’s anger. He did not invoke G’d’s attribute of אמת, Truth, as according to the standards of that attribute the Jewish people would clearly have been guilty of death. The attribute of “truth” is part of the attribute of Justice. Our sages in Avodah Zarah 4 explained that the meaning of that attribute is that G’d does not go beyond the boundaries of what is coming to a person, He does not extend latitude beyond the requirements of Justice. In this instance (in the words of Jeremiah 7,28) “truth (faithfulness) had perished, vanished from their mouths.” How could Moses therefore invoke such an attribute at this time?  Moses also did not invoke the attributes נוצר חסד לאלפים, seeing that at this time Moses did not invoke the merits of the patriarchs as he had done in the case of the sin of the golden calf. After all, the people’s sin had been their contempt for the very land which the patriarchs had chosen as their homeland. It would have been disastrous to invoke the patriarchs as support for a people who had just rejected the values the patriarchs had held dear. Neither did Moses invoke the attribute חטאה as the sin they were guilty of now was deliberate, not due to oversight or carelessness. Moses did have to invoke the ineffable name י-ה-ו-ה however, as this was the first name given to him in the list of the thirteen attributes.
    According to Rosh Hashanah 17, the reason that this name is repeated in the list of the thirteen attributes in Exodus is that this name is invoked first before repentance has taken effect and again after the sinner has repented. The message of G’d is that as David phrased it in Psalms 145,9 “G’d is good to all His creatures,” i.e. He is not prejudiced against the sinners. Moreover,  once the sinner has repented G’d will accept this repentance even if in the overall balance of that person’s deeds the demerits outweigh the merits. G’d hopes that His mercy will result in the sinner confessing his other sins also and restructuring his lifestyle. In this respect G’d is different from a human king who will always remember and consider in the back of his mind that someone whom he had pardoned a trespass had been guilty of that trespass at one time. [forgiveness is an exclusive attribute of G’d; it is not given to man to “forgive” in the sense of blotting out the sin in his mind. This is why Yaakov did not tell the brothers to ask Joseph’s forgiveness. Ed.]
    In this instance Moses invoked the ineffable Name only once as at this time the Israelites had not yet repented at all. G’d’s Ineffable Name could be invoked after the sin had been committed even without repentance having occurred yet. [this was a new dimension of G’d’s reaction to sinners, i.e. that His basic relation to them had not changed. Ed.]
    There was another reason why Moses mentioned the Ineffable Name here only once. Moses appealed to the Lord in His capacity as the Supreme King, from whom all attributes emanate. He was hopeful (but not certain) that the people would repent. In the event that their repentance would not be forthcoming immediately, Moses appealed immediately to the attribute of ארך אפים, reminding G’d that He extended His patience both to the sinners and the righteous. This is why he referred to the wordאפים  in the plural, i.e. wrath against the wicked or against the righteous who had become guilty of sin. Not only this, added Moses, but “You are רב חסד, “abundant in kindness,” i.e. if someone’s merits and demerits are in balance You tip the scales in his favour, even if he did not do repentance. If such a person did תשובה, You forgive him for both his intentional sins and even the ones which represented acts of insurrection against You, עון ופשע. Those who do not repent do not qualify for such forgiveness, i.e. לא ינקה, He does not consider such a person as completely cleaned from sin, ever. Nonetheless, He does not wipe them out together with their offspring but waits several generations פוקד אבות על בנים to see if subsequent generations will find their way back to the Lord. Seeing that G’d had previously revealed  these attributes to Moses, he could now argue that to kill the people by pestilence would negate some of these attributes which G’d had taught him to use in prayer. G’d could, however, without violating His principles, exact punishment from the children and subsequent generations a little at a time  as He Himself had said. To this plea G’d responded by saying: “I have forgiven in accordance with your words.” Moreover, if they had any residual claim on unused merits of the patriarchs-here described as חסד- G’d promised to preserve this for many future generations [instead of squandering it now, Ed.] However, G’d would not pardon this sin forever and as a result they would die in the desert and perish there. G’d would allow the children and grandchildren to complete the journey to the Holy Land in accordance with His principle of suspending certain judgments for up to four generations.
    Part of this promise entailed that the Jewish people would have many occasions to weep on the anniversary of this night as we have outlined before. This was the downside of the words פוקד עון אבות על בנים, that G’d would delay exacting the balance of the punishment due and not canceled. Moses was astute enough not to ask for forgiveness for the sin of the people as he realised that what had happened here was totally unforgivable. This is why he phrased his prayer in such a way that the punishment should be exacted over a period of time instead of all at once. In recognition of the careful way Moses had phrased his prayer G’d responded immediately by saying: “I have forgiven,” but “only on the terms you have spelled out yourself.” The people, however, who had been eye witnesses to all of G’d’s miracles could not be allowed to see the land that G’d had intended to give them.
    Shemot Rabbah 8,13 understood the additional words כאשר אמרת in G’d’s response as referring to the sin of the golden calf. Our sages understand the: “I have forgiven,” which G’d said at the end of the third 40 days which Moses spent on the mountain when he received the second set of Tablets, as a contrast to the sin of the spies. G’d told Moses (here) that whereas I have forgiven the sin of the golden calf in accordance with your plea and arguments, I have not and will not forgive this sin and the people old enough to be accountable will die in the desert. The fact is that though the words: “I have forgiven in accordance with your words” have been written here in connection with the sin of the spies, they really apply to the sin of the golden calf.
    A Midrashic approach, based on Mechilta Yitro Bachodesh 9: the word  כדברך in addition to the word סלחתי is similar to when Pharaoh told Moses כדברך, i.e. it is a form of admission. When the master agrees with conditions set by his servant such a servant is indeed blessed. (the reference is to Moses accepting Pharaoh’s request to delay removal of the frogs until the following day; Exodus 8,6) In this instance G’d, the master, accepted the servant Moses’ conditions.
    
    14,22. כי כל האנשים, “for all the men, etc.” The meaning of כי in this instance is the same as אם, “if.” The meaning of these verses is: “I swear by the fact that I am alive forever and the earth is full of My glory that all these men who have seen My glory will not see the land, etc.” The wording is the formula appropriate for an oath. However, the words which appear to be missing have been omitted in order for G’d Himself not even to mention His “inability” as a supposition as this would not be deferential and in keeping with G’d’s honour (based on Rashi).
    Nachmanides also writes, after quoting Rashi and rejecting his approach prefacing his remarks על דרך האמת, i.e. the kabbalistic approach, that the words חי אני were spoken by the כנסת ישראל, as part of the promise to Moses accompanying the words “I have forgiven as you said,” that whereas if He were to allow this generation to live the earth would not then be filled with His glory. He would, however, let the children live and be the replacement of the fate intended for their parents, i.e. to conquer and settle in the land of the Canaanites, the land promised to the patriarchs. When that would occur the whole earth would be filled with G’d’s glory. [This would not be an oath then but would contrast the dishonourable death of the parents with the glory-filled lives of their children which would reflect G’d’s own glory. Ed.] The words כבוד ה' in our verse as being spoken by the כנסת ישראל, is not unique. We have several examples in the Bible of such wording, such as in Psalms 104,31 יהי כבוד ה' לעולם, “may the glory of the Lord endure forever,” where the speaker is the כנסת ישראל. The words חי אני are equivalent to אלו-הים חיים,”by the living G’d.” This expression or almost identical expressions occur in Joshua 3,10- Judges 8,19 as well as Daniel 12,7. When the expression חי נפשך (Samuel I 1,26) occurs it describes the domain בינה in the emanations, the domain in which vows originate.
    
    14,23. וכל מנאצי, “and all those who provoke Me.” This is a reference to any children or grandchildren of the generation which was to perish in the desert. [I suppose the interpretation is based on the repetition of this expression concerning whom G’d had already decreed death in verse 11. Ed.] This is also an allusion to the weeping which would occur on that night in subsequent generations, all the exiled Jews who would not enjoy the good fortune to see the Land of Israel.
    
    14,24. רוח אחרת עמו, “who was imbued with a different spirit,” the word אחרת is relative, i.e. a spirit different from that of the ten spies. The Torah reminds us that the righteous person is “different” from the wicked person. The Torah first uses the word in connection with the third son of Adam and Chavah, Sheth, whom his mother describes as זרע אחר, “a different seed” (Genesis 4,25). Sheth was the righteous person who replaced Hevel both of whom were “different” from Kayin who was wicked. “Goodness” is essentially different from “evil.” Similarly, ”evil” is essentially different from “goodness.” This is the reason idols are described as אלוהים אחרים, “different” gods rather that “other” gods. When the word אחר occurs in connection with someone or something evil, it means “good” by comparison to the evil person.
   והביאותיו אל הארץ אשר בא שמה וזרעו יורישנה. והעמלקי. “and I shall bring him to the land where he has been (already) and his offspring shall possess it.” And the Amalekite, etc.” Here too is an example of the letters of the Ineffable Name appearing in reverse order (the last letters in the last four words of the caption; compare author on Genesis 11,9) This is an allusion to the fact that at that time the attribute of Justice was poised, ready to strike the Israelites. This is why it was decreed that the Israelites make a permanent home in the desert and that they would even retrace their steps in the direction of the sea of Reeds. This also why, when they were willing and anxious to proceed forward and ascend the mountain (as the spies had done), Moses warned them not to commit a sin by violating G’d’s commandment and embark on an undertaking that was doomed (41). The meaning of the words יושב בעמק, applied here to the areas inhabited by the Canaanite and the Amalekite, is not the usual “in the valley,” but “sitting ready to ambush you.” This is why G’d instructed them to change direction to save them from such attacks seeing He, G’d, would not protect them now by means of a miracle.
    
    14,29. במדבר הזה יפלו פגריכם, “your carcasses will drop in this desert.” It appears that the Israelites’ guilt in this episode could be divided into three levels. Some of them had wept, some of them had complained against Moses and Aaron saying: “if only we had died already.” The third level consisted of the people who had said: “let us appoint a leader and head back for Egypt” (verse 4). The reason the Torah mentions the word “your carcasses” three times is to allude to these different levels of the people. The choice of the word “your carcasses,” which at first glance seems very harsh, is actually the reverse. It means that only the bodies of these people would die, they would not lose their entitlement to life in the hereafter. (compare Rabbi Eliezer in Sanhedrin 105 and 110). This allusion is repeated in verse 35: “in this desert they will expire and there they will die.” The words: “all of you who have been numbered for military service,” mean that the Levites were excluded from this decree as they had not been part of the army and when they had been numbered the babies of one month old were already included in that count (Baba Batra 121).
    
    14,30. אם אתם  תבואו אל הארץ, “if you are going to enter the land, etc.” This statement by G’d was addressed to both Moses and Aaron and they were to convey this message to the people as G’d added (verse 28) by saying אמור להם, “say to them.”
    It is possible to argue that seeing this instruction was addressed to both Moses and Aaron that they themselves were included among the people who would not be allowed to enter the Holy Land. In fact Moses himself had already alluded to the fact that he would not enter the Holy Land in Exodus 15,17 when he said: “You will bring them and You will plant them firmly on the mountain of Your inheritance.” He had not said: “I will bring them, etc.” Even though both Moses and Aaron were totally righteous at this time and no decree had been issued against either of them they did not want to enter the Holy Land and thereby show up their charges the Jewish people as inadequate by comparison to their leaders. This is why they would die in the desert. Seeing that Moses and Aaron tied their fates to that of their people, when the time for the resurrection arrives both they and their people will ascend to the Holy Land under the leadership of Moses and Aaron. Seeing that Moses had actually longed to enter the land for the purpose of performing the commandments which could not be performed outside it, he would be granted even greater insights at the time of the resurrection to reward him for this pious wish. People who have kept all the commandments that it is possible to keep are entitled to such greater insights. The generation of the people who had witnessed the revelation at Mount Sinai had achieved greater insights and will participate in the resurrection regaining or surpassing their former stature at that time.
    
    14,34. יום לשנה, יום לשנה, ”a day for a year, a day for a year.” We would have expected the Torah to write the opposite, i.e. “a year for a day,” i.e. that the punishment for each day the spies had spent traveling the land and planning to slander it would be that the people would have to spend an additional year in the desert. Theirs would be nomads’ tents which flutter in the wind, an existence daily reminding them of their insecurity on earth. Not only that, but according to the context of the story mention of the punishment should have preceded mention of the sin. If the Torah wrote the verse in the manner it did it was to teach us something about G’d’s mercy which is manifest even while He metes out punishment.
    When the Torah chose the wording: “a day for a year,” we must consider the fact that seeing the land of Israel has been described as an area of 400 by 400 miles, approx, this is an area which the spies could not possibly have covered in the space of a mere forty days. However, seeing G’d had known in advance that He would have to decree the punishment mentioned, He telescoped the distance under their feet so that they could cover it in such a short period of time. This is why G’d said: “a day for every year,” i.e. just like a father who is forced to inflict a blow on his son. He does not inflict a cruel blow but is as considerate as possible. The meaning of the verse therefore is: “here I have reduced the extent of your punishment as much as is possible by shortening the time you (the spies) needed to traverse the land so that it took only forty days. “
    
    14,35. אני ה' דברתי, “I the Lord have spoken, etc.” This expression is equivalent to the rendering of an irrevocable decree; seeing that it is accompanied by an oath it could not be revoked. Although it could not be revoked its application could be delayed. Moses’ prayer accomplished that execution of the decree was spread over almost forty years.
    
    14,37. במגפה לפני ה', “by a pestilence before the Lord.” The punishment was commensurate to their sin. They had sinned by abusing their power of speech with their tongues; this is why their death resulted from a plague which first attacked their tongues lengthening them until their navels. Then worms crawled out of their navels through their tongues (Sotah 35). This is why the Torah added the words: “before the Lord,” This is the way Rashi explains this verse.
    
    14,41. והוא לא תצלח, “and it will not succeed.” According to the plain meaning of the text these words mean that the plan to ascend the top of the mountain would not succeed.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word והוא refers to the words פי ה', “the commandment of the Lord,” mentioned in the same verse. The reason the word is spelled with the letter ו instead of the letter ה which is the way we read it, is that it is an allusion to the interaction between the active force (male) and the passive force (female). 
    According to Nachmanides who also uses a kabbalistic approach, the word והוא (spelling) is similar in meaning to the same word in Ezekiel 1,13 והוא מתהלכת בין החיות, i.e. it is an allusion to the Shechinah, a manifestation of G’d perceived as “feminine.” Moses was telling the people concerned that the “feminine” presence of the Lord would not suffice to grant them success. [if I understood this correctly. Seeing the cloud remained over the camp the people had reason to believe that G’d was with them. Ed.]
    
    14,44. ויעפילו, the word is derived from עפל, climbing a fortified place and means that they tried to ascend a fortified hill. 
    A Midrashic approach found in Bamidbar Rabbah 10 compares the word to the root אפל, darkness, i.e. “they walked in darkness,” not having secured approval for their under-taking.which was considered wicked.
   וארון ברית ה' ומשה לא משו, “and the Ark of the covenant of the Lord as well as Moses had not moved.” In this verse the Torah drew a comparison between Moses and the Ark of the covenant. In Numbers 11,21 we have a formula where the Torah seems to equate Moses to the 600,000 men of military age of the Israelites when it is written: “and Moses said the people are 600,00 foot-soldiers, etc.” The Torah alluded to the spiritual worth of Moses as being equivalent to the people as a whole. If that had not been the intention of the the Torah in that verse it should have written: “the people amongst whom I find myself comprise 600,000 foot-soldiers.”
    
    15,2-3. כי תבואו אל ארץ מושבותיכם....ועשיתם אשה לה', “when you arrive in the land of your permanent residence....and you prepare a fire-offering for the Lord, etc.” This paragraph was attached to that of the failure of the mission of the spies in order to reinforce the confidence of the children who were already mourning the upcoming premature deaths of their parents that they would indeed come to the land and offer sacrifices there.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Shelach 14: just as a father is obligated to train his son in five aspects of successful living, i.e. to circumcise him, to teach him Torah, to redeem him from a priest if he is a firstborn, to teach him an honest trade, and to arrange for him to marry a suitable woman, so G’d provided similarly for the Jewish people (His firstborn son). He circiumcised them employing Joshua as the Mohel performing the ritual as recorded in Joshua 5,2. G’d “redeemed” Israel as we know from Samuel II 7,23: “and who is like Your people Israel, a unique nation on earth whom G’d went and redeemed as His people, etc.” He taught the Israelites the Torah as He said: “you shall teach them (the words of the Torah) to your children,” [employing the fathers as the teachers. Ed.] It is also written that G’d personally taught the Torah, compare Isaiah 48,17: ”I the Lord am your G’d, instructing you for your own benefit.” The latter words mean that He taught the people a useful trade. He also taught them the commandments as we know from Leviticus 27,34 “These are the commandments which G’d instructed, etc.” Finally, He arranged for the people to have suitable marriage partners when he blessed them saying: “ be fruitful and multiply.”
    Just like a father feeds his family, anoints them with oil and washes them (arranges for all this) so G’d does the same for Israel as we know from Ezekiel 16,9-10: “I bathed you in water, and washed the blood off you, and anointed you with oil. (verse 19) and the food which I had given you, the choice flour, the oil and the honey, which I had provided for you to eat, etc.” In Numbers 21,11 we find the Israelites addressing the well of water provided for them by G’d with the words: “spring up O well-sing to it,” Just as when the father gives properties to his children the children offer gifts to the father as symbols of their gratitude, so G’d here told the Israelites to offer certain libations to express their gratitude when they would arrive in the land of Israel.
    
    15,20. ראשית עריסותיכם חלה תרימו תרומה, “As the first of your kneading you shall set aside a loaf, a portion for the Lord.” The commandment of setting aside this loaf was not applicable in the desert (seeing the bread had not grown on our soil) but this commandment became applicable as soon as the Israelites set foot on the West Bank of the Jordan and ate from its produce. (Sifri 110). The reason the Torah had to use the words מלחם הארץ, “from the bread of the land,” is that it had to be contrasted with the “bread” the Israelites had been eating before entering the Holy Land, i.e. heavenly “bread.” The Biblical injunction described here is applicable in the full sense of the word only for people resident in ארץ ישראל, this is why the Torah writes בבואכם, “when you come (plural)” i.e. when all of you come. When only part of the Jewish nation resides in the Holy Land the commandment applies only as a Rabbinic decree.
    The commandment consists of setting aside this loaf from the dough before it has been baked, this is why the Torah uses the word ראשית, “the first of your kneading.” The person setting this part of the dough aside, generally a woman, recites a benediction mentioning that we have been commanded to perform this commandment. Even in the diaspora the dough is set aside although the benediction is not recited there. The reason this ritual is being observed also in the diaspora is so as not to cause the entire commandment being forgotten during the many years of our exile.
    There is no specific quantity for the size of either the dough from which the loaf has to be set aside or for the minimum size of that loaf. However, the Rabbis have made certain rules about this. They consider the minimum acceptable size of that loaf as being 1/60th of the dough whereas a generous person is expected to set aside 1/40th of the size of that dough. The minimum quantity of dough qualifying for this commandment to become mandatory is an amount equivalent to 423 eggs in volume. Anything less would not qualify under the heading of “a gift for the Lord,” i.e. the priest, His representative on earth. Anything less than the amount mentioned would be an insult rather than a symbol of gratitude, a gift (compare Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim chapter 5). Nowadays, seeing the whole commandment in the diaspora is of rabbinic origin, eating this is forbidden only to such priests as are ritually unclean through a discharge from their bodies. Other lesser degrees of ritual impurity, even such impurity as contact with the dead do not disqualify the priest from eating such חלה. The wording of Maimonides concerning who may eat it nowadays is subject to argument, Raavad certainly has a different version regarding parts of it. At any rate, seeing that these types of ritual impurity once contracted cannot easily be removed, and furthermore the חלה if containing water or certain other liquids is almost certainly unclean to start with, only a priest under the age of nine, before he is subject to seminal discharge may be permitted to actually eat it under strictly supervised conditions. There is therefore no absolute need to burn the חלה taken in the diaspora.
    A kabbalistic approach: The commandment to set aside חלה, which is the only commandment applicable to the dough, is an allusion to the כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept “Israel.” Of this spiritualised version of the Jewish people Solomon wrote in Song of Songs 6,9: “unique is she My constant dove.” Israel, i.e. the spiritual concept known as כנסת ישראל, represents the world’s tithe and heave-offering to the Lord. We know this as Israel is described as תרומה, “heave-offering”  חלה תרימו תרומה. [the words תרימו תרומה already appeared at the end of the previous verse so that in our verse it must refer to a different subject, not the dough, but the people of Israel. Ed.] The כסת ישראל itself is “distilled” from the emanation חכמה which is also known as ראשית, as it is the “first” of the emanations [below כתר which is in a different category completely being the connecting link to the עולם האצילות, Ed.]. We had explained already in Genesis that the words בראשית ברא אלוקים are to be understood as “using the emanation ראשית (חכמה), G’d created etc.” When you reflect on his concept you will realise why this commandment could not apply (as a Biblical commandment) except in the Holy Land, the residence of the Shechinah in the Holy Temple. This was something that could occur only when the whole Jewish people had come to that land (compare Ketuvot 25). Perhaps the fact that the verse in question comprises 10 words is a further allusion to the ten emanations.
    
    15,25. והם הביאו את קרבנם אשה לה' וחטאתם לפני ה', “and they have brought their offering to the Lord, and their sin-offering before the Lord.” Nachmanides writes that the words: “before the Lord,” refer to the celestial court, as these words had not really been necessary. The fact is that sins are expiated both by the attribute of Mercy, i.e. Hashem, as well as by the attribute of Justice. This has been spelled out in greater detail in connection with the sin of idolatry, i.e. that the forgiveness of both attributes is required to wipe out this sin. The word ונסלח appears both in verse 25 as well as in verse 26 although the subject is the same sin. This proves that forgiveness is required both from the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. The reason that in verse 28 the Torah makes special mention of G’d forgiving the proselyte is that proselytes, who used to be idol-worshipers, are more prone to commit an act which in Jewish law is considered as idol worship, than are natural born Jews. The repeated emphasis that the sin had been an unintentional one, i.e. שגגה, is the Torah’s way of justifying that forgiveness for this cardinal sin is indeed appropriate after the sinner or sinners have brought the appropriate offerings as outlined in our passage.
    
    15,31. כי דבר ה' בזה, “for he scorned the word of the Lord.”  The entire Torah is included in the description “the word of the Lord.” When someone deliberately commits an act of idolatry he has therefore shown contempt for the entire Torah.
    It is also possible to interpret the words את דבר ה' בזה as a reference to the first of the Ten Commandments. The idolater violates the concept of the divinity of the Lord, shows his contempt by what he did. The words ואת מצותו הפר, “and he violated His commandment,” refer to the second of the Ten Commandments, the warning not to have or to serve any other deities besides the Lord.
    A Midrashic approach: the words “he has shown contempt for the word of the Lord” refer to the heretics who deliberately pervert the meaning of parts of the written Torah (Sifri 112). The sages taught as as a corollary of this verse that the scholar who teaches Torah is considered as “the word of the Lord,” seeing he is the instrument by means of which the word of the Lord becomes known amongst the public (compare Daniel 12,3: ”and the knowledgeable will be radiant like the bright expanse of the sky, and those who lead many to righteousness will be like stars forever and ever”). Psalms 103,20 has a similar meaning when the psalmist says: “mighty creatures do His bidding.” The person who perverts the words of Torah, on the other hand, is the educated heretic, generally known as “Apikoret.”
    
    15,32. ויהיו בני ישראל במדבר, “while the children of Israel were in the desert, etc.” we already know that the episode of the spies, as well as the uprising of Korach and the incident of the person who gathered kindling on the Sabbath occurred in the desert. Why then did the Torah have to preface this paragraph with he words: “the children of Israel were in the desert?” According to the plain meaning of the text these words could be meant to underline the seriousness of the sin of the person who had gathered this kindling. While the people were in the desert they experienced miracles daily, such as the descent of the manna, the protective layer of cloud, etc., miracles which testified to the fact that G’d had preceded the world in time and therefore was able to ignore the laws of nature. This man, in defiance of such knowledge violated the Sabbath which is meant to testify to our belief in G’d’s being eternal, predating the existence of any physical universe.
    Another way of explaining the words: “the children of Israel were in the desert,” could be that seeing that G’d had decreed that the people would rermain in the desert for a long time and there they would die and perish, the Torah came to inform us that amongst the people (even the elite, i.e. “Children of Israel”) there were some who violated such basic commandments as the Sabbath, Zititzit, etc., so that even without the sin of the spies G’d might have decreed death in the desert for many of them. The reason such paragraphs are recorded in the Torah one after the other is to draw our attention to the reciprocal responsibility one Israelite has for the observance of G’d’s commandments by his fellow Israelite (compare Sanhedrin 27). If, nonetheless, Israelites committed such sins publicly this points to a failure of the principle of reciprocal responsibility at that time.
    It is also possible to explain  that in view of the Torah having written earlier (14,25) that the Canaanite and the Amalekite  dwelled in the “valley,” ready to set an ambush against the Israelites should they attempt to invade their lands, that this had prompted G’d to decree: “tomorrow you will turn and travel in the direction of the desert direction see of Reeds,” that the Israelites obeyed this instruction and remained in the desert. While engaged in obeying the command of the Lord the incident with the person collecting kindling on the Sabbath occurred. This was an illustration of one sin leading to another, i.e. if they had not had to remain in the desert due to the sin of the spies, this sin would not have occurred.
    Still another possibility of explaining the words ויהיו בני ישראל במדבר, a paragraph which is attached to the sin of committing idolatry, is that seeing that sin is first described as having occurred unwittingly, בשגגה, by the public at large, עדת ישראל, the next example was the same sin committed intentionally, i.e. ביד רמה. These were abstract examples of the very real examples of the sin of the golden calf and the sin of the spies. One starts committing idoltary unintentionally only to later on commit the same sin knowingly. The wording of the Torah in this connection is somewhat strange. When the Israelites made the golden calf they set out by simply wanting to replace the absent leader Moses, i.e. “make for us an authority to walk before us seeing that the man Moses we do not know what happened to him” (Exodus 32,1). After the calf emerged, suddenly they said: ‘these are your gods O Israel who have taken you out of Egypt,” and they prostrated themselves before the golden calf and offered sacrifices to it (Exodus 32,8), i.e. now the sin had become a knowing form of idol worship. In spite of this their sin was forgiven as they repented. The penalty prescribed for idolatry, i.e. extermination of that person from his people applies when no remorse has been demonstrated, etc. In our instance the Torah describes that as a result of lack of remorse the people had been required to remain in the desert, a fact which was immediately followed by at least one individual demonstrably violating the laws of the Sabbath thus demonstrating the truth of the saying that once one sin has been committed it is not a big step to commit another sin, in this instance a sin by an individual. 
    The Torah may have used to teach us by means of this example that if one travels in the desert far from civilisation (and does not know the day of the week) one is still obligated to observe the Sabbath. The way to do this is to count six days for himself and to observe the seventh day as Sabbath (Shabbat 69). The underlying reason for this is that during the six days of creation each of the respective emanations which were involved in assisting in the creation of the specific phenomena created on that day observed a rest at the end of their respective activity. When the Sabbath came and contributed its specific activity, i.e. מנוחה, this contributed a sense of pleasure and contentment to all the emanations and they all desisted from their respective activities.
    Even though the Israelites in the desert certainly kept track of the calendar and the days of the week, and there could not be a question of any error in their calculations, the Torah hints that if someone who does not know the day of the week because he is in the desert and he deliberately fails to set aside the seventh day in his personal calendar as the Sabbath, he is guilty of the death penalty no less than if he had been aware of the correct date.
    A Midrashic approach based in Shabbat 96: the man in question was Tzelofchod son of Chefer. The sages derive this from the fact that both the word: “in the desert” here and the word “in the desert” which we find as describing the location of Tzelofchod’s sin in Numbers 27,3 were really superfluous. The Torah wrote them to let us know who the מקשש עצים was.
    
    15,33. ויקריבו אותו, “they brought him (to Moses).” As soon as the Sabbath had ended.
   המוצאים אותו, “the people who had found him (collecting the kindling).” By rights the Torah should have written: אשר מצאו אותו, the ones who had found him (past tense) seeing that they did not find him now. The Torah chose the present tense to inform us that this man had continued to collect the kindling in spite of having been warned of the impending penalty if he would not stop (compare Sifri 113).
    It is worth noting that the word אותו, “him,” occurs  no fewer than six times in this short paragraph. This appears unnecessary as the Torah could have appended the suffix הו in most of these instances saving several letters. When you compare the Torah’s report about the blasphemer at the end of Parshat Emor (Leviticus 24,11-23) you will note that the Torah did make use of the suffix after the first time the man was mentioned. Another unusual feature of this paragraph is the description of the sinner as מקושש עצים, when we would have expected to read מלקט עצים בשבת, “someone collecting wood on the Sabbath.” The expression מקושש is reserved for matters connected with hay and straw. Examples are Exodus 5,7 and 5,12. On the other hand, the expression לקט is appropriate for the collecting of wood as we know from Jeremiah 7,18. There is, however, a reason why the Torah chose the expression מקושש. It is well known that the earth has six extremities. They were created with the power of G’d which resides within six seals, each seal being applied to a different one of these extremities [ boundaries, i.e. terrestrial earth is not an expanding part of the universe. Ed.] This is alluded to in Exodus 31,13 כי אות היא ביני וביניכם, “for it is a “sign,” i.e. ”seal” between Me and you” (part of the mystique of the Sabbath). The person gathering the kindling denied the validity of this covenant by what he did. This is why the letters שש (six) are part of the description the Torah chose to report his sin. He had turned something sacred into something profane by denying the significance of sealing the six extremities of the earth. The word could be read as מקו ששה, “from the sixth line”. By violating the concept of the six lines (leading to the six extremities), he made it impossible to perceive of the Sabbath as the seventh line specifically aimed at the Jewish people. This seventh “line” may be perceived as the Holy Sanctuary, something over and beyond the limitation of terrestrial space.
    
    15,34. כי לו פורש מה יעשה לו, “because it had not been made clear what should be done to him.” This refers to which of the four types of death penalties was applicable to someone committing this type of Sabbath violation. All that was known so far was that deliberate violation of the Sabbath is subject to the death penalty as written in Exodus 31,14. Now G’d clarified: “the man shall be put to death the entire assembly shall pelt him with stones outside the camp” (verse 35).
    
    15,38. דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel, etc.” The commandment to make fringes at the corners of four-cornered (almost all) garments was first mentioned in general terms, and then spelled out in detail. This is why the Torah adds: ואמרת אלהם, “and say to them.” Every single commandment consists of the general commandment plus its details. I have elaborated on this subject at the beginning of the Book of Leviticus (page 1473 our translation).
   ועשו להם ציצית, “they shall make fringes for themselves.” The word ציצית alludes to the four cords, threads, which are to be attached to each corner of the garment and which are suspended from it. We find that Ezekiel speaks of a vision (8,3) in which he  was taken hold of by an angel בציצת ראשי, “by the lock of my head,” i.e. a fringe of his hair. 
    The words: “they shall make for themselves cords,” means that they must not use threads which are already part of the garment, talit, and then make the fringes out of these threads (Menachot 41). Maimonides Hilchot Titzit 1,6-18 explains the procedure and appearance of making and attaching the fringes. One takes four cords, introduces them into a small hole near each of the corners of the garment and bends them double in the middle so that eight cords appear to hang down from that hole. The hole has to be no further than three fingers’ breadth from the edge of the garment. The place where the fringes are attached must be at least far enough from the edge of the garment to enable a knot to be made there the size of the thickness of a thumb. If subsequently, through wear and tear, the width is reduced so that the fringes appear literally at the edge of the garment this does not disqualify them from performing their function. The same holds true if the angles of the garments, the corners, shrink. Initially, the length of the threads used to make the fringes should not be shorter than four finger-widths with the thumb. If, subsequently, enough length remains exposed so that one can construct a loop this is sufficient. If, one of the four threads of the four tzitiyot is totally torn off, however, this renders the garment to which it was attached unfit to wear.
    In the process of attaching the fringes to the respective corner of the garment to which it is being attached the wearer takes one of the four (respectively eight) cords and winds same around the others so that approximately one third of its total length will be so wound. This “wound” part is known as the גדיל. The remaining two thirds of the length of the fringes are left to dangle by themselves, unwound. The part wound around the other threads by one thread three times is known as a חוליא, “vertebra,” and there should not be fewer than seven such vertebrae wound around part of the threads before they are interrupted by a double-knot. When winding more than seven such vertebrae around the other four threads one should not exceed the number 13 per section. The whole procedure symbolises the seven layers of the heavens which are separated by six layers of space between them (Menachot 39), seeing that the colour blue of the one thread resembles the colour of the sea, and the sea in turn resembles and therefore recalls the colour of the sky (heaven) and what this symbolises. (Menachot 43). The idea behind all this is to be remembered favourably in heaven.
    Nachmanides writes that of the number of threads, i.e. 8, seven are white whereas one is techelet, sky-blue, seeing the Torah speaks about פתיל תכלת, a (single) sky-blue thread. The colour itself is a dye derived from the snail known as חלזון, a marine creature whose essential colour is similar to the appearance of the sea and whose blood is black; it is found in the Dead Sea and the wool must be soaked first in lime, in order to bleach it; after that the wool is washed thoroughly until it is absolutely clean. Then it is placed in a pot of boiling water into which the blood of the חלזון has first been poured. Subsequently one adds the wool of which the thread in question is to be dyed in the customary manner of applying dye so that the wool will look like the colour of that snail called חלזון (Maimonides Hilchot Tzizit 1,6).
    A second view holds that six of the eight (resp. 4) threads are white whereas the entire eighth thread is of the ציצית is blue, not only half as it would be according to the first opinion cited (Raavad). According to the view cited first, one takes one of the white threads and winds them around the other threads once, close to the garment itself, leaves it and then takes the blue thread and winds it around the other threads twice. These three “rings” are called aחוליא , vertebra. He leaves a little space by making two knots and repeats the procedure this time winding two rings of blue thread around the other white threads making a knot. The three rings together are called “a vertebra”. The first knot is known as the “upper knot;” the procedure is repeated after allowing for a little space beneath the knot. The second vertebra consists of only blue rings. This procedure is again repeated so that the final vertebra consists of two rings of blue wool and one ring of white wool. The reason for this sequence is that seeing he started with white rings he also concludes the procedure with a white ring. There is an allusion to his procedure in the text when the Torah writes ונתנו על כנף פתיל תכלת, “they shall attach to the edge a blue thread.” Concerning this our sages in Menachot 39 have said the word כנף is not to be understood literally but refers to something resembling the edge, i.e. the first “ring” should be of the same colour as the garment itself. The first part of the visible פתיל should appear as if it were a continuation of the talit, the garment to which it is attached. It follows that only after a ring of white wool has been wound around the eight threads is a ring of blue wool to be wound around it. The reason why the final ring should also be white is the principle of מעלין בקודש, that when engaged in creating levels of sanctity one always proceeds from a lesser degree of sanctity to a higher degree. Seeing that the Torah had intended that that which is attached immediately to the corner of the garment should be white, it follows that the colour white is holier than the colour blue. The geonim have written in this vein in their various comments about this subject.
    Nowadays, seeing we do not have the blue thread, all the threads are made of white wool seeing the principle had already been established that in the absence of blue wool [of the required colour derived from the halachically approved source, Ed.] the absence of this blue thread does not make the whole command-ment of tzitzit redundant (compare Menachot 38 and Maimonides Hilchot tzitzit 1,4). We also have a rule that the absence of white threads when blue threads are available does not invalidate the application of the commandment either. This means in practice that if the visible part of the white threads had torn so that only the colour blue remains visible the garment may still be worn in such a condition (Menachot 38). The reason why the fringes are called tzitzit we already explained, is based on the verse from Ezekiel as the appearance of the fringes is similar to the appearance of the locks of hair on the head. The reason this part is called “white” is simply because we have not been commanded to dye it. Even though we have been taught that the presence of either blue or white is not of the essence, i.e. that the commandment is effective anyway, this does not mean that we are dealing here with two separate commandments [as in the case of the phylacteries where we recite separate benedictions over each phylactery, Ed.] The reason the “branch” i.e. the fringes are referred to as “white,” is because there is no instruction to dye them. If someone dons a garment which contains either white, blue or both of these colours he has fulfilled a single commandment seeing the Torah wrote: “they shall put on (each) fringe of the corner a blue thread whereupon these will become for you fringes” (verses 38,39). This teaches that both colours combine to make one commandment.
    We have a Baraitha (Menachot 43) in which Rabbi Meir is quoted as saying that if someone fails to incorporate white threads in the tzitzit he is subject to a harsher punishment than if he merely fails to incorporate the colour techelet, sky-blue. The matter can best be explained by a parable. A king told his servants to bring him two seals, seeing that in those days every slave had two stamps on him to show who he belonged to in the event he would be sold. He told one of his servants to bring him a seal made of gold whereas he told the other to bring him a seal made of clay. Both servants failed to carry out their respective tasks. Whom would the king punish more harshly? Obviously, the servant who had failed to produce a seal made of clay would be in line for harsher punishment as it is easy to find or produce a seal made of clay whereas it is much more difficult and expensive to produce a seal made of gold. For the same reason, if someone fails to incorporate white threads in the fringes this is a greater degree of negligence than if he fails to incorporate the blue thread seeing that white threads are in abundant supply.
    Nowadays, when we use only white threads for making the fringes one takes one of the eight threads and winds them around the others for a total length of approximately the first third of the protruding length. The remaining two thirds of the length are left to hang freely. If he wants to perform the system of making the vertebrae we described earlier this is perfectly admissible. If he does not want to make these vertebrae he is at liberty to merely wind the one thread around the others without making this division by making knots after each vertebra. The main thing is that the upper third of the fringes should have the eighth thread wound around it (Maimonides Hilchot Tzitzit 1,9). A similar principle is applied when affixing the מזוזה to the door post of our houses and rooms, i.e. the mezuzah is to be attached within the top third of the door post.
    The reason that we make five knots when attaching the tzitzit to the talit is that we have been taught that the fulfillment of this commandment is equivalent to all the 613 commandments of the Torah. The word ציצית has a numerical value of 600. When you add the eight threads and the five knots you have the number 613, an allusion to all the commandments of the Torah. This is the mystical dimension of (15,39) “when you see it (the fringe) you will remember all the commandments of the Torah and remember to perform them, etc.”
    Do not object that the word ציצת appears three times in this passage spelled without the letter י before the letter ת, so that the numerical value of the word is only 590 and not 600. The letter ל in the word לציצת in verse 38 makes up for the missing thirty through the absence of three times the letter י, so that the combined numerical value of each word ציצת, לציצת, ציצת is 1800, which divided by three still amounts to 600. The reason the word has been mentioned three times in our paragraph is to serve as an allusion that the statement that a single commandment is equivalent to all the 613 commandments is applicable to a total of three such commandments, i.e. he commandment of tzitzit, the commandment of observing the Sabbath, and the commandment not to engage in idolatry (compare Chulin 5).
    Rashi (end of verse 41) writes that the eight threads of the tzitzit are an allusion to the eight days which elapsed between the day of the Exodus and the singing of the song of thanksgiving after the Israelites had crossed the Sea of Reeds and the Egyptians had been drowned in it. We all know that this song is read from the Torah on the seventh day of Passover, not on the eighth day. How then are we to understand Rashi’s comment? The correct interpretation of Rashi’s words i.e. משיצאו ממצרים, when the departed from Egypt, is from the time that He (G’d) gave them permission to leave the country, i.e. on the evening of the fourteenth (see Rashi Berachot 9). The 14th day of Nissan, the day on which the Passover was slaughtered was part of the eight days Rashi refers to seeing that the Passover was קדשים, “sacrificial meat, and we have a rule that when it comes to anything connected with the sacrificial meat the night follows the day, i.e. the night from the 14th of Nissan to the fifteenth is still considered a part of the preceding day, i.e. the 14th of Nissan. This is based on Leviticus 7,15: “on the (same) day he shall consume it, he shall not leave over from it until the morning,” i.e. until the following morning is part of the same day. If the Israelites crossed the Sea of Reeds on the 21st of Nissan his was the eighth’s day after the Passover. 
    A Midrashic approach to our verse: the word ציצית is related to “seeing.” The root appears in that sense in Song of Songs 3,9 מציץ מן החרכים, “looking through the shutters.” When someone wears tzitzit he must take care not to commit any sins as he is under observation by G’d from the celestial throne of glory, a throne which resembles the colour of the blue thread on the tzitzit.
    The sages call a garment fitted with tzitzit a טלית, talit, a word denoting something superior, exalted; we find the word used in that sense in Daniel 7,4 ונטילת מן ארעא, “and it was removed (elevated) from earth,” This is an allusion to G’d who is exalted above all, and we have been commanded to drape ourselves in a talit based on an interpretation of Exodus 34,6, “the Lord passed in front of him (Moses).” If we did not have a specific verse in scripture to this effect it would have been presumptuous for any human being even to write such a line. At any rate, the meaning of the verse is that G’d wrapped Himself in a talit, just like the cantor in the synagogue, and showed Moses what He wanted to show him at Mount Sinai, telling him that whenever Israel is guilty of a sin, he should drape the talit over himself as he had seen G’d do, and then his prayers would result in G’d forgiving them. The entire thrust of the passage in Exodus 34 is to teach the Israelites how to pray and entreat G’d in order for their entreaties to be effective. They are to drape the talit (with the tzitzit) around themselves and invoke the attributes of the Lord relevant to the sin committed for which they seek forgiveness. When the sages spoke about draping the talit over oneself they referred to a white talit, seeing that white is the symbol of forgiveness. This is why the prophet Isaiah 1,18 said: “if your sins are as red as certain types of red wool, they will become white as snow (as a result of your repentance). Just as the colour red is a symbol of sin so white is a symbol of forgiveness. When man drapes the white talit over himself this is a pointer to G’d that He should cover His creatures in the white of His pardon and forgiveness. The first time G’d did this is recorded in Genesis 3,21: “The Lord made tunics made of leather for Adam and his wife and clothed them in it.” It is also a reminder that in the future G’d will resurrect the dead and dress them in garments appropriate for them. This is the mystical dimension of Job 38,14: “it changes like clay under the seal till its hues are fixed like those of a garment.” Seeing that this commandment is an allusion to the resurrection of our bodies, it is one which envelopes our body seeing the tzitzit are threads hanging from a talit similar to the locks of hair hanging from the head. This is the meaning of Ezekiel 8,3 which we discussed before. The holes made near the corners of the talit through which the threads of the tzizit are introduced symbolise the eyes, whereas the five knots symbolise the five senses man possesses. The eight strings represent the eight days which elapse until the male baby is circumcised. This is why the sages (Tanchuma Lech Lecha 20) have said that anyone who has not been circumcised will not take part in the resurrection of the dead. You will find five knots at each of the corners of the talit making a total of 20 such knots. This number corresponds to the combined number of fingers and toes, i.e. all these details symbolise man’s entire body.
    The reason that the upper third of each bundle of tzitzit is wound whereas the lower two thirds remain hanging freely is to hint that although at the present time the Jewish people are scattered throughout the surface of the globe, i.e. are in exile,  (the principal nations harbouring our exiles being Ishmael and Edom (Esau), and therefore the Israelites are at the bottom of the totem pole (nowadays), when the redemption comes we will occupy our true place at the top of the totem pole, i.e. the upper third of the tzizit, bound together), fulfilling the promise of Deut. 26,19: “and to place you at the top among the nations of the earth.” This idea has been spelled out by Zecharyah 13,8: “throughout the land, -declares the Lord- two thirds shall perish, shall die, and one third of it shall survive.” Elaborating on this verse Bamidbar Rabbah 15,11 states that the third which will survive the events described by the prophet are the Jewish people. The Midrash bases this on Isaiah 19,24: “In that day, Israel shall be a third (partner with Egypt and Assyria) as a blessing on earth.”
    Another observation by the sages of the Midrash (Shabbat 32): anyone who observes the commandment of wearing tzitzit will merit to be attended to by 2800 servants. They derive this from Zecharyah 8,23: “In those days ten men from nations of every tongue (70 nations) will take hold- they will take hold of every Jew by a corner of his cloak and say: ‘let us go with you, for we have heard that G’d is with you.’” (seeing that each talit has four corners this means that 2800 men will beg an individual Jew to be his servant.) 
    Anyone who treats the commandment of tzitit with contempt is described in Job 38,13 as subject to the curse: “and seizes the corners  of the earth and shakes the wicked out  of it.”
    A kabbalistic approach to the verse: “they shall make tzitzit for themselves.” This commandment applies to the 32 threads which are an allusion to the כלה, bride, in Song of Songs which is adorned and surrounded by 32 paths of wonderful wisdom. Concerning this “bride” Solomon said in Song of Songs 4,11: “and the fragrance of your robes is like the scent of Lebanon.” It is common knowledge that the word שלמה  in that text is not to be taken at face value but represents a simile for the superior wisdom the wearer was “garbed” in. We have an example of this in Bereshit Rabbah 21,5 where the author explains the words in Daniel 10,5 describing Daniel’s vision of איש לבוש הבדים, “a man dressed in white linen” as a reference to the angel Gavriel. Clearly, the angel wears neither linen [nor gold as mentioned in the latter half of that verse. Ed.] The “clothing” described as worn by the angel is the “wisdom” surrounding his essence. According to the Midrash the function of this covering is similar to the horn-like protective shield worn by certain kinds of locusts which cover their entire bodies. Man needs such protective cover when exposed to radiation, revelation, from celestial sources. The thirty-two threads of the talit’s fringes synbolise this. [The oldest kabbalistic text, the Sefer Yetzirah, attributed to Avraham, already commences with a reference to these thirty-two paths of wisdom. Ed.] Wrapping oneself in a garment equipped with thirty-two tzitziyot symbolises that we wish to possess these thirty-two paths of wonderful wisdom. They are what G’d wraps Himself in and we have been commanded to והלכת בדרכיו, to “walk in His ways,” i.e. to emulate Him to the extent possible (Deut. 28,9).
    The reason this commandment is one which is equivalent to the entire 613 mitzvah-complex is that it is the “headstone” consisting of 613 precious stones (the mitzvot)  and every one of the 32 paths of wisdom is divided into 2, i.e. negative and positive aspects of the mitzvah making a total of 64 each of which consists of elements of the ten emanations making a total of 640. When you deduct the number of letters of the Hebrew alphabet, i.e. 27, you are left with the number 613. This is the mystical dimension of what the Talmud Menachot 43 says that the words וראיתם אותו וזכרתם את מצות ה', “when you see it,” the mitzvah of tzitzit , you will remember all the commandments of the Lord and perform them as a result.” Reflecting on this commandment and its details calls to mind all other commandments. This is what the sage Rabbi Ezriel wrote in the introduction to his commentary on Song of Songs.
    There is an additional  reference to a mystical element of this commandment wherein the Jewish people (when wearing tzitzit) are compared to the chayot supporting the Divine entourage מרכבה, in the celestial regions. You are already aware that all the commandments have been divided into two major groups. One group is purely traditional, no specific purpose or reason having been revealed concerning it The other group consists of commandments which recommend themselves to our intelligence as soon as we examine them and think about them. The former are known as מקובלות, the latter as מושכלות.
    The Kabbalists who have composed the wording of the prayers did so only regarding the commandments known as the מקובלות not regarding the commandments which we defined as  מושכלות. The reason is that the former group of commandments constitute the essence of sanctity. We, the Jewish people, are referred to as a “holy people” because we perform the commandments known as מקובלות, not because of our observing the group of mitzvot known as מושכלות, appealing to our reason. This is also why all the benedictions recited prior to the performance of the מצות מקובלות, are prefaced with the formula “who has sanctified us by means of His commandments, and commanded us to perform such and such a commandment.”
    Intelligent people realise that the performance of those commandments which we understand (or believe we understand) employing physical instruments in order to perform them, all relate to matters of the mind and they symbolise matters subject to our intellect.
    The sages compared a person when he stands before the Lord offering his prayers as similar to the holy chayot. This is one of the reasons the sages insisted that when intoning the principal prayer, the עמידה, a person has to first align his feet so that they are parallel and close together in order for him to appear similar to the holy chayot described in Ezekiel’s vision Ezekiel 1,7 as ורגליהם רגל ישרה, understood by Rashi in Berachot 10 as “their feet appeared to be a single foot.” 
    Let us now discuss this mitzvah during the performance of which the Jew is considered as comparable to the holy chayot. First of all, you should know that there are four such “chayot” who are carriers of the Divine entourage, מרכבה. Actually, the four are in reality one; they looked like four because of the clouds, darkness, and other phenomena surrounding this vision which covered part of them making it appear in the vision as if Ezekiel was confronted with four separate phenomena. The vision was similar to the vision of a tree all of which is a single phenomenon though it appears to be divided into trunk, branches, twigs, leaves, etc. The entire tree, however, has a common root. This is the reason that we read in Ezekiel 1,22: “above the head (singular) of the chayah was an expanse with an awe-inspiring gleam of crystal, etc.” You will note that after the prophet had earlier spoken of four separate chayot, he now refers to them as a single unit.
    Each one of these “four” chayot had four wings, making a total of 16 wings for the four chayot. Each one of these four chayot also had four faces as described in Ezekiel 1,6: “each had four faces.” This makes a total of 16 faces and 16 wings for the four chayot. When you add the total number of  faces and the total number of wings of that vision you have a total of 32 phenomena. Each of these had profound “roots” representing weighty subject matters.
    According to the opinion of Targum Yonathan the number of faces of the chayot were 64 and the combined number of wings were 256. In that case the meaning of the verse is: “each had four faces, i.e. each chayah had four faces and each face had four sides,” i.e. facing in each direction. The “four wings” of which the prophet speaks belonged to each of these 64 facets making a total of 256 wings. An easy way of remembering this are the words of  Daniel 7,9 גלגלוהי נור דליק, “its wheels blazing flames.” When the Temple was destroyed the number of wings of these chayot were reduced. This resolves an apparent contradiction discussed in Chagigah 13 where it is pointed out that one verse (Isaiah 6,2) describes each of the chayot as having six wings whereas a similar verse in Ezekiel 1,6 describes the chayot as having four wings each. The answer given is that Isaiah prophesied and had visions at a time when the Temple was still standing. This is why the chayot had more wings than when Ezekiel prophesied at a time when the Temple had already been destroyed.  The Talmud discusses whose wings were reduced in number, and Rav Chananel  quoting Rav said that the ones who used to recite the songs of praise before the Almighty were the ones who had the number of their wings reduced. This is why the prophet writes in Ezekiel 1,6: “their legs were a straight leg,” suggesting that what had been several had been reduced to one.” In other words, the wings which in Isaiah’s vision had concealed the legs now were absent so that the legs were exposed. This is why in Isaiah 6,1 the prophet reports that with two of the wings the chayah (seraph) would fly whereas one chayah would call to the other: “Holy, Holy Holy, the Lord of Hosts, His presence fills the whole earth,” i.e. the text of the song. We read in Proverbs 23,5: “as soon as you focus on it is gone, riches grow wings, fly away heavenward like an angel.” The latter verse in Proverbs was understood by Rabbi Chananel as an allusion to the disappearance of the other two wings. The other sages, on the other hand, argue: “how would the prophet have known that in Isaiah’s vision these chayot had six wings? At that time their feet were not exposed due to the lower two of the six wings having covered them.” Thus far the Talmud.
    The total number of wings which the chayot were deprived of was eight, i.e. two were taken from each. According to the view of the other sages these eight wings were the ones which covered the feet of the chayot. This was sufficient to remind G’d of the sin of the golden calf, i.e. the chayot remained with 248 wings instead of the original 256, to intone the song corresponding to their 248 wings. We humans [counterparts of the angels] use the remaining 248 organs [our equivalent to the angels’ wings] to serve the Lord with each one to perform one of the 248 positive commandments. We compensate for the missing eight “organs” (wings) by circumcising our males on the eighth day after birth. It is this mitzvah which protects us throughout the generations.
    In order to appreciate all this you have to remember that when G’d created Man He intended for our species to fulfill the role on earth which the chayot fulfill in heaven. Man is basically a single body, having branches, i.e. arms and legs, fingers and toes  like the tree we described earlier. When one separates from this unit four specific organs which are to serve as the carrier of G’d’s entourage, מרכבה, so that as a result he becomes similar in function to the chayot in the celestial spheres, the presence of the Shechinah will come to rest on these four organs. They are: “the brain, the heart, covenant with the tongue [verbal promise to obey the commandments when the Israelites said: “we will do and learn” Ed.] and the organ on which the covenant Brit Milah has been performed. This is the reason that when we drape the talit around ourselves the four corners of the talit envelop the part of us corresponding to that of the chayah. This is the mystical dimension of Deut. 22,12: “you shall make tassels on the four corners of the garment with which you cover yourself.” This also explains the deeper meaning of the word כנף, כנפים, “wing or wings” which the Torah uses to describe the corners [instead of the usual word קרן, קרנות which is used to describe the corners of the Altar. Ed.] In order to remind us of the four faces and four wings of the chayot whose function in the heaven we are to duplicate on earth, our tradition (halachah) decided on the number of these tassels, i.e. eight for each corner to make a total of 32.
    Just as the “body” of the chayah was divided in the prophet’s vision into four separate parts, “faces,” whose task it is to conceal certain parts of the Shechinah, the attribute of כבוד, so the relevant part of the talit has to have white tassels to symbolise the chayot and a blue tassel to remind us of our counterparts in the celestial region which is perceived as blue. Nonetheless, the white fringes (tassels) are the more important ones as our sages taught in Menachot 39: “one begins with the white threads and one concludes the making of the tzitzit with the white threads” (the rings we wind around the upper third). The mystical dimension of this procedure parallels that of the blowing of the sound of the teruah, the broken sound of the shofar, which is also introduced by our first blowing an unbroken sound tekiah as well as our concluding with the same unbroken sound tekiah.
    The relationship of the white tassels and the blue tassel are somewhat similar to the relationship of the Lulav, palm frond, to that of the Etrog, citron. 
     Just as the absence of the Etrog or the Lulav invalidates the performance of the mitzvah, the whole procedure of the “four species,” so (when it is available) the absence of the blue thread or the white threads invalidates the whole commandment of tzitzit, i.e. one cannot pronounce a benediction over the parts of the mitzvah which is being put to use. Nowadays, when we do not have or do not know the correct colour of the techelet, the blue to be used, this does not invalidate the performance of the mitzvah of tzitzit and we recite the appropriate benediction as long as white tassels are available as these are the principal part of the commandment. The “blue thread” of the tassels is to the commandment of ציצית what the אתרג which is known as הדר, beautiful, represents for the mitzvah of the four species, generally known as לולב.
    There is an interesting comment by Midrash Tehillim on Psalms 90,16 on the words והדרך על בניהם, “and Your glory by their children.” [normally, the Midrash understands this verse as G’d showing the patriarchs that we, their children, observe His commandments something for which they are entitled to feel some satisfaction. Ed.] The Midrash in question understands the word והדרך, “and Your glory (beauty)” as a reference to the blue thread of the tzitzit we, His “children” are to wrap ourselves in order to emulate Him. Furthermore, the sages taught in Menachot 42 that whereas there is no maximum length for these tassels there is a minimum length. The same applies for the Lulav for which the sages did not set a maximum size (as opposed to the Etrog) although they stipulated a minimum size.
    When our sages in Berachot 12 interpreted the words ולא תתורו אחרי לבבכם in our passage as meaning: “you shall not follow the inclination of your hearts resulting in heresy,” they understood this as a danger inherent in the distinction between the white and the blue threads of the tzitziyot which could lead a person to believe that the two colours represent two separate divine domains, a division of power between two deities. The manner in which the white and the blue threads of the tzitzit are to be joined together is meant to forestall such thinking. I would add to this that if you will look closely at Proverbs 24,21: “fear the Lord my son and the king,” Solomon made it plain that he referred to different attributes of one and the same G’d. We can understand the white tzitzit as symbolising the attribute of Hashem, the attribute of Mercy, whereas the blue thread symbolises the attribute of G’d as “king,” i.e. as the attribute of Justice. This latter attribute is the function of the emanations. In order for it to be clear that we are to emphasise the basic unity of these attributes, Solomon concludes the verse we quoted with ”do not associate with those who keep changing,” in other words: “do not think in your hearts that there is a divided authority, but be certain that there is total unity even though G’d may manifest Himself with different facets.” This is the message in our verse: “do not follow the urges of your heart.” Following the urges of your heart is nothing but a form of heresy. When we approach the verses from this vantage point we can understand the word אותו in  וראיתם אותו, as derived from the word אות, “a sign, a symbol,” [not a pronoun but a noun, Ed.] It is as if the Torah had written that when you look at the tzitzit you are looking at G’d’s “seal,” the symbol of His existence .
    You will find this thought spelled out in the Sefer Habahir item 93, where the author writes: “what is the reason for the blue-coloured thread on the tzitzit?” A king and his daughter had a number of servants and they (the servants) wanted to make a trip abroad. Seeing they were afraid the king would be angry at them, the king gave them his seal indicating his approval of their plans. They were still afraid that the king’s daughter would disapprove of their plans; the daughter gave them a seal of approval of her own to put their minds at ease. Having obtained seals of approval by both their masters the servants were at ease when they began their journey. The seals in question were the phylacteries and the tzitzit. Between them the person equipped with them announces that he is under G’d’s protection.
    Midrash Tanchuma Shelach 15 makes the following comment on the words: “they shall make tzitzit for themselves.” This is a practical  demonstration of what is written in Isaiah 42,21: “the Lord desires His servant’s vindication that he may magnify and glorify His teaching.” G’d gave the Torah to the Jewish people in order to secure for them a permanent place in the hereafter. This is why He made sure that no part of an Israelite’s daily activities is not inextricably involved with performing His commandments. When the farmer goes out to plough his field, G’d had already commanded him not to use two mismatched animals in drawing the ploughshare (Deut. 22,10). As soon as this farmer proceeds to scatter his seed he encounters the injunction not to mix alien seed when planting a vineyard (Deut. 22,9). When it is time to harvest some of his crop, the Torah preceded this activity by warning the farmer not to go back to pick up certain minor parts of the harvest he had left behind but to leave them for the poor (Deut. 24,19). When it comes to winnowing the grain harvest, the Torah first reminds the farmer to allocate the respective tithes before doing this. Before kneading the dough in preparation for baking bread, the woman doing so must set aside the first part of the dough for making loaves for G’d, i.e. to give them to the priest (Numbers 15,20). Before and after eating the bread, or any food for that matter, the Jew is to recite benedictions reminding him of G’d’s largesse which made it possible for him to have the food (Deut. 8,10). Before shearing the wool of one’s sheep, the Torah directed that the first shearing be given to the priest. When the animal gives birth the firstborn belongs to he priest. When the animal is slaughtered certain parts of it are given to the priest (Deut. 18,3). When one encounters a nest of chicks the mother bird must be sent off before one may take the chicks or eggs (Deut. 22,7 and 9). When one slaughters birds or free-roaming animals their blood must be covered (buried) before the meat may be consumed (Leviticus 17,13). Before making or donning garments to wear one must ensure they do not contain a mixture of wool and linen (Deut. 22,11). When a son is born to a father he must circumcise him and observe a certain period of continence when he cannot cohabit with his wife (Leviticus chapter 12). When planting an orchard, the fruit which has grown during the first three years must neither be eaten nor used by the owner in another manner beneficial to him (Leviticus 19,23). There are restrictions pertaining to burial, construction of the roof on one’s house, prohibitions governing the manner in which one expresses one’s grief over the loss of family members, (no tattoos) etc., etc. The door posts of one’s house must have a parchment with sections of the Torah (called mezuzah) attached to it. In short, there is no facet of our daily lives in which the performance of the commandments does not figure prominently.
    The wearing of the talit with fringes may also be perceived as similar to a man who has fallen overboard and who flounders in the water. What does the captain of the ship do? He throws him a rope or life belt to keep him afloat until he can be brought back to the ship. The talit with its tzitzit attached fulfills a similar role in our lives in which we constantly flounder were it not for the help extended by the Torah, i.e. G’d’s commandments. This is the true meaning of Deut. 4,11 “and you who have cleaved to the Lord your G’d are all of you alive this day.” Thus far Tanchuma. 
    15,39. וראיתם אותו, “when you see it (the tassel).” The Torah refers to the visual impact of the commandment. This line is the source for the halachah that this commandment does not apply at night (as there is then no visual impact). Seeing that the application of this positive commandment is tied to a specific time frame, women are absolved from observing it (Menachot 43).
   וזכרתם את כל מצוות ה' ועשיתם אותם, “you shall remember all of the Lord’s commandments and carry them out.” The visual impact produces memory and the memory triggers the performance of the commandments (Menachot 43). 
   ולא תתורו אחרי לבבכם ואחרי עיניכם, “and you are not to follow your hearts or your  eyes.” The heart and the eye act as “brokers” for the commission of sins. The eye sees, the heart desires, and the body commits the sin. By wearing the talit with its tzitziyot man becomes as if he had seen the throne of G’d’s glory with bis own eyes and the tzitziyot are the symbol reminding him not to chase after pleasures in the terrestrial universe and all that his eyes ask for. The reason that the Torah mentions the heart first although the eye contact with the forbidden object occurs first, is that the heart acts as guide and “leader” for the entire body. The other organs follow the lead of the heart.
    
    15,40. למען תזכרו ועשיתם את כל מצותי, “in order that you will remember and carry out all My commandments.” The Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 2,4, discussing the requirement to recite the קריאת שמע both mornings and evenings, explains that when reciting this verse the letter ז in the word תזכרו has to be drawn out somewhat when enunciated. The reason is to avoid that the word sounds like תשכרו, i.e. “you will secure compensation,” as one should not perform the commandments only in order to receive the reward promised (Avot,1,3). In this connection we may add that dwelling on that letter ז may also bring to mind the Torah which consists of 7 books (when we include the verses in Numbers 10,35-36 which were introduced by the inverted letters נ to show that the Book of Numbers are actually three books, giving us a total of seven Books of Moses). Seeing that the commandment of tzitzit is equal in moral weight to that of all the other commandments combined, such a thought when drawing out the letter ז is quite near at hand.
    Another thought that may surface when we pronounce the letter ז in the word תזכרו as urged to do by the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot is that it conjures up thoughts of the שבת הגדול, the “great” Sabbath. The subject matter of the whole verse then is: “I have commanded you to perform this commandment involving the blue thread here on earth in order that corresponding to your activity on earth you will also remember that in the celestial regions there is an emanation which is part of the emanation הכל  which is also known as the שבת הגדול. The words which follow, i.e.ועשיתם אותם, “and you will perform them,” mean that when you concentrate on these various meanings of the letter ז in the word תזכרו you will in effect be thinking of all the commandments.
    15,41. אני ה' אלו-היכם אשר הוצאתי אתכם מארץ מצרים להיות לכם לאלו-הים, אני ה' אלו-היכם, “I am the Lord your G’d who has taken you out of the land of Egypt in order to become your G’d, I am the Lord your G’d.” Here the Torah reveals that the purpose of the Exodus was in order for Hashem to become our G’d. If that is so, we can look at the Exodus as something which did not only benefit the Jewish people but as something which bestowed similar benefits on G’d Himself. This is what Joshua had in mind when he said (Joshua 7,9) “if they will destroy our name from earth what are You going to do for Your great name?” If G’d does not have a people how could the fact of His kingdom become manifest on earth?
    Our verse commenced with the words: “I am the Lord your G’d,” and it concludes with the very same words. The reason this has been repeated is to remind us that G’d’s status vis-a- vis us in the hereafter will remain the same as it is in our terrestrial world.
    Another approach to the meaning of these words: “I will remain the same G’d and have the same relationship with you which I had after the first Exodus as I will have in the future after the final redemption.” Our verse would then be an assurance of the future redemption at which time the full extent of G’d’s Shechinah would once again become manifest in Jerusalem. This is in contrast to the presence of G’d’s Shechinah during the period of the second Temple when only a very ”weak” form of the Shechinah was manifest as we know from Yuma 21. The evidence of this “weak” Shechinah were the five important ingredients of the Temple which were absent during the entire existence of the second Temple. We have previously pointed to the letter ה in the words וארצה בו ואכבדה, as a clear allusion to the recurrence of these five manifestations of the Shechinah, seeing the prophet Chagai 1,8 did not need to write ואכבדה but could simply have written ואכבד, “I will be glorified.” By writing what he did, the prophet compared the first redemption to the final redemption. This thought is also expressed by Isaiah 11,11 when he writes: “in that day G’d will again apply His hand to redeeming the other part.” The prophet Micah elaborates when he said (Micah 7,15)  “as in the days when you sallied forth from the land of Egypt I will show wondrous deeds.”
   ויקח  קרח
    
    
   שוחר טוב יבקש רצון ודורש רעה תבואנו, בוטח בעשרו הוא יפול וכעלה צדיקים יפרחו. “He who diligently strives for good will find favour; but he who seeks evil, it will come to him. He who relies on his wealth will fall; but the righteous will sprout forth like foliage.” (Proverbs 11,27-28). In these verses Solomon warns man to endeavour to further the interests of his fellow and not to try and cause him any harm; he should do so as he can expect to reap the fruits of his activities, i.e. if he is helpful he will succeed, whereas if he is the reverse he will inevitably fail. Solomon espouses the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, that sooner or later he will be measured by the yardstick he applied to others. He bases himself on Isaiah 3,10: “hail the just man, for he shall fare well, he shall eat the fruit of his works.” Concerning the wicked person the same prophet writes in verse 11 of the same chapter: “woe to the wicked man, for he shall fare ill; as his hands have dealt, so it shall be done to him.”
    The expression שוחר used by Solomon here is a reference to prayer. The word appears in a similar sense in Proverbs 8,17: ומשחרי ימצאונני, “those who seek Me out diligently (in prayer) will find Me.” In our opening verse too Solomon speaks of people who are so concerned with the well being of their fellow that they pray on his behalf. Such people are considered as if concerned with the securing of G’d’s goodwill. This is why our sages said in Baba Kama 92 that if someone prays for G’d to grant a particular request to a third party and he himself is in need of having that same request granted by G’d for his own needs, not only will his prayer concerning the third party be granted but his own unspoken prayer will also be granted. Proof is found in Job 42,10: “The Lord restored Job’s fortunes when he prayed on behalf of his friends, and the Lord gave Job twice what he had before.”
    We learn from this that if someone is the leading member of the congregation and in a unique position he is obligated to offer prayers on behalf of the other members of the community who are less fortunate than he is. If he fails to do so he will punished for this omission as we know from what our sages explained in connection with someone who committed involuntary murder and who must remain in a city of refuge until the death of the High Priest (Numbers 35,25). The Talmud Makkot 11 explained why the length of time such a man has to remain in the city of refuge is tied to the death of the High Priest. The High Priest should have prayed on behalf of the people of his generation that no one should become guilty of killing anyone even unintentionally. Seeing he had failed to do so he is punished in that presumably all the people in cities of refuge will wish for his speedy death so that they may leave that city.
    We find that anyone who fails to offer a prayer which he should have offered is called “a sinner,” as we know from Samuel I 12,23: “far be it from me to become guilty against the Lord by refraining from praying on your behalf.” [G’d had sent lightning, thunder, and rain in the middle of the summer to indicate that He had been displeased with the people’s request to be ruled over by a king. The people became scared at these unusual phenomena at that time of year. Ed.] We find a similar occurrence with David who prayed on behalf of others, their sicknesses, etc., when he said (Psalms 38,5,13) “yet when they were ill my dress was sackcloth, I kept a fast- may what I prayed for happen to me!” He added in Psalms 141,5: “my prayers are still against their evil deeds.” He meant: “while I am still alive I pray on their behalf as they have committed evil deeds.” At any rate from David’s statement that what he prayed for others he should also himself be granted we learn that praying for others has positive results for oneself, i.e. a form of מדה כנגד מדה, that it is appropriate to entreat G’d on behalf of others who need to be cured or otherwise helped. It stands to reason that if one prays that evil befall others that G’d will let such evil befall the petitioner. This is much worse than not praying on behalf of one’s fellow. Not only did one fail to pray on behalf of one’s fellow one even engaged in prayer to G’d to victimise him!
    Most of those who wish evil on others are the ones who rely on their material wealth to protect them against harm. Wealth is the principal reason why one individual lords it over his neighbour who is less affluent. Such people arrogate to themselves the right to revenge themselves for any slight they think has been inflicted upon them. The word הוא in the line בוטח בעשרו הוא יפול, refers to the word בוטח. This is another facet of the principle of מדה כנגד מדה i.e. that the very wealth which someone put his trust in will be the cause of his fall. It is similar to Kohelet 5,12: עושר שמור בעליו לרעתו, “riches hoarded by their owner (lead) to his misfortune.”
    Alternatively, the word הוא in the verse quoted at the opening refers to the word עושר, wealth, meaning that as a result of the fact that the wealthy made his wealth the source of his faith he is punished by losing it. Concerning wealth Solomon also said (Proverbs 23,5) “you see it then it is gone, it grows wings and flies away like an eagle, heavenward.” We also have a verse in Psalms 92,13: “the righteous bloom like a date-palm; they thrive like a cedar in Lebanon.” The speed with which the righteous may be rescued is compared to the blossoming of a development of a leaf, making way for the development of the fruit. What happens to the righteous is the exact reverse of what happens to the wealthy who makes his wealth the object he puts his trust in instead of putting his trust in the Lord. This is the plain meaning of the verses quoted.
    A Midrashic approach to the verses from Proverbs we quoted at the beginning of this introduction to Parshat Korach understands Solomon as referring to Mordechai when he wrote שוחר טוב יבקש רצון. The opposite is true of Haman who is characterised by Solomon as a person who set all his faith in his immense material wealth. Another person who set his faith in his personal wealth was Korach who also wound up losing all his possessions within seconds. The Torah spells out that not only he but his possessions went down into the earth (Numbers 16,32). On the other hand, the people described in the latter half of the verses quoted by Solomon are Moses and Aaron who represent the righteous “who will sprout forth like foliage.” Of Aaron we are told specifically that his staff sprouted, representing the house of Levi (Numbers 17,23).
    There were two outstandingly wealthy men in the world, one A Jew the other a Gentile. They were Korach and Haman respectively. Both listened to their wives and as a result they came to an evil end. Haman had listened to his wife’s advice to build a gallows and ask the King’s permission to hang Mordechai from it (Esther 5,14). As a result of accepting his wife’s advice he himself was hung on that gallows. Korach had also listened to the advice of his wife and as a result lost his life and all his wealth. His wife had asked him what new halachah he had heard from Moses on a certain day. He told her that Moses had expounded on that day on the laws of techelet for the tzitzit. When his wife wanted to know details, Korach explained to her that Moses had said that they had been commanded by G’d to put the tzitziyot on the four corners of their garments and that one of the threads should be blue wool, seeing that it is written in the Torah: “they shall put on the tzitzit a thread of blue wool.” Korach’s wife responded that surely Moses was making fun of them. She would make him a talit which was all blue wool. She proceeded to do so. Thereupon most of the elders from the tribe of Reuven, a total of 250 men all dressed up in such a talit completely made of blue wool and came to Moses asking if such a talit required tzitziyot. This is the meaning of:
    
    16,1. ויקח קרח בן יצהר בן קהת בן לוי, “Korach son of Yitzhar, son of Kehat took, etc.” The question arises here “what was it that Korach took?” Answer: he took his talit, the one made of all blue wool- and presented it to Moses asking if such a talit required tzitziyot. This is the reason that this paragraph follows immediately after the paragraph detailing laws about tzitzit.
    According to the plain meaning of the text, the words “Korach took” mean that he persisted in his quarrel with Moses and Aaron. This is also the view of Onkelos who translates the word ויקח as ואתפליג, “he separated from the assembly.”
    Ibn Ezra understands the verse as abbreviated and suggests that the noun in that verse, i.e. “men” is missing. The complete verse would be “Korach took men.” Alternatively, it may refer specifically to three men mentioned by name, i.e. Datan, Aviram, and On.
    In that event the letter ו at the beginning of the word ודתן would be superfluous as he had the same reason as Korach. It is more likely that he was prompted by a different reason hinted at by the letter ו.
    Datan, Aviram, as well as On whom Korach took with him in his confrontation with Moses supported him in his quarrel as they viewed the fact that the birthright had been transferred from their tribe [Reuven, Yaakov’s oldest son] to Joseph as a grave injustice and insult to their tribe. They suspected Moses of having done this in order to justify the elevation of Joshua who was from the tribe of Joseph (Ephrayim) as his personal valet. The fact that Ephrayim had a flag of its own, i.e. that the tribe of Joseph possessed two flags enraged them. Both On as well as the two hundred and fifty men who joined Korach were all firstborn sons who had an axe to grind considering themselves deprived of the honour due to them from birth. Seeing that in the time before the Levites had been appointed the firstborn had performed the priestly functions all these people felt keenly disadvantaged. Korach himself was also a firstborn as we know from Exodus 6,21.
    Korach’s personal grievance was twofold. 1) He was “dressed” in jealousy, a negative character trait, a disease for which there is no known therapy. 2) He misinterpreted the meaning of the vision in which he had foreseen that his descendants would achieve outstanding greatness. Concerning the first reason, i.e. his jealousy,  this is a very vicious disease. One starts by scheming until one achieves whatever it is that his fellow owns and he does not. Even if one achieves this goal and therefore should cease to be jealous, one has in the meantime become addicted to the craving for personal honour, a desire to lord it over others, a craving for power, until eventually all this becomes similar to עבודה זרה, a form of idolatry. On the other hand, if the jealous person fails in his attempt to equal the one he is jealous of, his whole life is one of frustration and it may, G’d forbid, result in his murdering the object of his jealousy. Solomon already referred to this phenomenon in Proverbs 14,30 when he said: “envy is like rottenness of the bones.” Also Eliphaz is quoted in Job  5,2 as saying: ”jealousy kills the fool.” If someone allows himself to be seduced by jealousy it will eventually kill him. Our sages in Avot 4,28 have said that the three traits “jealousy, greed, and the thirst for personal honour” contribute to man’s premature demise.”
    When one displays jealousy of one’s fellow one will eventually hate him and possibly become guilty of murder. The Torah describes this graphically in Deut. 19,11: “if someone hates his fellow, sets an ambush for him, and rises up and slays him.” Concerning such saddening phenomena Solomon commented in Kohelet 4,4: וראיתי אני את כל עמל ואת כל כשרון המעשה כי היא קנאת איש מרעהו, גם זה הבל ורעות רוח, “I have also noted that all labour and skillful enterprise come from men’s envy of each other- another futility and pursuit of the wind.” When Solomon speaks of עמל, labour, he refers to the material possessions, honour, and the other exterior paraphernalia denoting personal power. When he speaks of כל כשרון המעשה, he refers to Torah, repentance, and good deeds.” The word “Hevel” is a reference to Kayin’s brother who had observed his older brother offer a sacrifice and wanted to outdo him as he was jealous of his having preceded him with a good deed. He therefore emulated his father Adam and offered a living creature (as opposed to Kayin who had only offered vegetable matter. compare Tanchuma Bereshit 9 and Bereshit Rabbah 22,15) [this is based on the Torah reporting Kayin as being the first of the brothers to offer the sacrifice, Genesis 4,4. It helps explain why G’d tolerated Hevel being murdered. Ed.] The jealousy led to Kayin and Hevel developing mutual hatred until Kayin murdered his brother. This character trait contains within it the potential destruction of the universe.
    The trait of jealousy is not limited to human beings. Even the ministering angels are reported as having been jealous of Adam until they succeeded in seducing him into sinning and he was forced to exchange the “garments” of intelligence for garments made of inferior materials (Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 13). The word בגד “garment,” is related to בגד, “betray.” In other words man’s clothing may betray him. Adam’s superior “garments” were the cause of the angels’ jealousy. The result of this was that the Shechinah departed from him and therefore from mankind on earth. 
    Korach’s jealousy also resulted in his being expelled from the universe. The immediate focus of Korach’s jealousy and that of his sympathizers was the manner in which Israelites had been appointed to high office. He saw in this high-handed action by Moses, nepotism of  a kind. When Moses, in answering Korach’s accusations, says כי לא מלבי, “I did not do these things arbitrarily” (verse 25), it is clear that this was his response to Korach’s accusation. Korach and company had even suggested that the appointment of all the Levites to their position and their replacing the function of the firstborn had only been a device by Moses to elevate members of his own tribe to a higher social status. If even Levites also took part in that uprising it was because they perceived that Aaron and his family, Moses’ closest relatives, had been given the highest rank of all. Korach also believed that Moses had appointed Elitzafan ben Uzziel as prince of the tribe of Levi seeing that Uzziel had been one of Moses’ uncles, though the most junior in age (Numbers 3,19). Korach was particularly irked by the fact that he felt he had been passed over in the sharing out of honours though he was senior to Uzziel, being a son of Yitzhar who was older than Uzziel. In his mind, Amram, Moses’ father had been the firstborn (an honour), whereas his two sons had taken for themselves the highest positions, King and High Priest. Korach felt that the second of these honours should have been his, seeing that he was the son of Yizhar, who was next in line to Amram. When he found that the next highest honour had been given to Elitzafan, son of the younger Uzziel instead, he started the uprising.
    How did Korach secure support for his demagoguery? He assembled 250 heads of the respective tribal supreme courts, most of them from the tribe of Reuven; he clothed all of them in talitot made completely of blue wool, תכלת; this is the meaning of “Korach took”, i.e. he took his talit and came to Moses wearing it. The other 250 men did the same. They all asked Moses whether such a talit required tzitziyot in order for it to be fit to wear. When Moses said that indeed even a talit made exclusively of blue wool required tzitziyot these people all started laughing, saying: “if a white talit can be converted into an halachically sound garment by means of a single thread of תכלת, blue wool, surely a talit which is completely of blue wool does not need an additional blue thread in order for it to be fit to be worn!” They then asked a similar question pertaining to the affixing of a mezuzah on a house filled with sacred texts. Moses ruled that such a house too is not absolved from the need to have a mezuzah affixed to its entrance. Thereupon the rebels said that if affixing two paragraphs out of a total of the 275 paragraphs contained in the Torah can make such a house fit to live in, surely when the house contains all 275 paragraphs, seeing that there is a Torah scroll inside, this must be enough to absolve such a house from the need to affix another two of these paragraphs to its door post! They concluded that Moses’ ruling was arbitrary and could not represent instructions he had received from G’d. Korach had asked these questions using his intelligence to make Moses look ridiculous.
    There is another nuance contained in these questions, i.e. Korach used the simile of the house full of sacred texts and the talit made completely of blue wool as a parable describing the Jewish people. He meant that seeing the Jewish people are all holy, there was no need to appoint a High Priest who would perform the function for the people which the tzitzit performed for the talit. He compared all the fringes to the religious dignitaries who are part of the oligarchy of the Jewish people. He implied that a nation such as the Jewish nation should be a totally egalitarian society with no special duties or privileges for anyone, especially no hereditary ones.
    Korach’s second mistake, one which led him to vent his jealousy, was that he erred in interpreting the chain of prominent people who would be descended from him. Our sages (Tanchuma Korach 5 and quoted by Rashi), say. He was deceived by foreseeing that the prophet Samuel would be descended from him, a prophet who has been described as equal to Moses and Aaron combined, as we know from Psalms 99,6: “Moses and Aaron among His priests and Samuel among those who call upon His name.” He reasoned that he had to be saved as otherwise this prophecy could not be fulfilled. He also foresaw that 24 groups of Levites would be descended from him all of whom prophets, sons of Heyman (Chronicles I 6,18). Seeing that he foresaw such a brilliant future for his descendants he said to himself: “how can I remain silent and not challenge the present hierarchy?” He thought that his speaking up would ensure that the future he foresaw would materialise. This is why he tried to force the issue. He had heard from Moses that everyone of the present hierarchy would perish and only one would be saved. This is how he interpreted Moses’ words אשר יבחר ה' הוא הקדוש, “the one whom the Lord will choose he is the holy one (verse 9).” He thought there would remain only a single person fit for the description “holy,” i.e. himself.
    Sanhedrin 109 views the words: “Korach the son of Yitzhar, son of Kehat, son of Levi  took,” as a string of allusions that Korach, i.e. “the bald one”  made a bald spot in Israel (by his and his followers’ disappearance). He was the son of Yitzhar, i.e. a son who managed to arouse the anger of the whole world against him publicly, in broad daylight as if it were noon; “the son of Kehat,” i.e. his conduct blunted the teeth of his father and grandfather, i.e. they were ashamed of this offspring; “the son of Levi,” a “son” who wound up” i.e. was escorted, לויה, to purgatory. The same Midrash sees in the name דתן a hint at “violating the דת אל, G’d’s law.” In the name אבירם, this Midrash sees a reference to a refusal to repent, i.e. maintaining a defiant posture, רם, upright. The name און is understood there as a reference to אנינות, someone who sat disconsolate, seeing he had first made common cause with Korach until his wife blocked his way so that he was prevented by miraculous ways, פלא, from becoming enmeshed in that guilt. The word בן ראובן is seen as an allusion to this son “seeing,” ראו, the error of his ways and understanding the abyss he was facing. The expression קריאי מועד is understood as a reference to these people having been called by Moses to assemble at the entrance to the Tabernacle. The words אנשי שם, men of distinction, are a reference to their status prior to the Exodus.
    The twelve princes of the various tribes were part of the total of 250 men Korach had been able to attract to his uprising. Our sages in Bamidbar Rabbah 18 arrive at the same conclusion basing themselves on the use of the words קריאי מועד both here and in Numbers 1,16. Rashi also supports this theory in his commentary on the appointment of the prince of Reuven, Elitzur ben Shede-ur and his colleagues described as נקבו בשמות (Numbers 1,17) “designated by their names,” i.e. the reputation they had acquired for themselves. Even though the Torah did not spell out the fact that all of these tribal leaders joined in Korach’s rebellion the Torah threw out sufficient hints that this was so. It is similar to the owner of a bath house whose well reputed son had stolen a number of valuable trinkets from that bath house. Seeing that the son had enjoyed a fine reputation up until then, the owner did not want to accuse him outright of being a thief, but he threw out hints, such as when asked who the thief was he would describe the thief as possessing certain features which were common knowledge as belonging to his son. Nonetheless, he refused to name the person to whom these features belonged. Similarly here. Although the Torah hinted in various ways that the 12 princes were part of the uprising it did not mention any names other than those of Korach, Datan, and Aviram (and On). This is merely part of the ways of the Torah which have been described as דרכיה דרכי נועם, “its ways are ways of loveliness,” i.e. the Torah avoids embarrassment to people unless absolutely unavoidable as a way of ensuring others do not become guilty of the crimes of the people named.
    
    16,3. כלם קדושים, “they are all holy.” Korach referred to the firstborn Israelites as “holy,” seeing the Torah had written in Exodus 13,2: “sanctify for Me every firstborn.”
   ומדוע תתנשאו, “and why do you try to elevate yourselves?” He meant Moses and Aaron respectively claiming the position of King and High Priest.
    
    16,4. וישמע משה ויפול על פניו, “when Moses heard this he fell on his face.” Aaron was not included, as the Torah reports only that Moses fell on his face, singular. The fact that Aaron is not reported as falling on his face was because the main complaint of Korach was directed at Aaron’s appointment as High Priest. It would have been unbecoming for the modest Aaron to remonstrate by displaying such a reaction. Moses, who felt insulted on behalf of the challenge to his brother, was entitled to react in such a manner. The fact that Moses fell on his face, i.e. “was floored,” may have been the cause for Korach already incurring a punishment for his conduct seeing he had humiliated Moses. This is probably the source from which Rabbi Eliezer learned (Baba Metzia 59) that he could punish Rabbi Gamliel by displaying his humiliation by merely falling on his face, or sitting on the floor and weeping in shame.
    Every intelligent student knows that entreaty (a form of prayer) is addressed to the attribute of Justice and that it represents G’d’s “left hand.” We have an explicit verse distinguishing between different kinds of prayers [and the addresses to which they are directed in the first instance, Ed.] In Psalms 30,9 David says: אליך י-ה-ו-ה אקרא, ואל א-ד-נ-י אתחנן, ”to You O Lord I called, and to my G’d I made appeal.” Another verse describing an entreaty being addressed to the attribute of Justice is found in Deut. 3,24: א-ד-נ-י אלוקים אתה החילות וגו'. At that time Moses’ prayer had been described as a תחנה in the preceding verse. [the concept with which we are all familiar is that G’d employs the right hand to attract, to draw near to Him, whereas when He has occasion to reject, to push away, He uses His left hand, i.e. the “weaker” hand to do so. Ed.] Our sages also make a distinction between prayers offered  and described as לפני ה', and those addressed as לה', the former being addressed to the attribute of Justice.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Korach 4: The words: “Moses fell on his face when he heard this” may be compared to a father whose son has become guilty of a major misdemeanour. He had a friend who would always intercede on behalf of that son and calm down the father’s irritation. When the son had become guilty of serious misconduct for a fourth time, the father’s friend felt that he could no longer defend the son’s conduct in good conscience by offering a variety of excuses. Here too, Moses had reached the stage where after having interceded on behalf of the people after the sin of the golden calf, and again when the people complained about their diet and the advantages of Egypt, and more recently when hey had rejected the Holy Land after hearing the report of the ten spies, Moses had come to the end of his rope as a defender of the people. This is why “he fell down.” 
    
    16,5. בקר וידע ה' את אשר לו, in the morning the Lord will make known who is His own.” Moses meant by this that “whereas you are claiming that we are trying to dominate the congregation of the Lord and that I do things without authority, on my own, tomorrow you will know if this is so; tomorrow you will have evidence that the Levites are His, especially.” He needed to reconcile the apparent contradiction between Numbers 8,14 “the Levites will be Mine” and Exodus 13,2: “sanctify for Me every firstborn.” The additional words ואת הקדוש refer to the occupant of the position of High Priest, i.e. Aaron, seeing that we have a verse in Chronicles I 23,13: “He set apart Aaron to sanctify him to become ‘holy of holies.’”
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Korach 5). The words “in the morning G‘d will make known, etc.” are to be understood as a sort of oath quoting G’d, i.e. “just as the magicians of Egypt if they assembled at the same time in the same location would be unable to change morning to evening, and just as I (G’d) distinguished between light and darkness, so I have set apart Aaron to make him ‘holy of holies.’”
    
    16,6. זאת עשו, קחו לכם מחתות, ”you are to do the following: ‘take fire-pans for yourselves, etc.” Moses said: “seeing that you have accused me of substituting the Levites for the firstborn in order to give high rank to my brother Aaron and his sons, and that I have made the Levites subservient to Aaron, and that I have done all this arbitrarily without instruction from G’d, I will give you a chance to test your claim.” Take fire-pans and offer incense, a procedure which is forbidden to non-priests on pain of death- seeing the Torah wrote: ‘anyone not authorised to do this who approaches sacred precincts will die’ (Numbers 1,51). If you will succeed in your offering and will be saved from the punishment spelled out, I will admit that your claim that G’d does not make any distinction between one tribe and another is correct.”
    This is also what is meant by the Midrash which claims that “Moses gave these people a deadly poison.” The Midrash meant that the advice Moses gave these rebels, i.e. to offer incense contained a deadly ingredient;  if they would accept the challenge they would become guilty of death at the hands of G’d. Had the Midrash meant this literally, the fact that these rebels died would not have demonstrated that it was G’d’s judgment that killed them and the rebels would have had further cause for complaint against Moses.
    You should know that Onkelos translates the word קטורת, incense, in this paragraph as קטרת instead of as קטרת בוסמין as he does elsewhere. [Rabbi Chavell quotes Nachmanides as emending the text in Onkelos as our text does not correspond to what our author writes, and in our text Onkelos writes קטרת בוסמין, Ed.] It appears- based on the changed use of the word קטרת by Onkelos- that he felt that what the 250 men offered on their pans was not the classic mixture of incense described in Exodus chapter 30, but a different mix of incense altogether, the one usually described by the Torah as לבונה, frankincense. Onkelos makes the same distinction when describing the “incense” offered by the sons of Aaron, Nadav and Avihu. Perhaps he did not want to add the word בוסמין whenever the offering of this mixture was unauthorised. At any rate, the opinion of our sages in the Tanchuma is that the mixture in question which the 250 rebels presented in their fire-pans was identical to that regularly offered inside the Tabernacle mornings and evenings. This is the view of Nachmanides.
    
    16,7. רב לכם בני לוי, “you have gone too far, O sons of Levi!” Moses meant that G’d had already given the Levites plenty. In the following verse he spells out precisely what it was that G’d had given the Levites. It is worth noting that in the entire paragraph Moses refers only to the Ineffable Name when referring to G’d. Only here in this verse, seeing Moses had to mention אלוקי ישראל was he forced to employ a different attribute of G’d in order to allude to their attributes. (the attribute of the founding father of the Levites, the original Levi, brother of Shimon who was described as an exponent of the attribute of Justice by our author on Numbers 1,51).
    
    16,8. שמעו נא בני לוי, “Hear now, offspring of Levi!” The following words are addressed to the arguments of the Levites (against Aaron). The previous remarks of Moses were addressed to the arguments of Korach and the firstborn.
    
    16,9. המעט מכם, “is it too little for you?” Moses asked if their selection as Levites and their performing duties in and around the Tabernacle  was considered by them as something so insignificant?
   ולעמוד לפני העדה לשרתם, “and to stand in front of the congregation to serve them,” when they offered their sacrifices.
    
    16,11. לכן אתה וכל עדתך הנועדים, “therefore you and your whole assembly who have banded together.” Moses meant: “you who have banded together against me and Aaron have actually banded together against G’d. We find a similar construction in Psalms 2,2: ורוזנים נוסדו יחד על ה', “and regents intrigue together against the Lord.” Another similar verse is found in Numbers 26,9 בהצותם על ה', “when they agitated against the Lord.”
   ואהרן מה הוא, “for who is Aaron?” “What did he do to you  and how did he sin against you that you challenge his position as High Priest?”
    
    16,12. ויאמרו לא נעלה, they said: “we will not go up.” The Tabernacle was on an elevated site in the desert. We find this construction again in verse 24 when the people are instructed  to “go up and away from the area surrounding Korach”.
    
    16,13. המעט כי העליתנו, “is it not enough that you have made us go up, etc.?” Datan and Aviram paraphrased (sarcastically) Moses’ question: “is it not enough that G’d has set you apart to become Levites, etc.” by referring to the “elevation” from a land flowing with milk and honey to the desert. Actually, Egypt, situated at sea level was lower than most of the Land of Canaan except a narrow coastal strip and the Israelites at that time were on a high plateau at the southern end of Eretz Yisrael.
   כי תשתרר עלינו גם תשתרר, “that you also want to lord it over us?” The word “over us” refers to the manner in which they perceived Moses as having lorded it over them already in Egypt something which was followed by their continuing to exercise their rule over the people in the desert (this justifies the word גם, also, in this line). On the other hand, one may understand the reason the word השתרר has been repeated as the dual “rule” by Moses as the political autocrat over the people and Aaron as the religious autocrat in his capacity as the High Priest. Other secondary forms of authority wielded by the Levites and the princedom of Elitzafan ben Uzziel are referred to in the word גם, “also.”
    
    16,14. אף לא אל ארץ זבת חלב ודבש הביאותנו, “nor did you bring us to a land flowing with milk and honey.” They meant: “not only did you take us out of a good place, but if you had brought us instead to another good place and each one of us would have had a field and a vineyard such as we had in Egypt we could have put up with your autocratic ways. But instead you took us out of a good place and have not offered us compensation by providing us with a similarly good place; why then should you claim the right to lord it over us?”
   העיני האנשים ההם תנקר, “even should you gouge out those men’s eyes, we will not come!” the meaning of “those men” is a reference to Datan and Aviram themselves, as they would not associate such a disaster with themselves as victims by identi-fying themselves with it even conditionally. They simply meant that even if the penalty for not appearing in front of Moses as asked would be the loss of their eyesight they would not give him the satisfaction of doing his bidding.
    Ibn Ezra interprets the verse as “do you want to gouge out the eyes of those men so that they cannot see” (what you are doing to them?) The subject of האנשים ההם are the people who had left Egypt, Datan and Aviram saying that these people had not been blind enough not to see how their lot had deteriorated under Moses’ rule. It is like someone saying about others: “these people must have their eyes shut, this is why they do not see.”
    The mouth of the wicked always leads them into a trap both when they commence speaking and when they conclude what they have to say. At the beginning Datan and Aviram had said: “we will not go up!” They also concluded their diatribe with the words: “we will not go up!” Their opening words were foolish and so were the same words at the end.
    A Midrashic approach to the words: “are you going to gouge out the eyes of those men, we will not go up!” It is significant that the Torah did not quote them as saying: “we will not go,” or; “we will not come,” but wrote “we will not ascend, go up.” Their mouth betrayed them as having refused to ascend. They died by descending into the earth and into purgatory. They had prepared the way they were going to die with their own mouths.
    
    16,15. אל תפן אל מנחתם, “do not turn to their gift-offering.”  It is a well known fact that both the total-offering and the gift-offering brings long life for the people offering it even if the people concerned are wicked. Moses prayed that contrary to this accepted norm G’d should punish the rebels immediately.
    Rashi, on the other hand, views the meaning of the above prayer by Moses as a plea to G’d not to accept the incense offering which they were going to bring on the morrow. It seems that the subject of the words “their gift-offering” were Datan and Aviram. This is also the opinion of Nachmanides. If that indeed were so we would have to ask why Moses only prayed concerning the offering by Datan and Aviram who were not the principal rebels and why he did not also pray concerning the offerings of Korach and the other 250 rebels? Besides, seeing that Moses was not aware of any merit that these people had which would postpone their punishment at this time, why did he have to pray that their offering not be accepted altogether? He should have prayed that equal punishment should befall all of these people, so why single out only Datan and Aviram?
    In view of these problems I believe that the words: “their gift-offering” refer to that by the twelve princes, i.e. to the inaugural offerings which were reported at the end of Parshat Nasso (Numbers 7) when each one of them had offered a bowl full of incense although they were not priests and therefore had no right to do so (Numbers 7,16). Moses did not bother to pray to G’d concerning His possible acceptance of the offering of Datan and Aviram as he was not aware of any merit they had accumulated which could delay the punishment due to them for their provocative conduct. Furthermore, from the moment that these two men had reiterated their refusal to appear near the Tabernacle as directed by Moses he knew that their own mouths had already convicted them and that they were lost in his eyes.
    He did, however, pray that G’d not accept the incense offering of the 12 princes who were the mainstay of the other 250 rebels that the merit they had accumulated through their inaugural offerings should not cause G’d to delay their punishment at this time. After Moses had offered his prayer that the offering of the princes not be accepted, he reverted to the comments made by Datan and Aviram, offering his rebuttal of the accusation by these men that he had “lorded it over the people,” by pointing out that he had never been the beneficiary of his position as leader to the extent of even a single donkey, nor had he caused anything negative to befall a single Israelite due to his conduct.
    The opinion of our sages in Tanchuma Korach 7 is  that the point of Moses’ prayer was that G’d should not accept their financial contribution as expressed by their half-shekel contribution to the daily public offerings which were brought also on their behalf. 
   לא חמור אחד מהם נשאתי, “I have not taken the ass of any one of them.”  It is usual for political leaders or rulers  to arrogate to themselves the right to use other people and animals for their personal convenience and to let them perform chores on their behalf. This is why Moses in rebutting the accusations of Datan and Aviram that he had “lorded” it over the people had to point out that he done nothing of the kind. He had not even used such an animal to carry his personal belongings. Seeing he had not even used a beast of burden for his own personal use, how could he be accused of using people, i.e. his subjects, for such a purpose? How then had he “lorded” it over the people? We find that the prophet Samuel also could say of himself: (Samuel I 12,3) “here I am, come forward against me in the presence of the Lord and in the presence of his anointed one, whose ox or donkey I have taken and whom did I defraud or whom have I robbed? From whom have I accepted a bribe, etc.?”
    
    16,19. ויקהל עליהם קרח, “Korach gathered against them, etc.” The firstborn all agreed with Korach’s accusation that Moses had disqualified the firstborn from performing ritual sacrifices, whereas the members of the tribe of Levi agreed with him that they had become subservient to Aaron and his sons at Moses’ bidding. Our sages explain  that Korach had said to them: “look at what the son of Amram has done to you! Whereas by rights Reuven is the firstborn of the tribes of Israel, Moses appointed Nachshon the prince of the tribe of Yehudah to offer the first of the inaugural sacrifices in the Tabernacle instead!” These kinds of arguments  won Korach sympathy among large segments of the people until the Torah could report that Korach managed to assemble the whole community in a confrontation with Moses. This demonstrates the power of a single sinful individual to cause the whole people to become sinners themselves. This was a demonstration of the far-reaching negative influence exerted by people who engage in לשון הרע, badmouthing others.
    16,21. הבדלו מתוך העדה הזאת, “Separate yourselves from this congregation, etc.!” The reference was to the congregation of Korach seeing that Moses and Aaron stood next to them at the entrance to the Tabernacle. Moses misunderstood, thinking that the expression: “this congregation” applied to the entire Jewish nation. This is why he answered G’d by saying: “shall one man sin and You will be angry at the entire assembly (people)?” Thereupon G’d explained to him immediately that the expression העדה applied only to the rebel community, i.e. העדה הזאת. This is the meaning of the words: “move away from around the tent of Korach,” an elaboration of what G’d had said previously.
    Why did G’d have to give instructions for the people who did not support Korach to separate from him physically, as if He were unable to single out the sinners and kill them only, [as He had done with the firstborn in Egypt? Ed.] Do we not have a saying  that when two or three people take shelter under the same talit, the two standing on the outside would die and the one standing in the centre would be saved (Midrash Rabbah in connection with the dying of the first born in Egypt)? David elaborated on his phenomenon in Psalms 91,7 when he said: “a thousand may fall at your left side and ten thousand at your right, but it (disaster) shall not reach you.” In view of all this, why did G’d insist on the people distancing themselves physically from the group supporting Korach? It was in order that the contaminated air around Korach and his fellow rebels should not infect the people around him. Just as one has to flee a town in which pestilence rages in order to escape the chance of such infection through radiation of bacteria so the people had to leave the vicinity of Korach. When Lot and family were told by the angel not to stand still while running away from the city of Sodom and his wife ignored the warning she turned into a pillar of salt, i.e. the negative fallout from the sulfur in the air caught up with her (Genesis 19,26).
    Another reason for the instruction that the people standing around Korach were to put space between themselves and him may have been the well known fact that when the attribute of Justice is at work it does not distinguish between the guilty and the innocent who are in its path. It was therefore necessary for the ‘innocent’ to take action to save themselves from the attribute of Justice (compare Baba Kama 60). The reason may also have been that G’d ‘honours’ the righteous, i.e. He does not release forces of destruction while the righteous are in the immediate vicinity of the wicked to be destroyed.
    
     16,22. ויפלו על פניהם, “they fell on their faces” (Moses and Aaron),” in prayer. This is the source for our prostrating ourselves during certain parts of our prayers, supplications. You should know that there are actually three distinct considerations present when we “fall on our faces” during prayer. 1) awe of the fact that we are in the presence of the Shechinah, so that we may wrap ourselves in shame and humility in the face of it, a normal reaction when displaying one’s inadequacies. The petitioner wants to demonstrate his awareness of facing the presence of G’d. This has been described by David in the words: “I am ever mindful of the Lord’s presence” (Psalms 16,8). We fall on our faces to symbolise this feeling. We find that Moses hid his face already when G’d first appeared to him at the burning bush (Exodus 3,6) as he was afraid to look at what he perceived to be the presence of G’d.
    2) We want to display our anguish and pain by prostrating ourselves. 3) We want to demonstrate that we relax our emotional control, i.e. our posture of being in control of ourselves, and throw ourselves instead completely on G’d’s mercy. 
    The wording describing נפילת אפים is found even in connection with the chayot hakodesh, certain groups of angels. Our sages, when describing these angels as reciting their hymns of adulation in the presence of the Lord, speak of these angels first prostrating themselves before the Lord. This is based on Ezekiel 1,14 where the prophet describes these angels as running to and fro, i.e. as not being allowed to remain stationary in a certain place and to look at any point above the layer of heaven they found themselves in. They had to ‘dash’ below that layer of heaven immediately they had sung the hymn and the speed with which they did this is expressed by the prophet with the word כמראה הבזק, “as the appearance of a flash of lightning.” The reason Ezekiel does not call lightning ברק in this instance but בזק is that the former is a manifestation in our terrestrial world, always descending, whereas בזק is its counterpart in the celestial regions traveling both upward and downward. The word בזק is a variation of זיקות, “a flash of fire, a spark.”
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 50,1 commenting on the arrival of the angels who were going to destroy Sodom and save Lot, respectively, explain the expression כמראה הבזק in Ezekiel 1,14 by  comparing it to the olive waste which when used as fuel bursts into flame immediately, and produces flames which travel both in an upward and a downward direction. This is the meaning of the words רצוא ושוב in Ezekiel 1,14. [the author elaborates further on that vision, something which has no relevance to our subject. Ed.]
    The important aspect of prostrating oneself during certain prayers is that through expressing one’s anguish and pain one is helped in making one’s repentance meaningful and this in turn ensures that G’d will listen favourably to our entreaties. We are told in Taanit 24 as well as in Baba Metzia 59 of incidents in which righteous people who experienced pain during their prayers had their prayers answered immediately, such as rain materialising out of nowhere, or that Rabbi Eliezer was prevented by his own wife from prostrating himself during prayer as his prayers were immediately answered by G’d when he fell on his face. In some instances such prayers involved considerable economic harm to the community the petitioner lived in. Once his wife made an error in the date of the month thinking it was New Moon (when one does not prostrate oneself in one’s prayers), and she did not therefore monitor him while he prayed. She was the sister of Rabbi Gamliel who had put Rabbi Eliezer in ban for his publicly disagreeing with the majority decision of the other sages. When his wife saw that Rabbi Eliezer prostrated himself in prayer she remonstrated with him saying that his prayers had already caused the death of her brother. While telling her husband that her brother Rabbi Gamliel had died, a long blast of the shofar emanated from the house of Rabbi Gamliel announcing the Rabbi’s death. Rabbi Eliezer wanted to know how it was that his wife had already known about this? She told him that whereas the gates of prayer had been shut since the destruction of the Temple, she had a tradition from her grandfather that prayer accompanied by tears on account of the petitioner feeling wronged was still able to penetrate the iron curtain between the Jewish people and G’d and that her husband’s tearful prayer  complaining about the decree making him an outcast had had this effect. As a result Rabbi Gamliel who had confirmed that decision had died.
    The third element in “falling on one’s face” during prayers of entreaties is the utter denial of self, surrendering oneself to the mercy of G’d at the expense of what we usually call one’s own personality, one’s ego. A person becomes so engrossed in his prayer that he closes his eyes, is blind to his surroundings and totally oblivious of any danger that might face him while he was so indifferent to his physical surroundings. Such a person acknowledges at such a time that he is completely unable to chart a course unless he receives guidance from G’d. This is described in Jeremiah 10,23 as כי לא לאדם דרכו, “I know, O Lord it is not up to man to choose his road, that man as he walks cannot direct his own steps.” The Gentiles symbolise such feelings when they pray by arranging their hands in a posture of entreaty vis-a vis G’d, although they themselves cannot explain to you whence they took this custom. The real reason is that it is an expression of the denial of self and the petitioner’s personal aspirations. By folding his hands in the manner described, the petitioner shows G’d that he is willing to leave to Him that which he normally tries to accomplish with his own hands. He signals to G’d that his hands are as if shackled, unable to perform their assigned tasks. Seeing that placing one’s feet in a parallel position close to each other expresses the same thought even more forcefully, our Rabbis  decreed that we do with our feet what the Christians do with their hands.
    Ravi Hai, gaon, has said that when prostrating oneself during prayer one should do so with his face on his left side signaling that he is willing to submit to the attribute of Justice which is perceived as being on the left side of G’d. This is an allusion to the “hand” of G’d which orchestrated the liberation of the Jewish people on Passover. When Moses commenced his prayer on this occasion with the words:
   אל, אלו-הי הרוחות, “O G’d, G’d of the spirit of all flesh, etc.,” he referred to G’d’s power to destroy a multitude instantly. He implied that seeing that G’d’ is familiar with the individual spirit of each individual there was no need for Him to apply collective punishment seeing He was well aware of who was guilty and who was not, as distinct from human rulers who do not possess such knowledge about what goes on in the hearts of their subjects.
   האיש אחד יחטא, “because of one man who sins,” i.e. because of Korach and his group whom he seduced into sin so that eventually all the people became confrontational against Moses and Aaron,
   ועל כל העדה תקצוף, “against the whole assembly You will vent Your anger?” Moses meant that Korach and his rebels had seduced the people into sin, a sin which was really of their making. This prayer which Moses and Aaron offered while they had prostrated themselves, was a short prayer, similar to the one he offered when he prayed for Miriam to be cured in Numbers 12,13. On that occasion he had described his Creator, praising Him as אל, also using entreaty as evident by the word נא, whereas here he was a little more long-winded in heaping praise on his Creator by referring to His attribute as אלו-הי הרוחות לכל בשר. Our sages have taught us, using Moses’ prayers as models, that one must always introduce one’s entreaty with expressions praising the attributes of Hashem  before speaking of one’s own concerns, requests (Berachot 32). This is why in our עמידה prayer the principal prayer in which we voice our requests, the first three benedictions are devoted to reciting G’d’s praises and mighty deeds. Only after that do we approach G’d with our collective and individual concerns and requests.
    I believe that the word הרוחות in Moses’ prayer here refers to the angels, i.e. G’d, Who is the G’d of the angels who are composed exclusively of רוחות, spirits, not flesh. The same G’d, according to Moses, is also the G’d of all flesh. The reason Moses phrased it thus was to say that He is the G’d in the celestial regions as well as in the terrestrial part of His universe. I also believe that the expression אלו-הי הרוחות used by Moses here as an attribute for G’d is similar to Avraham referring to G’d as אלו-הי השמים והארץ, “G’d of the heaven and G’d of the earth” (Genesis 24,3). In Moses’ instance there is the additional allusion to G’d governing all four directions on earth. We also find this elsewhere though it is expressed as אני ה' בקרב הארץ “I am the Lord in the midst of the (whole) globe” (Exodus 8,18). G’d is similar to a king who, though resident in the centre of the country, exercises his dominion over the far corners of his country. Seeing that the patriarchs described G’d’s kingdom as extending “vertically,” starting from heaven above and including earth below, Moses preferred to describe His dominion as extending “horizontally,” i.e. in all directions, East to West and North to South. In this manner he completed the praise of G’d seeing that now G’d had been acknowledged as extending His supervisory powers to all six extremities of the universe.
    
    16,24. העלו מסביב למשכן קרח, דתן ואבירם, “get yourselves up from around the dwelling of no one, and Datan and Aviram respectively!” Actually, the Torah should have included in its call  for the people to remove their presence from the vicinity of Korach, On, son of Peles, seeing he had figured by name as one of the instigators of the rebellion in verse one of our chapter. Our sages view the failure of the Torah to mention On at this point as proof that he had withdrawn from the rebellion and had done תשובה, had repented his former part in it. 
    Tanchuma Korach 10 claims that On had been saved by his wife who had said to him: “what difference does it make to you personally if Moses is High Priest or whether Aaron is High Priest seeing that in either event you will only be the student, i.e. subordinate to either of them? Concerning the wife of On (and others like her) Solomon said in Proverbs 14,1: “the wisest of women builds her house, i.e. the wife of On, whereas “folly tears it down with its own hands,” a reference to the wife of Korach who had inflamed his ego when she first belittled the halachah about a blue woolen talit requiring tzitziyot. She became the immediate cause of the rebellion and the death of hundreds (compare Proverbs 7,26).
    
    16,25. וילכו אחריו זקני ישראל, “the elders of the people of Israel followed Moses.” The reference is to the 70 elders, appointed in Numbers 11,25.
    
    16,26. ואל תגעו בכל אשר להם “and do not touch any of their belongings!” G’d meant that if anyone sought to save the money that the rebels would forfeit for themselves they would share the fate of Korach, Datan and Aviram.
    When the Torah describes Datan and Aviram as keeping an arrogant upright posture in front of their respective tents when Moses and the elders approached them, the sages of the Midrash understand this as a euphemism for insults hurled at Moses by these two individuals (Tanchuma Korach 3). They base this on the similarity of expressions used by Samuel I 17,4 describing Goliath’s haughty and insulting posture and the language used here. We know that Goliath was insulting vis-a-vis G’d and that David only agreed to fight him in order to teach him not to defy the G’d of Israel (Samuel I 17,45). Moses said that the proof that the death of these people would be because of their defiance of G’d and their curses would be the extraordinary way in which they would die. 
    
    16,28. בזאת תדעון כי ה' שלחני לעשות את כל המעשים האלה, “By this you shall know that it was the Lord who sent me to do all these things.” He referred to the exchanging of the functions formerly performed by the firstborn to be performed by the Levites. The firstborn had disqualified themselves from acting as priests as they had participated in the sin of the golden calf as  described in Exodus 32,6: “they offered burnt-offerings and meat-offerings (in honour of the golden calf),” as opposed to the Levites who had remained loyal to G’d and had acted as executioners of the people publicly worshipping the golden calf (Exodus 30,28). The Levites were sanctified in place of the firstborn and chosen to perform sacrificial services. Anyone who did not believe in the selection of the Levites to replace the firstborn indicated thereby that the guilt of the golden calf episode had not yet been expunged and that the people who now challenged Moses and Aaron did not consider these parts of the written Torah as authentic.
    
    16,29. אם כמות כל האדם ימותו אלה, “if these people die like any other human being, etc.” Our sages (Tanchuma Korach 8) illustrate this by a parable. The bridal attendants of the king’s daughter who held proof of that daughter’s virginity at her wedding in their hands were challenged by one of the wedding guests who claimed that the evidence they claimed to possess was forged. Thereupon these bridal attendants demanded from the king that he personally confirm that what they held in their hands was proof of his daughter’s virginity, and that if the king would refuse to do so they themselves would have to conclude that the accusation was true and that they had been furnished with forged evidence. The king responded by saying that it was better to execute the guest than to have the loyal attendants spread lies about the chastity his daughter. This is what motivated Moses to demand such an unusual penalty for Korach and his fellow-rebels. He argued that if these rebels were allowed to die in bed like most mortals, and the physicians would check on them prior to their deaths as they do with most sick people, then he Moses, would also deny that he had ever been appointed by G’d to lead the Jewish people and that he had arrogated all this authority to himself without divine appointment. Korach would then be considered as having a valid complaint
    We have a similar incident in Jewish history which is described in Kings I 22,28 where Michaya (the true prophet) said to Tzekekiah (the false prophet): “if you ever come home safe, then I will also admit that the Lord has not spoken to me.” Something similar occurred at Mount Carmel (Kings I 18,36-37) when the prophet Elijah proclaimed: “let it be known today that You are the G’d in Israel and that I am Your servant, and that I have done all these things at Your bidding. Answer me, O Lord, answer me, that this people may know that You, O Lord are G’d; for You have turned their hearts backward.” What Elijah meant  with this postscript was ”if You do not respond to my request I myself will say that You have turned their hearts backward.”
    It is a well known fact that the quarrel initiated by Korach at that time has become the root cause for the neglect or worse of the entire Torah seeing that each individual nowadays reserves the right for himself to reject a part of the Torah as not being divinely decreed. The moment one begins to challenge even a minute part of the Torah as being “man-made,” the flood gates have been opened to reject Torah as a whole. Eventually, the challenger will declare that the entire Torah is man’s invention and that the lawgiver perpetrated a colossal fraud relying on the gullibility of his people. In order to head off such events in the future the punishment for Korach and his fellow rebels had to be especially severe. They had brought this upon themselves seeing that we have a principle that anyone who challenges the words of Moses is considered as having challenged the word of the Lord Himself (Sanhedrin 110). 
    One may raise a very serious question in connection with this whole episode. Firstly, how can we explain that Moses, the loyal shepherd of the people, who had repeatedly interceded on their behalf when the people had sinned, such as at the golden calf, the spies, etc., in this instance instead of interceding on their behalf actually demanded an extreme penalty for the instigators? Why did he not spend his energy instead to get these people to repent their error? After all, there is no sin so severe that it cannot be expiated through sincere repentance by the sinner! Even people whose sin was inspired by a rebellious attitude and a desire to affront G’d deliberately is subject to such repentance as we do not fail to mention on Yom Kippur!
    If these people had entertained serious doubts about Moses’ claim to be only the spokesman of G’d-given instructions and that he had distributed positions of influence based on his personal choices, Moses could have called for some miracle by G’d which would have confirmed that what he had claimed was divinely inspired and approved and this would have made the doubters repent their error! 
    Furthermore, granted that the people who had challenged Moses’ authority had brought such a punishment upon themselves, why would their children, their babies, be mentioned as part of their sin (verse 27)? Surely any minor children of Datan and Aviram could not be held responsible for their parents’ action? Surely G’d who is righteous would not punish the innocent! If we were to address what is written in this paragraph only based on the plain text, i.e. the פשט, the question raised would be very difficult indeed. In order to do justice to these verses we must fall back on a kabbalistic approach involving the doctrine of transmigration of souls, סוד הגלגול. Let me acquaint you with several verses in the Torah where the subject is alluded to. In Genesis 11,4 the Torah reports the people of the generation of the tower as saying: הבה נבנה לנו עיר ומגדל וראשו בשמים ונעשה לנו שם, “now then let us build a city and a tower whose top will be in the heaven so that we will make a name for ourselves.” Concerning that generation G’d is on record in Genesis 11,6 as: “and this is what they have begun to do!” As a result, we read that G’d scattered these people all over the earth and confused their language. In Genesis 19,4 the Torah, speaking of the people of Sodom, writes: “and the men of the city, the men of Sodom surrounded the house;” the Torah found it necessary to explain that the people previously referred to as “the people of the city” were in fact identical with the people of Sodom! Later the Torah continues describing that Lot’s guests, the angels smote these men with a temporary kind of blindness (Genesis 19,11). Here in connection with the assembly of rebels who had joined Korach, the Torah writes: ויקומו לפני משה,”they arose (in a confrontational posture) before Moses.” the Torah should have written על משה, “against Moses,” instead of לפני משה, “in front of” or “in the presence of Moses.” However the Torah clearly wanted us to realise that this occurred “before (the generation of) Moses," i.e. historically long before Moses; 
    The people referred to there were the same as the  אנשי שם men who had made a name for themselves,” (16,3) because they were reincarnates of the people who had made a name for themselves when they began to build the city and the tower hundreds of years ago during the 10th generation after the deluge. They were the reincarnates of the people referred to in connection with the men of Sodom as אנשי העיר, the people who had planned the city and tower already at that time [maybe 80 years later than the report of what happened in Genesis chapter 11. Ed]. When Onkelos translated the opening words of our paragraph ויקח קרח as ואתפליג, he hinted at the connection between Korach and the generation known a דור הפלגה, the generation when G’d destroyed the unity of mankind by mixing up their languages and scattering them all over the globe. We must understand what happened in terms of a parable. A father had a son who became a delinquent when he grew up. At first the father contented himself with reprimanding his son. When the son persisted in his errant behaviour the father punished him physically. When this did not help either the father gave up on the son and rejected him absolutely. When the people described as “making a name for themselves” displayed rebellious tendencies for the first time, G’d scattered them all over the earth (as a warning Genesis 11,8). When a group of reincarnates conducted themselves in similar amoral fashion in Sodom, G’d struck them with blindness as a further warning before giving them a third opportunity to mend their ways in different bodies. When, during the generation of Moses, these people repeated their gross disobedience to G’d a third time, G’d gave up on them, destroyed them so that they would not again be reincarnated in order to expiate sins committed in a former life on earth. Now when the punishment is first referred to and Datan and Aviram defiantly say that even if Moses would deprive them of their eyesight (as had happened to the people of Sodom) they would not alter their opposition to him, we find another allusion to the fact that history repeated itself here and that what Moses faced now had already happened “before Moses.” Although, basically, G’d performs deeds of loving kindness with the children of the pious, the ones who love Him, (Exodus 20,6) they no longer qualified for the benefits that accrue from that attribute of G’d.
    Concerning the mystical dimension of this whole subject of reincarnation, Solomon says (Kohelet 4,9 and 4,12 respectively) “two are better than one;” he continues a little later: “and the threefold thread is not easily broken.” What he means is that here are occasions when even a threefold thread tears asunder, i.e. the example we just described. However, this is a rare occurrence and that is why Solomon mentions it as a remote possibility. We find these thoughts expressed clearly in the Sefer Habahir (item 121-122) (the question being what is meant in Psalms 146,10 ימלוך ה' אלו-היך ציון לדור ודור), whereas in Chronicles I 11,1 Zion is described as ציון עיר דוד, as if the city belongs exclusively to David (who lived only for one generation). Rabbi Akiva said that when Kohelet writes: דור הולך ודור בא, the meaning is [not the generally accepted one that a generation appears on the stage of history only to be replaced by the next generation, Ed.] “a generation follows a generation which has already left the stage of history, i.e. “it reappears on the stage of history.” We can describe this in terms of a parable of a king who had many servants and who outfitted them in all kinds of exotic uniforms in accordance with his means. When the servants were found soiling their uniforms the king stripped them of these fancy uniforms and dismissed them. The king then laundered all these uniforms carefully until no trace of their stains and dirt remained. He hung them up for storage; in the meantime the king acquired other servants whom he provided with the uniforms previously worn by the first set of servants who had not displayed much care about their outfits. At that time the king did not yet know if the new servants would prove worthier of their uniforms than the ones he had dismissed. Nonetheless, these new servants were recipients of uniforms which had been worn before them. Thus far the comment in the Sefer Habahir. 
    Now you can understand our verse here very easily and the question of why Moses did not engage in prayer on behalf of these people becomes pointless. Also the question of why G’d included the children of the sinners in our paragraph disappears. [there is a limit to the opportunities granted to people in the form of reincarnation. This limit is reached with the third transmigration. If at that time the soul does not make use of its body to rehabilitate itself for sins committed in its previous appearance on earth, it is not entitled to another life, i.e. to biological offspring. Ed.]
    Perhaps this is what our sages in Midrash Tehillim 46 had in mind when they commented on psalm 46,1 למנצח לבני קרח על עלמות שיר, “a psalm for the sons -of Korach on the mysteries of song.” The Midrash understands the opening words as the sons of Korach singing a hymn to G’d although they did not understand the workings of the Lord in order to appreciate it. In other words, עלמות שיר, “although the workings of G’d in history are sometimes obscure, beyond our ability to fathom, He deserves to be praised for what He does.” [the word עלמות is understood by the author of the Midrash as meaning “something hidden,” נעלם].
    We have another Midrash in Tanchuma Korach 3 which draws our attention to the extraordinary seriousness with which G’d viewed this quarrel. Whereas normally, culpability for sins commences with the age of 13 for sins judged by a human tribunal and does not commence before the sinner is twenty years of age for sins subject to be judged by a celestial tribune, in this instance G’d “punished” even the infants suckling on their mothers’ breasts by wiping out the entire families of the sinners. This is the meaning of Numbers 16,32: “the earth swallowed them, their houses, and every person belonging to Korach as well as all his tangible property. All of them descended to sheol.” The word אותם in our verse refers to Datan and Aviram mentioned previously in verse 26 as well as their wives and children who all had assumed a defiant posture, adults and children alike.
    
    16,30. ואם בריאה יברא ה', “But if the Lord will display a totally new phenomenon, etc.” The reason Moses used the term בריאה, which reminds us of the creation of the universe out of no pre-existing raw materials was that he wanted to emphasise that the miracle about to occur was equal in dimension to that which was required to bring the universe into existence. It appears that the Torah should really have written: ואם בריאה יברא אלו-הים, using the attribute of G’d which He employed when starting the creative process, instead of the attribute י-ה-ו-ה which Moses employed here. After all, Moses threatened that the attribute of Justice was poised to strike these people. It was this attribute which orchestrated the sinking into the earth of Korach and associates in verse 32. However, it was not Moses’ style to invoke the attribute of Justice against the people, even against rebels of the type of Korach and cohorts. The reason he never did so was that his entire prophetic mission was under the aegis of the attribute י-ה-ו-ה, the attribute of Mercy. This is why he had said earlier (verse 28) “through this you will know that Hashem has sent me.” He meant that the attribute זאת would inform the people that Moses’ mission was at the behest of Hashem. (compare our author on Genesis 49,28 and Exodus 6,3). The sin of these men had been extraordinary in its undermining the whole basis of Moses as G’d’s delegate and faithful communicator of G’d’s words at the people’s own request as we know from Deut. 5,22. In Exodus 34,10 G’d had already allowed for the possible demon-stration of miracles which parallel those performed at the outset of creation when He had said: “in the presence of the entire people I will perform wonderful deeds the likes of which have not been created anywhere on earth, etc.” Moses considered that the time had arrived for G’d to demonstrate such a miracle. This was a practical demonstration of the principle עת לעשות ה' הפרו תורתך, “at a time when something has to be done to demonstrate the power of the Lord, when they have breached Your Torah.” (Psalms 119,126). At this juncture it was not enough to orchestrate the punishment of these people through one of G’d’s agents, intermediaries such as angels, but He Himself had to be involved in that demonstration. The situation was similar to that prevailing prior to the slaying of the Egyptian firstborn by G’d Himself when the Torah had written (Exodus 12,23) “and י-ה-ו-ה, i.e. G’d’s essence will traverse the land of Egypt to smite Egypt, etc.” Our sages (Haggadah shel Pessach) interpreted these words to mean that no angel of whatever rank would orchestrate that plague but that G’d Himself, personally, would do this. Moses concluded his prediction here with the words: “then you will know that these men had provoked Hashem.” You will note that Moses employs the expression תדעון, וידעתם, “i.e. “definitive knowledge” both at the beginning and at the end of his prediction. He hinted that just as if the people had not been redeemed after the plague of the slaying of the firstborn that would have been a desecration of the Lord’s name, so non-occurrence of the phenomenon which Moses now predicted would also be a desecration of the Lord’s, name by him, Moses. (compare what author wrote on Exodus 11,4)
    
    16,31-32. ותבקע האדמה אשר תחתיהם, ותפתח הארץ את פיה ותבלע אותם, “The ground which was beneath them split open and the earth opened its ‘mouth’ and swallowed them.”  Nachmanides explains why the Torah had to mention both אדמה and ארץ as “opening” in this verse. Had the Torah only written that the ground split open the phenomenon could have been considered as regular earthquake -although Moses had predicted the time and the place.- This is why the Torah added the words “the earth opened its mouth” to tell us that a great miracle, unparalleled, happened here. This is why the miracle had been predicted as a בריאה, a new creation. The place where this took place returned to its original appearance as distinct from an earthquake which leaves behind clear evidence that there had been an upheaval.
   ואת כל האדם אשר לקרח, “and every human being belonging to Korach.” This refers to the members of his household and all the rebels accepting his leadership. Korach’s sons were also “swallowed” by the earth but they did not die as a result; this is the meaning of Numbers 26,11: “and the sons of Korach did not die.” Our sages (Megillah 14) explain that a “fortified” place was reserved for them in purgatory where they stayed. [I suppose the meaning is a site safe from the fires of purgatory but inside it. Ed.]
    It is possible to explain the verse differently by understanding the words ואת כל האנשים, “and all the men,” as including only the people previously described in verse 30 as כי נאצו האנשים האלה את ה', “for these men had provoked Hashem.” The reason that the Torah called the people who were swallowed as אדם is because they were swallowed by the אדמה, i.e. they returned to the place they originally came from [as in “dust thou art and to dust thou shall return.” Ed.]
   ואת כל הרכוש, “and all the property.” The Torah informed us that not only the people but their belongings including their tents, their money, etc., were all swallowed up as part of this great act of retribution. Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 10,1 states that even a needle of theirs which had been temporarily in the possession of some other unrelated Israelite would be swept away down into the abyss into which these people disappeared. The reason the Torah writes the words אשר לקרח, “which belonged to Korach,” without specifying that Korach personally was also swallowed by the earth in so many words, is because there was no need for this. Seeing that the Torah had written that Datan and Aviram, and their families as well as Korach’s families and more distant followers had all been swallowed it is clear that he himself as the instigator of the whole rebellion did not escape such a fate. At any rate, even though Korach’s descent into the bowels of the earth is not spelled out, we find it spelled out in Numbers 26,10 where the Torah writes: “it swallowed them, together with Korach.” We find a parallel example when the Torah described the drowning of the Egyptian army in the sea of Reeds where the Torah writes (Exodus 15,4) “the chariots of Pharaoh together with his army were drowned in the sea,” although the Torah does not specifically mention that Pharaoh himself was also drowned at the same time. Nevertheless, David explains in Psalms 136,15: “He flung Pharaoh and his army into the sea of Reeds.”
    Our sages (Sanhedrin 106) believe that Korach was not only swallowed by the earth but that his body was also burned; seeing that he was the root cause of the sin he was afflicted with two penalties. They derive this from the words in 26,10: “it swallowed them as well as Korach when the assembly died as the fire consumed the 250 men.” This teaches first of all that Korach was swallowed; he was also consumed by the fire as the words באכול האש refer to Korach as the first one to be burned. The reason that the Torah did not spell out his name specifically as a victim of the fire is that simple logic teaches us that fact. All the people who offered incense were burned together with the incense in their censers. Clearly, there is no reason to believe that Korach would survive his attempt to offer this incense. The other two hundred and fifty men were punished on account of Korach; why would he escape such a penalty? Alternatively, we need simply view the extra word את before the expression החמישים איש as the clue that Korach was included as the word את always means something or someone additional, as we know from Pessachim 22.
    
    16,33. וירדו הם וכל אשר להם חיים שאולה, “They and all which belonged to them descended into sheol while alive.” “Sheol” is the lowest recess of purgatory. There  are a total of seven regions in purgatory [parallel to the seven regions or layers of heaven, Ed.] The seven regions are named in Eyruvin 19, Sheol being the lowest. David also appears to describe it as such in Psalms 9,18. The reason that David uses the expression ישובו when referring to the wicked whom he wants consigned to that place instead of writing: וירדו, “let them descend,” is that the word ישובו is an allusion to the tortures experienced in that region, unending tortures, something final from which there is no recovery. The word ישובו suggests that although these souls have undergone searing fire, they will be subjected to such treatment again and again. I have seen a comment in Midrash sidduro shel olam that Sheol is the seventh layer, consisting partly of fire and partly of hail (ice). The wicked jump from the fire into the ice to cool off and from the ice into the fire to warm themselves, a continuous process. The angel supervising what goes on in purgatory keeps hounding them and prodding them just as a shepherd prods his flock from hill to hill to mountain. The Midrash bases itself on Psalms 49,15: “sheeplike they head for Sheol,  with Death as their shepherd.”
   ויאבדו מתוך הקהל, “they were lost from amidst the congregation.” This is the source for the sages telling us that anyone who attacks the Torah and wants to undermine its principles has no share in the hereafter. This is the true meaning of the words: “from among the community.” Basically, the whole community of Israel has a share in the hereafter. These people who descended into the bowels of the earth thereby lost their claim to the hereafter This is what our sages explained in Sanhedrin 109 that Rabbi Akiva interpreted the words ותכס עליהם הארץ to mean that they died in this world whereas the additional words ויאבדו מתוך הקהל refer to their losing their share in the hereafter. Normally, we would have expected the Torah to write: ויאבדו מתוך ישראל, “they were lost from Israel.” The expression: מתוך הקהל means that they lost their share in the hereafter. Do not raise the point that seeing these people had been punished so harshly already in this world, surely their share in the world to come would therefore be preserved for them! Did we not find that Achan ben Carmi who had also been punished severely in this world had been assured by Joshua that he would not forfeit his share in the hereafter? (Joshua 7,28) The men who associated with Korach were guilty of a far greater crime than had been Achan who had basically only been a thief (and who had confessed at the end). Nonetheless, although the people of this uprising had forfeited their share in the afterlife of the souls they did not forfeit their entitlement to the resurrection of the bodies when the time comes (Sanhedrin 108 according to Rabbi Eliezer), based on Samuel I 2,6 ה' ממית ומחיה מוריד שאול ויעל, “the Lord kills and revives, consigns to Sheol and raises them even from there.”
    
    16,34. נסו לקולם, “they fled when they heard their sound.”  This appears to mean that as Korach and companions descended into the bowels of the earth they called out in repentance: “Moses is true and his Torah is true,” as our sages reported Rabbi bar Chanah as hearing over a site reputedly the point where all of this took place (Baba Batra 74). According to the report of the Talmud, an Arab guide took Rabbi bar Chanah to a site at which thin smoke emerged from the earth on top of two small cracks in the surface of the earth. The Arab placed some wet wool on top of the site, ignited it, and told the Rabbi to listen carefully. When Rabbi  bar Chanah put his ear to it he could hear the confession of Korach that Moses and his Torah are true whereas he and his crowd were liars. According to that Arab this phenomenon could be observed every thirty days. This was a demonstration of the justice meted out in purgatory, i.e. to make the guilty confess their erstwhile sins.
    
    16,35. ואש יצאה מאת ה', “fire had come forth from the Lord, etc.” G’d matches the punishment to the crime. Seeing that Korach had demanded to be elevated to a position in life which he did not deserve he was punished by being relegated instead to a position below the earth. This corresponds to what our sages  said on Numbers 21,20: ומבמות הגי, “and from the heights to the valley.” Here, in the matter of the fire described, this was also a demonstration of the principle of “measure for measure,” seeing the 250 men who were firstborn came to offer incense, i.e. a fire-offering on their fire-pans. Seeing that they aspired to a privilege which they had not earned this very fire became the instrument causing their death, i.e. their punishment. Concerning these people David said in Psalms 106,18: ”a fire blazed among their party, a flame that consumed the wicked.”
    
    17,3. את מחתות החטאים האלה בנפשותם, “the fire-pans of these people who sinned at the cost of their lives.” The reason the Torah added the word “against their souls” was to reinforce the point that they forfeited the lives of their souls in the hereafter.
    
    17,5. ולא יהיה כקרח וכעדתו, “and so that they not become like Korach and his congregation.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 110 derive from this verse that if one participates in and reinforces a quarrel one is guilty of infringing on a negative commandment. The meaning of the whole verse is: “one should not become like Korach and his congregation who had been swallowed by the earth and had been burned but one should prefer to be afflicted with tzoraat.” This is an allusion to people who merely quarrel against the “exclusive hereditary nature of the priesthood” such as King Uzziah who arrogated to himself the privilege reserved for priests. He was punished by becoming a צרוע for the remainder of his days (Chronicles II 26,21). He did not die and did not forfeit his afterlife. [I believe the author uses the words: “a negative commandment” as an example of something not carrying the death penalty. Korach did not merely quarrel but made a “federal case” out of his complaint. Hence his special punishment. Ed.] 
    17,6. וילונו כל עדת בני ישראל, “The entire community of the Children of Israel complained.” Seeing that already two different acts of retribution had occurred (to prove the authenticity of the leadership of Moses and Aaron), what was there possibly left for them to challenge, to complain about? Nachmanides writes that whereas after the burning to death of the people offering the incense the people did believe in the authenticity of Aaron as the High Priest, they still wanted that the firstborn perform the functions of the priests instead of the Levites. They still opposed the exchange of the firstborn in favour of the Levites. Their motivation was that they wanted that every tribe should have representatives who would perform the sacrificial service in the Tabernacle.
    
   אתם המיתם את עם ה', “you have brought about the death of the nation of the Lord!” They referred to Moses having advised the rebels to test the validity of their claim to priesthood by offering incense. They still maintained that these rebels (firstborn) had been entitled to perform the duties now assigned to the Levites though they may not have been entitled to perform priestly functions. This is also the meaning of the flowering of the staff of Aaron “from the house of Levi” in verse 23. [for who did not know that Aaron was a Levite? Ed.] Thus far Nachmanides.
    
    17,11. כי יצא הקצף לפני ה' החל הנגף, “for wrath has gone forth from the Lord, the plague had commenced.” There is an angel whose name is קצף, whose power is derived from the attribute of Justice. As a result of this angel emerging from its “home” the plague had started to strike the Jewish people. Moses had become familiar with this angel at the time when the Torah had been given to the Jewish people. This is the meaning of Tanchuma Ki Tissa 20 on Exodus 32,2 where G’d had said to Moses: “go and descend!” The message was that due to the people having committed the sin of the golden calf five destructive forces (angels) had been unleashed; they were the angels known as: אף, חמה, קצף, השמד, חרון. As soon as Moses mentioned the three patriarchs three of these angels were neutralised. This left the two angels אף and חמה who were still active, pursuing their destructive activities. This is what Moses had in mind in Deut. 9,19 when he said כי יגורתי מפני האף והחמה, “for I was afraid of Af and Chemah. In answer to Moses’ “fear,” G’d said to him: “you stand up against one of them!” [G’d meant that Moses’ personal merit was sufficient to neutralise at least one of these two angels. Ed.] “whereas I will deal with the second one.” This is the meaning of Psalms 7,7 קומה ה' באפך, “arise O Lord against Your אף,” [i.e. the angel known as אף. Ed.]. Moses himself was going to confront the other angel known as חמה, and this is the meaning of Psalms 106,23: לולא משה בחירו עמד בפרץ לפניו להשיב חמתו מהשחית, “if not Moses His choice one had stood in the breach to confront His angel Chemah preventing him from his destructive activities.”
    
    When the Torah here reports Aaron as ויעמוד בין המתים ובין החיים, “standing between the dead and between the living” (verse 13), the additional word ובין is very crucial. Had the Torah only written בין המתים והחיים, this would have indicated that the “dead” were in front of him whereas no living people were amongst that group. All the living were only behind Aaron. Now that the Torah added the word ובין this indicates that amongst the people in front and behind Aaron there were both living and dead. Aaron was truly in “the middle.” This is the meaning of the incense arresting the plague, i.e. that the effect of the incense was that the situation remained as it was; no additional people died. Any of the living who had been among the dead, surrounded by them did not die as a result. 
    We learn from this verse that originally, before Aaron intervened with his incense, the destructive angel חמה had wreaked death without exception whenever he had struck a person. He was killing the living and uprooting the dead [depriving them of their share in the hereafter. Ed.] Now, even the dead that were found among the living were no longer subject to having their hereafter denied them. You find this thought echoed in Tanchuma Tetzaveh 15  where the Midrash examines the word החל, “commenced” in our verse. [In that Midrash not only is the angel described as destroying systematically, just as the reaper reaps in the field systematically, but the confrontation even with G’d is described. It appears to me that  when the Midrash speaks of the angel Chemah “uprooting” amongst the already dead, i.e. not skipping anyone in his destructive activity, this  can only mean that he had power over the hereafter of those already slain. Ed.]
   
    17,15. וישב אהרן אל משה אל פסח אהל מועד והמגפה נעצרה, “Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and the plague had been arrested.” Seeing that the Torah had already reported in verse 13 that as soon as Aaron put incense in his censer and stood between the living and the dead the plague stopped, why did the Torah have to repeat the fact that the plague had been arrested? The Torah teaches us here that Aaron forced the angel to come to the entrance of the Tabernacle where Moses stood. This is part of what is described in Tanchuma Tetzaveh 15, excerpts of which we have quoted already. When the angel had challenged Aaron’s interference saying that he was an agent of G’d, Aaron had countered that he was an agent of Moses. The angel ridiculed this saying that Aaron was only the messenger of a mortal human being whereas he was the messenger of eternal G’d. Aaron challenged the angel to accompany him to the entrance of the Tabernacle where both G’d and Moses could be found. The angel refused to accompany Aaron until the latter took hold of his loins and dragged him along. The Torah alludes to all this when it reports about Moses’ last day on earth in Deut. 33,11 when he blesses each of the tribes and writes ברך ה' חילו ופועל ידיו תרצה, “may the Lord bless his (Aaron’s) resources and may the work of his hands be pleasing (in the eyes of the Almighty).” This was a veiled reference to Aaron’s performance in our paragraph. Moses wished that future High Priests from the tribe of Levi be similarly successful in their efforts to intercede on behalf of the Jewish people when the need would arise to do so. The whole passage teaches how beloved the offering of incense is in the eyes of the Lord. 
    
    17,18. כי מטה אחד לראש בית אבותם, “for there shall be one staff for each head of an ancestral house.” The Torah emphasises this point seeing that the tribe of Levi had been divided in its functions between “ordinary” Levites and the priests, (descendants of Aaron).
    
    17,20. והיה האיש אשר אבחר בו מטהו יפרח והשיכותי מעלי  את תלונות בני ישראל, “it will be that the staff of the man whom I choose will sprout, and I will rid Myself, etc.” This verse teaches that there were still some people who complained and challenged the established hierarchy even though G’d had already employed three different methods of punishments for the people challenging same, i.e. “swallowing by the earth, burning by fire and now death through the plague.” G’d now felt the time had come to make Aaron’s staff sprout seeing that the swallowing of Korach had proven that the firstborn had been disqualified in the eyes of the Lord as priests and the burning of the non-priests who had dared offer incense had proven that Aaron was the High Priest; the plague had shown that the people’s demand to have the firstborn officiate as Levites if not as priests was not acceptable. However, there were still people complaining as we know from G’d saying that He hoped the new measure, i.e. demonstrating which of the staffs of the tribes would sprout and produce fruit would settle the matter. If it would be the staff of Aaron (the Levite) this should finally put to rest any lingering doubt about the role of the tribe of Levi in the hierarchy of the Jewish people. The fact that the staff of Levi sprouted something positive, i.e. blossoms and fruit, was in contrast to the challengers whose actions had produced negative fallout for themselves on three occasions. The Torah stresses the words: “the house of Levi,” to show that it was not merely Aaron’s appointment that was confirmed thereby but the appointment of the entire tribe of Levi for its respective task as outlined in Numbers chapter eight.
    
    17,21. ומטה אהרן בתוך מטותם, “and Aaron’s staff among their staffs.” The other tribes’ staffs were placed beside that of Aaron  so that if something miraculous happened to it it would not be argued that this was because only his staff had been deposited near the Shechinah.
    
    17,23. והנה פרח מטה אהרן לבית לוי, “and behold! The staff of Aaron, representing the ancestral house of Levi, sprouted, etc.”  It did so because Aaron was part of the ancestral house of Levi.
   ויוצא פרח ויצץ ציץ, “it had brought forth sprouts, produced blossoms, and borne almonds.” The reason the staff produced almonds instead of some other fruit [seeing the almond is not one of the fruit for which the land of Israel is famous, Ed.] is because not only are almonds highly regarded but they are the first to mature after winter. The word שקד suggests a kind of eagerness such as the prophet Jeremiah describing  G’d as “eager” to carry out His promise/threat [having shown Jeremiah an almond tree in a vision, Jeremiah 1,11-12. Ed.] In that particular instance the almond tree symbolised the bitter taste of some almonds and G’d used it as a threat of the Jewish people tasting the bitterness of exile. We have other examples of similar meanings of the simile of almonds. The people of Israel were to learn from this that if someone challenges the hierarchy as established by the Torah not only would he be punished but his punishment would be swift. The attribute of Justice would be activated against such a person. King Uzziah was a case in point; he was punished immediately he offered incense, his forehead becoming afflicted with tzoraat, the dreaded skin disease (Chronicles II 26,19).
    
    17,24. ויראו ויקח איש מטהו, “when they saw, each (tribal representative) took his own staff.” Each one knew which was his staff as they had inscribed their names on it.
    
    17,27. הן גוענו, אבדנו, כולנו אבדנו, “behold we perish, we are lost, we are all lost.” They meant that they were all lost as anyone approaching the sacred precincts of the Tabernacle would die. The reason the Torah repeats the expression קריבה, “approaching” in verse 28 is that if anyone who approaches the Tabernacle more closely than his neighbour is subject to death just like the 250 men who had been burned they wished they would die now [seeing they had nothing to look forward to except death in the desert. Ed.] The question: “will we ever stop perishing?” (verse 28) suggested that the Israelites viewed the Levites as the cause of their deaths. This is why G’d told Aaron in his capacity as the tribal head of the tribe of Levi to take care that the Levites should not become the cause of Israelites dying through any error they would commit (compare Ibn Ezra on verse 27).
    There is also another approach to these words הן גוענו אבדנו כלנו אבדנו; this statement by the Israelites was a reference to the three penalties that had struck the people who had challenged the existing order in Jewish society. The words הן גוענו, “here we have perished,” refer to the people who suffered death by being burned; the word אבדנו, “we are lost,” refers to the people who had been swallowed up by the earth. The final expression: כלנו אבדנו, “we have all perished,” referred to the plague which had cost 14,700 victims. (verse 14). Onkelos reflects this approach in his translation. He writes: הא מננא קטלת חרבא הא מננא בלעת ארעא, והא מננא דמיתו במותנא, i.e. he mentions the three kinds of death which struck these three groups of people by name instead of speaking in generalities as does our verse in its original. The translation of גוענו as קטלת חרבא, “death by the sword,” is quite appropriate for a description of the attribute of Justice as it is found in Isaiah 27,1.
    
    18,1. תשאו את עון כהונתכם, “you shall bear any guilt connected  with your priesthood.” The meaning of the verse is: “if you do not carefully guard the priesthood any guilt arising from negligence will be borne by you. The reason the Torah adds: “you and your sons with you in front of the Tent of Testimony” (verse 2), is that both you and your sons are always perceived as being in My (G’d’s) presence all the time. Sifri Korach 116 explains that the priests are responsible for what occurs inside the Sanctuary whereas the Levites are responsible for what occurs around it outside in the sacred precincts. Each group was expected to mount guards at night, etc.
    18,3. ולא ימותו גם הם גם אתם, “so that not both you and they will die.” This is the source for the halachah that the functions of the Levites are not interchangeable, that a priest may not perform functions designated for the Levite, nor the Levite functions reserved for the priest (Erchin 11, Maimonides Hilchot Kley Hamikdash 3,10). Not only this, but even priests who have been assigned certain tasks must not exchange their duties with priests who have been assigned different priestly assignments, nor must Levites exchange duties within the framework of what is their exclusive domain. If a Levite was assigned the duty  to play an instrument or participate in the songs the Levites sing, he must not instead engage in washing the hands of the priests, for instance! This is why the Torah writes (Numbers 4,49) איש איש על עבודתו, “each man to his designated task.” This is the way these words have been defined in Sifri 116. The words: “but to the holy vessels and to the Altar they shall not approach,” are a warning, whereas the words following “so that they will not die,” are the Torah’s way of spelling out the penalty for non-observance of the warning. The words גם הם, “they also,” are the source for the inadmissibility of exchanging duties either by mutual consent or willful pre-empting the duties assigned to a colleague. It occurred once that Rabbi Joshua ben Chanayah wished to assist a colleague in closing the doors and he was stopped from doing so by Rabban Yochanan who told him that seeing he was one of the singers he had not business to concern himself with the duties of those who were in charge of the gates (Erchin 11).
    18,4. ושמרו את משמרת אהל מועד, “and they are to safeguard the duties pertaining to the Tent of Meeting.” The purpose of this שמירה, supervision, is to enhance the reputation of the Tabernacle as it is a well known fact that any building surrounded by guards of honour is considered as of greater importance by people seeing the guards than even a palace not surrounded by guards.
    
    18,7. עבודת מתנה אתן את כהונתכם, “I make your priesthood a service of dedication.” The performance of the sacrificial duties which I (G’d) impose on the priests are not to be viewed as menial tasks but as a major service and a gift from Me to you. Apart from the fact that you derive your livelihood from the performance of these duties you are to consider it as an honour and glory bestowed upon you.
    The reason that the Torah repeats here once more that “the stranger who approaches (unauthorised) shall die,” is because this time it is not addressed to members of other tribes but to priests who for one reason or another have become disqualified. Even Levites are subject to this warning. If we find that the prophet Samuel (a Levite, not a priest) offered a burnt-offering (Samuel I 7,9) this was an exception dictated by special circumstances. It was similar to Gideon (a member of the tribe of Menashe) who is also reported as offering a sacrifice (Judges 6,25-27). Moreover, seeing that this paragraph deals with the situation in the desert and the period when the Tabernacle had recently been erected and the firstborn had been replaced by the Levites, there is ample reason to repeat the warning once more. (Rabbi Chavell points out that the sacrifice offered by Samuel on a private altar after the destruction of he Tabernacle in Shiloh was perfectly permissible for any Israelite and that there is nothing strange about what Samuel did there although he was the first one to do so. Compare Avodah Zarah 24. According to the Talmud Temurah 28 the night on which Gideon offered a sacrifice was historically important as no fewer than eight prohibitions were waived on that night).
    
    18,8. וידבר ה' אל אהרן ואני הנה נתתי לך את משמרת תרומותי, “The Lord said to Aaron: “here I have entrusted to you the minding of My gifts, etc.” At this juncture G’d reconfirms Aaron’s status as High Priest after his position had previously been challenged. You may understand why the Torah found it necessary to do this by means of a parable. A king had given a present of a field to a close friend of his without bothering to draw up a deed confirming the gift. After a while, people seeing the king’s friend treat the field as his challenged him. The king told the friend who was somewhat upset: “let whoever wants to challenge My gift challenge it.” However, I will provide you with a deed proving that you have title to the field and I will put my royal seal on it. Here we have written proof of the 24 different kinds of gifts the king (G’d) bestowed on the priests, most of which came from the pockets of the Israelites (compare Sifri 119). Chulin 133 confirms this stating: “there are 24 different kinds of gifts called מתנות כהונה, ‘gifts that the priests are entitled to.’” They are equivalent to what is called a ברית מלח, a “covenant based on salt.” Just as salt is of an enduring quality so anyone who observes this covenant is highly regarded, whereas anyone who breaches any part of this covenant (withholds any of these items from the priests) is considered as if he had violated all parts of this covenant. The reason for this is that the covenant is spelled out both in general terms, i.e. לכל קדשי בני ישראל לך נתתים, “of all the sacred donations of the Israelites I give them to you,” and is subsequently listed in detail once more.
    These twenty-four gifts are divided into three distinct categories. Ten of them apply to sacrificial offerings presented in the Temple and to be consumed only within the sacred precincts of the Temple Mount. Ten more apply to other parts of the Holy Land, i.e. they are to given to the priests anywhere within the Holy Land. The last four are gifts to be given to the priests within the (whole) confines of the city of Jerusalem. 
    The ten gifts to be consumed within the confines of the sacred grounds of the Temple are: meat from sin-offerings of four-legged animals; meat from a sin-offering consisting of a bird; meat from the guilt-offering for a sin definitely performed, meat from a similar guilt offering when the sinner is not certain he has become guilty of that sin; parts of the meat of public peace-offerings,  the log of oil to be offered by a person cured from the skin disease tzoraat; the two show-breads offered in the Temple each Sabbath; the breads offered on Shavuot each year (new wheat harvest); remainders of all “gift-offerings” consisting of flour and oil. The part of the Omer (annual new barley offering) not consigned to the Altar. The four gifts given to the priests for use
within the confines of the city of Jerusalem are: the firstborn male animal fit for the altar; the respective first fruit (of the seven kinds of produce the land of Israel is famous for). The remains of the ram brought by the Nazarene at the end his term, and lastly, the hides of the various animals which are offered on the altar. The ten gifts which are applicable and usable by the priest throughout the Land of Israel are: a gift by the farmer before he separates the tithe from his grain harvest. Terumat-Maasser, a corres-ponding gift to the priest by the Levite of the tithe he has received from the Israelite. Challah, the first part of the dough (discussed in Numbers chapter 15,17-21); the wool of the first shearing of the sheep. The stomach, forearm and cheekbones of the average animal offered as a freely donated offering by the ordinary Israelite. The five shekel the father needs to give to the priest to redeem his son if he is the firstborn of his wife by natural birth. The lamb or money in lieu of the lamb traded in order to redeem the fistborn of a farmer’s donkey. Certain lands which belonged to proselytes who died intestate. Fields donated to the Temple Treasury and not subject to the Jubilee legislation. Property stolen from a proselyte who died without heirs before the stolen property could be returned by the thief.
    18,10. בקדש הקדשים תאכלו, “you shall eat it in the most holy.” Seeing that the Inner Sanctuary, known generally as קדש הקדשים, is not an area in which one may consume any part of the offerings since even the High Priest may only enter there on Yom Kippur when eating is altogether forbidden, the meaning of this word must be something different. The term does not apply to a location but to a state of ritual purity, i.e. the highest state of ritual purity the priest can attain. He is not allowed to eat the parts of the sacrificial meat described in the previous verse unless he is in that state of purity.
    Alternatively, the term here is relative, i.e. compared to the outer courtyard of the Tabernacle, the area of the Sanctuary including the עזרה, is considered “the holy of holies” (compare Ibn Ezra).
    18,14. כל חרם בישראל לך יהיה, “Every segregated property (proscribed) to the Israelites shall be yours.” When an Israelite vows a property of his as out of bounds to himself it becomes out of bounds both to himself as well as to the other Israelites and becomes the property of the priests of the roster who perform service in the Temple at that time. Elsewhere, in Leviticus 27,21, this legislation is couched in the words: כשדה החרם לכהן תהיה אחזתו, “as land proscribed; it becomes the priest’s holding.”-In the event that he donor had intended his property to be used (exchanged for money) to make repairs to the Temple, for instance, then it is used for that purpose instead of being given to the priests and to become their personal property. Our sages (Midrash Tehillim 1) derive this rule from something in our Parshah. A certain woman owned a female sheep and when the time came to shear its wool, the local priest asked her to give him the wool. When the same sheep birthed her first young male lamb the priest took it. When she saw all this she slaughtered the animal. When the priest found out he came to claim his portion of the meat. When frustrated at this state of affairs the woman decided to rather declare the whole animal as חרם, hoping thereby to deprive the priest, she found to her dismay that the priest now claimed the entire animal.
    18,16. ופדויו מבן חודש ומעלה, “those that have to be redeemed must be at least one month old.” The subject of the word ופדויו is the male human firstborn.
    18,19. ברית מלח עולם היא לפני ה’, “It is an eternal salt-like covenant before Hashem.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is that the covenant is “cut off,” absolute, final, just like salt is cut off from the mine in which is it detached from the mother lode. The word means that something is final, irreversible. We find the word used in this sense in Jeremiah 17,6 ארץ מלחה ולא תשב, “a land so full of salt that it will never be habitable again.” 
    A kabbalistic approach: the words “it is an eternal covenant” mean that the covenant described as a “salt-like covenant” is an eternal covenant. Just as salt preserves the meat indefinitely, so this type of covenant endures indefinitely. 
    The major ingredient of salt is water. Due to the power of the sun which shone upon it it turns into salt. In other words, salt represents a fusion of the elements fire and water. Similarly, the covenant is a combination of the attributes Mercy and Justice. This is the mystical dimension of Genesis 36,39 בת מי זהב, (compare author’s comment on page 544 our translation on the meaning of the word בת). The whole verse explains to us that this covenant is the “salt of the universe.” it ensures that the universe endures, or, G’d forbid, will be destroyed if the covenant is breached. We have proof of this from Deut. 29,22 where the earth around Sodom and Gomorrah which had undergone a rain of sulfur and salt some 500 years earlier is described as still unfit to produce vegetation. At first glance, describing salt as a destructive agent and using it as an example of an enduring covenant, i.e. something positive, appears contradictory. However, this is not so. The two statements are merely two halves of the same coin. You should realise that in these two paragraphs  which have been written consecutively the gifts which have been allocated to both the priests and the Levites have been spelled out. In both paragraphs G’d addressed only Aaron using both the term וידבר and the term ויאמר (verses 8 and 20 respectively). The details of the 24 gifts that the priests are entitled to were told Aaron under the heading of וידבר, whereas the gifts the Israelites were to give to the Levites were introduced with the words ויאמר ה’ אל אהרן. 
    You are already aware that the attribute which applies to the priests is primarily the attribute which characterises the written Torah, whereas the attribute which applies to the Levites is predominantly that which is characterised by the oral Torah (our author elaborated on this in Exodus 13,1 in the kabbalistic part of his commentary, page 907 our translation) In connection with the Levites you encounter the wording על פי ה’, an expression you do not encounter in connection with covenantal instructions issued to the Israelites (non-Levites). Our sages in Gittin 60 have said that “G’d only concluded a covenant with the Jewish people for the sake of the oral Torah.” When you open the “eyes” of your heart and look carefully you will observe that the heritage allocated to the priests is associated with G’d’s attribute אני, i.e. אני חלקך ונחלתך, “I am your share and your heritage among the Children of Israel” in verse 20 of our chapter. In this instance the word אני undoubtedly describes the attribute of Mercy. Other examples of where the wordאני  clearly describes G’d in His capacity as the attribute of Mercy are found in Exodus 6,5: וגם אני שמעתי את נאקת בני ישראל, “and I have also heard the groaning of the Children of Israel, etc.”
    The share of the Levites is the tithe which in itself is an allusion to the עשירית, the tenth emanation. This is why the Torah phrases this as ולבני לוי הנה נתתי כל מעשר בישראל לנחלה, “and as to the members of the tribe of Levi: “here I have given every tithe in Israel as a heritage, etc.”
    You will find that Yaakov treated his son Levi as the tenth amongst his sons (compare what the author wrote on page 418 our translation in connection with Genesis 27,19). Yaakov took the vow to tithe everything G’d would give him so seriously that he even tithed his children.
    When a shepherd wants to tithe every tenth of his flock as prescribed by the Torah, he first leads all the sheep into the fold and then counts them individually, one by one. The last one in then becomes the first one out. Similarly, when Yaakov, a shepherd set out to tithe one of his children he first brought them into the fold commencing with his eldest Reuven and concluding with his youngest Binyamin. When he counted them subsequently, commencing this time with Binyamin, Levi was the tenth and therefore became sanctified. We find this idea in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 37 where the author writes specifically that Yaakov tithed in reverse order, i.e. in the order we just described. According to that statement he commenced with Binyamin while he latter was still in the womb of his mother. The Midrash goes on to describe the archangel Michael presenting Levi before G’d and saying: Lord Almighty this one is Your lot, the share of Your tithes. G’d stretched out His hand and blessed Levi saying that all the sons of Levi should become holy forthwith and perform service to the Lord on earth similar to what the ministering angels do in the celestial regions. The archangel Michael  continued saying: “do not the king’s servants receive their livelihood from the king as compensation for their services?” Therefore G’d allocated the tithes of the Children of Israel to the Levites. This is the meaning of Deut. 18,1: “the fire-offerings of Hashem and His inheritance shall they eat” (the latter part applies to the Levites). Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer. 
    While it is true that every Levite has been sanctified, the priest has been accorded an even greater level of holiness. The Levite himself publicises the additional sanctity of the priest seeing he has to tithe the tithe he has received from the Israelite and give it to the priest. This is the meaning of Numbers 8,19: “and from among the Israelites I formally assign the Levites to Aaron and his sons, to perform the service for the Israelite in the Tent of Meeting, etc.”
    If you will look closely at our verse (18,19) you will note that the Torah applies the feminine pronoun היא to the tasks performed by the priests, i.e. the ברית מלח, whereas in connection with the Levites (verse 23) the Torah employs the pronoun הוא, i.e. the masculine pronoun. What this proves is that the attributes are not totally separate from one another and that each attribute contains elements from the other. When something is defined as “feminine,” this does not mean that it is exclusively feminine, but that the feminine ingredients in that attribute dominate; the same applies to instances when we encounter the masculine attribute, i.e. the masculine aspect is the dominant one. We already explained repeatedly that the same concept applies to attributes such as “Justice” and “Mercy” respectively. In the instance quoted the word היא means that although we said previously that the dominating attribute associated with the priests is the attribute of Mercy, the Torah wants us to realise that this attribute is not exclusive; neither is the attribute of Justice which we described as predominant in connection with the Levites exclusive; hence the masculine pronoun הוא is here (23) associated with the Levites. [A construction such as found in verses 23, i.e. ועבד הלוי הוא את עבודת אהל מועד, is most unusual as the word הוא appears totally superfluous in the sentence. Ed.] We find similar examples of apparently inverted associations with the “wrong” attribute in connection with both Yaakov and David. The most famous example is Micah 7,20 תתן אמת ליעקב, as we would never have expected the harsh attribute אמת to be applied to Yaakov. Similarly, when David (Psalms 23,1) describes the attribute “elohim” i.e. the attribute of Justice as being the one which looks after him as a protective shepherd, this seems at first glance similarly innocuous. The lesson from that wording is that the attribute of Justice contains elements of the attribute of Mercy. David uses the subject of פרנסה, livelihood, to demonstrate that both of these attributes are involved on their respective levels in ensuring man’s livelihood.
    18,20. בארצם לא תנחל, “in their land you shall have no heritage.” Our sages apply this verse (only) to the time when the land parcels will be distributed to the various tribes (Sifri Korach 119).
   וחלק לא יהיה לך בתוכם, “and you will not have a share among them.” This refers to booty captured in war.
   אני חלקך, “I am your share.” You will eat at My table (altar). The portions of the offerings assigned to you (the priests) are portions from G’d’s table.
    18,21. ולבני לוי, “to the sons of Levi, etc.” Seeing that in connection with the priests the Torah had spoken of “Pinchas and his descendants after him,” (Numbers 25,13), i.e. that the priesthood would be hereditary in character, the Torah had to teach us that the same principle applied to the duties and privileges associated with the Levites. The Torah chose the word: “sons of” seeing that it had not previously used the word “after him” as it had in connection with the priesthood bestowed on Pinchas. The letter ו in ולבני, is an additive, adding something to the original i.e. the subject discussed previously, the priesthood. Just as the term “an eternal salt-like covenant” applies to the priests and the priesthood, so the same term applies to the Levites and their duties and privileges.
    These portions which we conclude here describe that after the various challenges to the already prevailing hierarchy had been disposed of, the staff of Aaron had to sprout not only as symbol of his personal status but as symbol once and for all that the functions of both the Levites and the Priests had been ordained from on high not just for this generation but on an ongoing hereditary basis. As mentioned previously, the sprouting of Aaron’s staff contained not only the message of Aaron’s “superiority,” but the whole phenomenon was to serve as warning to any future challengers of the system that G’d’s punishment would be swift, just as the almond tree develops swiftly. We find strong allusions to this concept in Psalms 92,8, in Isaiah 35,2, in Hoseah 14,6 and in Proverbs 11,28. In all of the verses mentioned the verb פרח does not only describe development, growth as such,  but swift development. 
    
    
    
   זאת חקת  התורה
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   בני שמור אמרי ומצותי תצפון אתך. מצותי וחיה ותורתי כאישון עיניך. “My son, heed my words treasure my commandments within you. Keep my commandments and live; and my teachings as the apple of your eyes” (Proverbs 7,1-2). Throughout the Book of Proverbs Solomon always speaks in the name of the attribute (or emanation) חכמה, wisdom; he refers to all the 613 commandments in the Torah as either אמרים, “words” or מצות, “commandments.” His father David before him already referred to the commandments as אמרים, as we know from Psalms 12,7: אמרות ה’ אמרות טהורות, “the Lord’s commandments are pure commandments.”
    The commandments of the Torah are subdivided into three groups. They are known as 1) מצות מקובלות, 2) מצות מושכלות, and 3)  מצות שאין טעמם נגלה ומבואר 1) Commandments which are based on historical precedents; 2) commandments which appeal to our minds and which are easy to understand and appreciate. 3) Commandments the reason for which and the usefulness of which are completely outside our ability to comprehend. The first group which includes such laws as making and wearing phylacteries or putting fringes on our four-cornered garments as well as the commandment to circumcise our male babies, etc., have a common denominator in that they are associated with the history of our people and our special protection by the Almighty. When we perform any of these commandments we testify to the fact that we belong to the chosen people and that we as well as our forefathers have accepted His covenant and are loyal to it, bound by it. None of these commandments would have been invented by man as only G’d can legislate what are suitable symbolic acts to recall events in our history. This is why many of our sages also call these commandments עדות, “testimony.” They are all of Divine origin. The Torah describes the second generation of Israelites as inquiring after what they perceive to be these “testimonial laws” in Deut. 6,20. Some of these laws testify to the fact that G’d created the universe out of no tangible material, others testify to the selection of the Jewish people as His special nation; still others testify to the manner in which G’d provided for us in the desert, etc. David (Psalms 119,24) is on record as viewing even these commandments as שעשעי, “my delights.”
    The second group of commandments-even if not always in their details- are the ones which the human mind would have had to invent and legislate if the Torah had not done so; this is why they are called מושכלות, “rational” in essence. Examples are how we are to deal with the crimes of theft, robbery, murder, unfair business practices, etc., etc. The term applied to these kinds of commandments in the Torah is משפטים.
    The third group of commandments, the ones which completely baffle us, are the legislation not to mix certain seeds, wear clothes combining wool and linen, mixing of meat and milk (though they are part of the same animal), the dispatch of the scape-goat to the Azazel, and the laws involving the red heifer. The Torah’s appellation for all of these types of laws is חקים, “statutes.” This is also one of the groups of laws referred to as the subject of the inquiry by second generation Israelites (and later generations) in Deut. 6,20-21. The answer suggested by the Torah to such inquiries is prefaced with the words: “we used to be slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt who maltreated us in a cruel manner until the Lord our G’d redeemed us from there ad brought us to this land of Israel.” The Torah emphasises “the Lord our G’d did all this,” i.e. that as of that point in time the reputation of the Lord as our national G’d was greatly enhanced. It is therefore appropriate that we loyally accept all three groups of commandments. The passage in Deuteronomy we quoted refers to three groups of commandments, עדות, משפטים, חקים. In the verse quoted above from Proverbs, Solomon merely paraphrases the words of the Torah by speaking of the עדות as אמרי; he refers to the משפטים as שמור מצותי וחיה, “observe My commandments so that you may live (a civilian and secure life).” Finally, when Solomon says: ומצותי תצפון אתך, “treasure My commandments with you,” he refers to the חקים statutes, which, though not understood by you, should be treasured nonetheless. G’d in His capacity as our king has the right to legislate statutes such as the one of the red heifer without revealing His motive.
    19,2. זאת חקת התורה אשר צוה ה’ לאמור, דבר אל בני ישראל ויקחו אליך פרה אדומה תמימה וגו’, “this is the statute of the Torah which the Lord has commanded to say: ‘tell the Children of Israel that they shall take an unblemished red cow, etc.’” The paragraph dealing with the red heifer has been appended to the one detailing the gifts the Israelites have to give to the priests because the red heifer is the “instrument which purifies the Jewish people.”  The paragraph teaches that the priests are not only the recipients of gifts from the Israelites but that they are the ones who can confer ritual purity on the Israelites.
   חקת התורה, “a statute of the Torah.” The various commen-tators understand the word as meaning: ‘statute, Royal Decree.’ In other words, a law which defies understanding by the subject to whom it is applied. People asked to obey it constantly wonder why they have to obey such a law. The details of the red heifer legislation are not only devoid of logic but appear to defy logic in that contact with that cow defiles the ritually pure while purifying the ritually impure.
    The truth is that the red heifer is one of the statutes which defies our understanding. Still, the principal meaning of the word חק is derived from the word חקיקה, something that is “indelibly engraved in a rock.” like a picture. G’d hinted to the Children of Israel that their image is indelibly engraved in the celestial regions. In other words, seeing there are no rocks to inscribe things on in the celestial regions, the word חקיקה is a simile for immutable concepts, as basic to G’d’s legislation as if their counterpart had been engraved in rock in our terrestrial universe (compare author’s comment on Leviticus 19,19 our translation page 1745). This is why a certain group of the commandments is known under the heading of חקים. It is significant that the expression חקת התורה appears in connection with our legislation here, whereas in connection with the legislation involving the scape-goat the Torah defines this as חקת עולם, whereas in connection with kilayim, the prohibition to mix species which G’d wanted to keep separate, the Torah simply writes את חקותי תשמורו, “observe My statutes.” Whenever the Torah refers to a commandment as having an aspect of חוק, this is its way of reminding us of the immutability of such a commandment.
    Another reason why the term חק is applied to certain laws is that the word means גבול, “limitation,” such as when the prophet Jeremiah 15,22 describes the sand on the beaches of the sea as the limit to the ocean’s power of expanding into the area designated as “the dry land.” The wording there is: אשר שמתי גבול לים חק עולם ולא יעברנהו, “who set the sand as a boundary for the sea as a limit for all time not to be transgressed.” Other examples of the meaning of the word חק being “boundary,” are Jeremiah 31,35: חקות ירח וכוכבים לאור לילה, “the laws of moon and stars for light by night.” In other words, sun and moon respectively serve as boundaries of day and night respectively (compare the whole verse in Jeremiah).
    The philosophical aspect of the meaning of “boundary” for the word חק in connection with this legislation is that there are limits, boundaries, to the extent to which we may employ our investi-gative faculties in probing its meaning. We have to discipline ourselves in acknowledging that G’d clearly did not want us to probe beyond a certain point.
    You need to appreciate that there is a difference in meaning between the word חק and the word חקה. Any commandment described as חק has its origin in the attribute זכור [the author refers to the two aspects of Sabbath legislation described by the Torah as זכור and שמור respectively, Ed.] The former refers to an emanation on the right side of the diagram of the emanations, whereas the latter is part of the left side of that diagram. We find in connection with the laws of Passover (Exodus 12,25) that the Torah categorises that legislation as לחק לך ולבניך, “as a statute for you and your children.” A חק is something definitive, decisive. We find the word in the benedictions recited at the circumcision, i.e. חק בשארו שם, “He set a חק (seal) on the flesh of his offspring.” In our prayers on New Year’s Day we speak of the requirement to blow the shofar on that day as being חק לישראל, (Psalms 81,5) a very definitive requirement. This point is also made in the Sefer Yetzirah 2,1 where the author writes כי חק הוא מכריע, that the word חק reconciles conflicting concepts [between the right and the left side of the emanations. Ed.]
    A commandment described as חקה, is derived from the attribute שמור. Examples are such statements as Leviticus 19,19 את חוקותי תשמורו, “you are to observe My statutes.” The statutes referred to are not to mix certain species, not to marry the wife of a brother while the brother is alive (The word שמירה is used in connection with that commandment). Here too the Torah couches the legislation in the word חקה rather than חק, similar to the wording in Leviticus 20,22 summing up the legislation involving forbidden sexual unions. [the difference between the two words used for these various legislations may perhaps be defined as the difference between positive and negative commandments. The former are described as חק, the latter as חקה. Ed.]
   אשר צוה ה', “which the Lord  has commanded.” The Torah really should have written: “which I commanded.” However our syntax here is comparable to Exodus 24,1 where the Torah wrote: ואל משה אמר עלה אל ה',- instead of עלה אלי, ascend to Me.”
   דבר אל בני ישראל, speak to the Children of Israel, etc.” Although the paragraph commences with G’d addressing both Moses and Aaron, He uses the singular דבר, instead of דברו when formulating what precisely it is that the Children of Israel are to be told. The reason is that even when G’d addresses Moses and Aaron simultaneously, Moses is  considered the principal.
   ויקחו אליך, “and they shall take to you.” The reason for the additional word “to you” at this point is to teach that the commandment was of immediate importance at this time in the desert, whereas later on (verse 10) G’d gives instructions as to future applicability of this commandment. We find a similar pattern in the legislation of the oil for anointing (Exodus 27,20) and I have commented on this at the time.
   פרה אדומה תמימה, “a completely red cow without a blemish.” The word תמימה refers to the colour, not to the size or other features of the cow. If this cow had been undersized compared to other cows of similar age this would not disqualify the animal from serving the purpose described by the Torah. Two black hairs or two white hairs in its coat would disqualify the cow from being used for the procedure described here. It is not surprising therefore that the price of such a cow would be very high (compare Kidushin 31).
    Maimonides writes in Hilchot Parah Adumah that this cow was generally either three of four years old. If it happened to be older this did not disqualify her. One does not generally purchase such an animal when it is still a calf and raises it in the care of the Temple treasury. In the event the need arises for such a cow to be purchased and none is available that meets the required criteria age-wise, it is acceptable to put the money for an animal which is younger at that time in escrow and the animal remains under the care of its owners until it is old enough and only then is ownership transferred to the Temple treasury. This rule is derived from the wording: “take to you a red cow” [as opposed to a red calf, Ed.].
    It is permissible to buy such a cow from a Gentile, (idolater) and we do not worry that its owner had previously used it in mating practices which are forbidden under Torah law. The reason we do not worry about this is that no one in his right mind puts such an expensive animal at risk, seeing that if such a ritually forbidden mating had taken place the owner would forfeit all the money he had stood to gain from selling this animal to the Israelites.
    All the blemishes that normally disqualify an animal as a potential sacrificial offering also disqualify the red cow [although it is not destined for the altar. Ed.] We derive this from the words: אשר אין בה מום, “ which is unblemished.” The Torah refers to this animal as a חטאת, “(normally translated as “sin offering”) although it is not slaughtered in sacred precincts. This cow is subject to additional restrictions not applicable to animals destined for the altar, as the Torah demands אשר לא עלה עליה עול, “which has never worn a yoke.” Other animals may have served such profane uses prior to being sanctified to became sacrificial offerings.
    We have a similar requirement in connection with the עגלה ערופה, “a heifer (calf) which will die by having its neck broken” (compare Deut. 21,3) where the wording is אשר לא עובד בה אשר לא משכה בעול, “with which no work has been performed, which has not pulled with a yoke.” Just as in the case of the עגלה ערופה such a calf is disqualified if it has performed work for an owner even without the device known as “yoke,” so the red cow too must not have performed any chore even if it had not worn a yoke while doing so. In other words, the “yoke” disqualifies the red cow even if it had never been put to its customary use. Similarly, work performed disqualifies the animal even if it had never worn a yoke. To illustrate: if the animal was connected to a ploughshare even if it had not pulled the plough it would be disqualified; on the other hand if it had been brought to a threshing-ground without having started to thresh it would be fit to serve as a red cow. If someone had used the cow to ride on, to lean on, or had hung something on its tail, or had even covered it merely with a cloth etc., it is disqualified. If the cloth was of a protective nature, i.e. to ward off flies, it is in order. If restraints had been put on the animal because it had behaved rebelliously this does not disqualify the red cow from being used for its designated purpose. If the animal had not first demonstrated unruly behaviour making restraints necessary, putting restraints on it merely as a precautionary measure is not permissible. If the cow had performed a useful task without the owner or any other person urging it to do so, it depends on whether the owner approved and meant to benefit by such work. If yes, the animal can no longer serve for its ritual purpose, if the owner did not  approve or intend to make use of the result of the animal’s labour the animal is not disqualified. This is the meaning of the formula אשר לא עובד בה, “that the labour had not been performed with it by design.” Approval after the event is equated by halachah as if it had been intended already prior to the event. Therefore, if, for instance, a bird had made the animal’s back its regular seat, this does not impede the animal’s use as a red cow. If a bull had mounted the cow this does disqualify her; if she is pregnant she is also disqualified, of course. The rule governing all this is simple: if the work performed with the animal is for the good of the animal or its well-being it is all right. If its serves the owner or his agent it disqualifies the animal as a potential red cow as described in the Torah.
    If an animal which had been designated as a red cow dies before it could be used, or it developed some blemish which prevents it from being used as intended, it may be redeemed. As a result its hide may be used for profane purposes though its meat may not be eaten, or in the case of death being due to natural causes rather than ritual slaughter, its meat must not be fed to the dogs as this would be degrading (even after it has been redeemed for money to the Temple treasury).
    If, when the red cow was slaughtered, it was slaughtered for profane purposes instead of with a view to the remains being burned as ashes of the red cow, it will not have the effect of achieving atonement for people being sprinkled with its ash and the water from a living well. If the Temple  treasury had bought a red cow and subsequently found an animal of better appearance, the original one may be redeemed and the proceeds applied to the purchase of the second animal even though the original red cow had not developed any blemish disqualifying it. 
    An ordinary priest is fully qualified to perform the procedure with the red cow. This is derived from verse 3: “and you shall hand it to Eleazar the Priest.” As a general rule the procedure was performed by the High Priest’s substitute, second in command. At the time this legislation was revealed Aaron was still alive. Therefore, when the Torah writes that the procedure is to be performed by his son Eleazar who was his successor, it is clear that not only the High Priest could perform this procedure. The priest performing this procedure is to wear the four priestly garments which an ordinary priest wears when performing sacrificial service within the confines of the Temple and its courtyard.
    The flesh of the cow must not be burned on the sacred grounds of the Temple Mount as we know from verse 3: והוציא אותה אל מחוץ למחנה, “he is to take it outside the camp.” This means outside both the camp of the priests, the Levites, and the Israelites. Usually, the red cow was slaughtered on the Mount of Olives. [there were only a total of 9 such cows during the entire 830 years that the two Temples stood. Ed.] The words: ושחט אותה לפניו, “he shall slaughter it in his presence,” mean that even a non-priest could perform the slaughtering provided the priest stood beside him and watched his every action. Sifri 123 and Yuma 42 state that indeed a lay Israelite slaughtered the cow while Eleazar was watching. Sifri adds that only this animal could be slaughtered at that time. The slaughterer was not allowed to slaughter another animal immediately before or after. The slaughterer must not be involved at that time in any other chore. We derive this from verse 5: ושרף את הפרה לעיניו, “he is to burn the cow in front of his eyes,” i.e. he must  not take his eyes off it during the entire procedure until it has become ash. The words in verse 4: “and Eleazar the priest shall take of its blood with his finger,” mean that as opposed to sacrificial animals whose blood is sprinkled on the altar, no special vessel was designated for the blood to be put into prior to its being sprinkled on the altar, or in this instance in the direction of the Temple (or Tabernacle). The priest must watch what he is doing while sprinkling as the Torah uses the words: “in the direction of.” The slaughtering is done with the right hand whereas the blood is “caught” with the left and then sprinkled with the fingers of the right hand.
    After each of the seven sprinklings the priest wipes his hand on the body of the cow as residue of the blood must not be used again; at the conclusion of the sprinkling he descends from the woodpile upon which the animal’s body is lying and lights the fire.  The priest stands some distance away watching until the fire has enveloped most of the cow’s body and its belly has split open. After that the priest takes the cedar-wood and the hyssop, not shorter than one handbreadth, and some wool dyed red (crimson)  weighing five selaim and he says to the people standing around him: “this is the cedar-wood” (prescribed by the Torah) three times. After that he points to the hyssop, again saying three times: “this is the hyssop.” Those around him confirm having heard what the priest said by saying הן, “yes,” in response to each of the priest’s statements. Why was all this elaborate ritual necessary? There are seven different varieties of cedars; there are four varieties of hyssop;  different artisans use different dyes to achieve the colour called תולעת שני, “crimson;” therefore the priest wanted to make sure that all the people around him had confirmed that what he had done was the correct procedure by consensus. According to Maimonides the colour crimson can be obtained from the seeds of a plant known as puah, closely resembling the seeds of the carobs, etc.; the priest wanted confirmation that the colour of the wool he used corresponded to what the Torah demanded.
    The kind of hyssop described by the Torah is the kind eaten by ordinary householders and used to provide flavouring for cooked dishes. The hyssop is sandwiched together with the cedar-wood inside the crimson coloured wool and the priest throws it inside the belly of the cow after it has split open. This is the meaning of the words in verse 6: “into the burnt part of the cow.” He must not add this to the burning cow until the fire has taken hold of most of the animal, neither must he delay this part of the procedure until after the cow has turned to ash.
    When the burning has been completed one hits the remains with sticks together with all the wood from the woodpile upon which the cow was burned. After that the whole remains are sieved and anything black (not yet ash) which one comes across whether remains of wood or animal tissue, is beaten so much that it is reduced to ash.
    The water into which the ash of the red cow is poured must have been filled into a vessel directly from a spring or well of water as the Torah wrote in verse 17: “they shall put it on (the ash) spring water in a vessel.” The “pouring” of the ash into the vessel filled with water from a spring or river is what is described as “holy,” and as soon as the ash is added this mixture of water and ash is described by the Talmud as מי חטאת, (water with the capacity to bring about atonement or purification or both). The Torah (verse 13) describes this mix of water and ash from the red cow as מי נדה, “water of a menstruous woman.”
    The sages imposed additional strictures in connection with who is allowed to perform these procedures. Even a person (priest) who has immersed himself in a ritual bath so that he is ritually pure enough to perform service on the altar is not automatically pure enough to perform the procedures outlined in our chapter. He is neither qualified to burn the cow nor to fill the vessel containing the water which will be mixed with the ash and used in sprinkling on the ritually impure person to be purified. Unless the immersion in a ritual bath was for the express purpose of qualifying for the tasks associated with the procedures of the red cow such immersion is not sufficient ritual preparation.
    The sages imposed similarly harsh conditions concerning the vessel fit to contain this mixture of spring-water and the ash from the red cow. For example, even the basins in the courtyard of the Temple which were used to catch the blood from sacrificial animals after these were slaughtered in preparation of their blood being sprinkled on the altar, was not considered as of a high enough degree of sanctity to serve for holding the water-ash mixture unless such a basin had previously been immersed for this express  purpose.
    Maimonides relates in Hilchot Parah Adumah 13,2 that the kerchief of a man of the piety of Yochanan ben Gudgodah who maintained a personal level of ritual purity which would have enabled him to consume sacrificial meat all his life, was considered as if suffering from a level of ritual impurity known as tumat medress of someone suffering from involuntary seminal emissions, when compared to the degree of ritual purity required to perform the procedures of the red cow. 
    What were the details of purifying people suffering from contamination through contact with the dead by using these waters known as מי נדה? A ritually pure person takes three stalks of the hyssop plant ties them together each little branch wound with a small stalk. He proceeds to dip the heads of the small stalks in the מי נדה of the vessel containing same. While doing so he concentrates on his intention to use the water-ash mixture to sprinkle it on the person to be purified. This procedure occurs on the third and the seventh day of the seven days of purification after sunrise; the mixture of ash and water is sprinkled on the exposed part of the body of the person concerned. It does not matter how little of it hits the skin. If it only hits the tongue this does not help as the tongue is not considered an external part of the body for the purpose of this procedure. If vessels other than earthenware vessels have become contaminated through contact with the dead, the mixture is sprinkled on those vessels. They are purified without any waiting period afterwards. Thus far excerpts from Maimonides on the subject. 
    A Midrashic approach as presented by Rashi. Concerning the words: “they shall take to you a red cow.” The words: “to you” mean that the people have to pay for this red cow. Just as when the people had divested themselves of their golden jewelry in order to enable Aaron to make the golden calf (Exodus 32,3), they now have to pay for the instruments which will secure them purification and forgiveness for the ritual contamination they had caused themselves thereby. The matter is best illustrated by a parable. The son of the king’s maidservant had dirtied the palace. Thereupon the king ordered the maid to clean up the filth her son had left lying about. Similarly, the red cow is to atone for the whole episode of the golden calf. The reason that the cow is to be red is understood by the Midrash as natural, seeing that sins are generally associated with the colour red, i.e. blood guilt. We know this from Isaiah 1,18: “if your sins are crimson, they will become white as snow (after expiation).”
    The word תמימה, unblemished, is understood by the Midrash as a reference to the unblemished state of the Jewish nation prior to the sin of the golden calf. Due to their participation in that sin in varying degrees they had all became spiritually blemished. The function of the red cow and the procedure of sprinkling the Israelites with its ash and holy water would remove these blemishes. The words: “which has not borne a yoke,” are understood by the Midrash as an allusion to the yoke of the Torah which the Israelites had shaken off by their participation in the sin of the golden calf. They had rejected the yoke of accepting G’d as king. The words: “to Eleazar the priest,” are understood as an oblique reference to Aaron’s share in that sin. The red cow ritual could not be performed by Aaron as the participant in the guilt cannot reverse himself to act as advocate for the guilty. [Aaron could, of course, perform the ritual of future red cows if needed. Ed.] The words: “he shall burn the cow” are an allusion to the golden calf which Moses had burned immediately after his return from the mountain (Exodus 32,20).
    The words: “cedar-wood, hyssop, and crimson-red wool,” are understood by the Midrash as an allusion to the 3,000 active participants in the worship of the golden calf whom the Levites had executed. The cedar is the tallest of the trees, whereas hyssop is the smallest. It symbolises that the tall become haughty, sin as a result, and in the end wind up as the lowest, the most insignificant. The worm,תולעת , (source of the red colour crimson) also symbolises the human being after he has become guilty.
    The word למשמרת, “as a safekeeping,” (verse 9) is a reminder that the sin of the golden calf will never be forgotten as every time the Israelites become guilty of a sin and punishment, some of the unexpiated guilt of the golden calf episode will be added to their punishment throughout the generations. This is based on Exodus 32,34: “and on the day when I make an accounting, I shall bring their sin to account against them.” In this way the sin will be remembered  for all times.
    The golden calf had brought defilement and ritual impurity on all who had any dealings with it, (Psalms 106,28) “they attached themselves to Baal Peor and ate sacrifices offered to the dead.” [the reference to the “dead” is to compare the impurity conferred by idolatry to that conferred by contact or association with the dead. Ed.] We also have a verse in Isaiah 30,22 comparing idolatry to associating with a menstruous woman “You will cast them away like a menstruous woman. ‘Out! you will call to them’” The red cow causes similar defilement to all who busy themselves with it. Just as the purification of the Israelites from that sin at the time came about by their being sprinkled with the ash of the golden calf and water (Exodus 32,20), so the red cow procedure will parallel what Moses had done at the time in order to rehabilitate the Israelites who had become defiled.
    Midrash Pessikta de Rav Kahana  (page 75 volume I edition by Dov Mandelbaum) comments as follows: The word פרה, cow, is a reference to Egypt, compare Jeremiah 46,20: “Egypt is a handsome heifer.” The word אדומה, red, is a reference to Babylon, compare Daniel 2,38: “you are the head of gold (red).” The word תמימה, unblemished, is a reference to the kingdom of the Medes as we know from Rabbi Chiyah bar Aba who described the kings of that kingdom as תמימים, unblemished. The only complaint G’d had against these kings was that they practiced idolatry, a tradition they had carried on from their forefathers. The words: “which does not have a blemish,” refer to Alexander the great. When Alexander came face to face with the High Priest Shimon Hatzadik he got off his horse and stood at attention in greeting him. He said: “blessed be the G’d of Shimon Hatzadik.” His adjutants asked him why he showed such deference to a mere Jew? He explained to them that before every victorious battle the image of this man had appeared to him. The words: "“which has not worn a yoke,” refer to the kingdom of Edom (Rome). This kingdom completely rejected obeisance to G’d even blaspheming Him, as we know from Psalms 73,25: “Whom else have I in heaven? And having you I want no one else on earth.” [This Midrash attributes these blasphemous words quoted by the psalmist to the kingdom of Edom. Ed.] The words: “and you shall give her to Eleazar the priest and he will take it outside the camp, etc.,” are an allusion to the future when the protective angel of that kingdom will be expelled from the celestial regions. G’d will slaughter this angel representing Edom. We know this from Isaiah 34,6: “for the Lord holds a sacrifice in Bozrah, a great slaughter in the land of Edom.” Rabbi Berechyah commented on that verse and on our verse (5) “he shall burn the cow in front of his eyes,” that this corresponds to Daniel 7,11: “I watched till the beast was slain and its body destroyed, and consigned to the fire’s burning.” The words: “its skin, its flesh  and its blood  with its dung shall he burn,” are an allusion to what we read in Ezekiel 27,27: “your wealth, your wares, your merchandise, your sailors and your pilots, the men who made your repairs those who carried on your traffic, and all the fighting men within you, all the multitude within you- shall go down into the depths of the sea on the day of your downfall.” Thus far Midrash Pessikta de Rav Kahana.
    Tanchuma on Chukat 8 comments as follows on the words: “they shall take a red cow to you.” The words “a cow to you,” mean that I, G’d, will reveal the meaning of this legislation to you, but for everyone else it will remain in the realm of a חוקה, a statute, beyond their understanding. This interpretation is based on an illuminating comment by Rav Hunna on two verses (Psalms 75,3 and Zecharyah 14,6). In the former verse the psalmist writes: At the time I choose I will give judgment equitably.” [at that time the justice of My ways will become revealed to everyone, seeing G’d did not mean to imply that up until that time His justice had been inequitable. Ed.]. In the other verse the prophet quotes G’d as saying: “in that day there shall be neither sunlight nor cold moonlight, but there shall be a continuous day -only the Lord knows when- of neither day or night, and there shall be light at eventide.” The meaning of the verse is that there will remain matters which while they are not revealed to you in this world will be revealed to you in that future, such as the blind man who gains his sight, of whom Isaiah 42,16 writes: “I will guide the blind by a road they did not know, and I will make them walk by paths they never knew I will turn darkness before them to light.....these are the things which I have done and I will not abandon them.” The crucial word in that verse is the word עשיתים, instead of אעשה אותם, i.e. “I have done them,” instead of “I am going to do them” (as we would have expected). This means (according to Tanchuma) that what is described here as a view of the future G’d has already shown to Rabbi Akiva and his companions (who descended into the Pardess).
    A different approach to the same verse: Even matters which have not been revealed to Moses will be revealed to Rabbi Akiva. This is based on Job 28,10: “his eyes behold every precious thing.” These words which describe someone as seeing “every precious thing” refer to Rabbi Akiva. Solomon said in Kohelet 7,23: “All this I tested with wisdom; I thought to myself that I would become wise, but it is beyond me.” The words: “I would become wise,” are a reference to the testimony in Kings I 5,9: “the Lord had given wisdom to Solomon and discernment in great measure....and his wisdom was greater than that of all the Kedemites and all the wisdom of Egypt.” What precisely did the wisdom of the Kedemites consist of? They knew how to interpret zodiac signs, were experts in astrology; they were also familiar with the tiar, a bird  (raven?) based on Kohelet 10,20: “for a bird of the sky may carry the sound, and some winged creature may betray the matter.”
    Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel used to say that he liked three customs of the Orientals. They do not kiss on the mouth but on the hand; when they cut meat they always employ a knife; when they ask someone’s advice on a matter they invariably do this in the field (where they cannot be overheard). This latter practice is based on Yaakov consulting with his wives in the field on his decision to leave Lavan (compare Genesis  31,4). What did the wisdom of the Egyptians which Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel praised consist of? You will find that when Solomon was about to build the Temple he sent word to Pharaoh Necho asking him to supply him with artisans on loan to help him in the construction. How did Pharaoh answer this request? He consulted his astrologers to determine which of his artisans would not live out the year and he then dispatched these artisans to Solomon. When Solomon saw these people he realised with the aid of Holy Spirit that they were all going to die during that year. He provided each one with a shroud and sent them back to Pharaoh with a note reading: “were you short of shrouds in Egypt? Here I send you your artisans back with a gift of shrouds.” When the Book of Kings wrote that Solomon was wiser than “כל האדם, “any man” (or “Adam,”) what precisely did the unique wisdom of Adam consist of? You will find a discussion in the Midrash that when G’d was about to create Adam He consulted with the ministering angels about His plan saying: “let us make Adam in our image and in our likeness.” The angels countered: “what is so special about Adam that You want to bother with him?” G’d responded that the Adam He intended to create would be wiser than they. How did G’d proceed to prove His point? He assembled all the beasts, the birds, etc., and asked the angels to name them. The angels were unable to do this. After G’d had created Adam, He paraded all the animals in front of him and asked him: “what is the name of this animal, etc.?” Adam replied: “this one is called “lion,” this one is called “giraffe,” this one is called “sheep,“ etc.; etc. This is the meaning of Genesis 2,20: “Adam called the names of all the beasts.”‘ All these names Adam gave the beasts were not merely arbitrary names he chose to call them by, but they reflected the essence of each animal respectively. I have already discussed this in greater detail in my commentary on Genesis 2,19. When G’d asked Adam what his own name was, he answered: “Adam.” He explained that he said this seeing he had been created out of אדמה, raw material taken from the soil. Thereupon G’d asked Adam what His name was. Adam answered that G’d’s name was the tetragram. When G’d wanted to know what had given him this idea, (seeing he had not been told)  he answered: for You are the Master of all creatures. We know that Adam was correct from Isaiah 42,8  אני י-ה-ו-ה הוא שמי, “I am the Lord, this is My name.” G’d meant that He adopted (or retained this name) seeing the first human being Adam had bestowed it upon Him. This was a pact between Adam and G’d that G’d would henceforth be known by the name bestowed upon him by His first intelligent creature.
    When we read in Kings I 5,11 that Solomon was wiser than Eytan the Ezrachi, whom did Jeremiah (author of that Book) have in mind when he wrote these words? It was a reference to Avraham. Psalm 89 is attributed to Avraham as the word האזרחי, at the beginning of that psalm is a reference to the “East” according to our sages in Baba Batra 15. Heyman is understood to be Moses (ibid). The philological connection is established by the word נאמן in Numbers 12,7 that G’d said of Moses בכל ביתי נאמן הוא, “he is trusted in My entire House.” כלכל, another of the wise men mentioned in the chapter of the Book of Kings extolling Solomon’s wisdom is a reference to Joseph (who “provided” for all of Egypt economically with his wisdom). The Egyptians recognised that the only reason a man whom they considered a slave was able to rule over them was the extreme wisdom of Joseph which enabled him to maintain himself in that position. The Egyptians who had been suspicious of Joseph and his ability brought him seventy different pieces of paper, each in a different language, asking him to explain what was written thereon. Joseph was able to read each in its respective language. Not only that; Joseph also knew Hebrew, a tongue which the Egyptians did not understand. We base this on Psalms 81,6: עדות ביהוסף שמו, i.e. an allusion that Joseph knew something in addition to what anyone else knew. The word דרדע, another person named as very wise in Kings 5,11 is a reference to the generation of Israelites who had experienced the revelation at Mount Sinai in the desert and who had been granted insights exceeding that of any other generation. They were known as the דור דעה, “the generation imbued with knowledge.” The בני מחול who are also listed in the Book of Kings as possessing outstanding wisdom are an allusion to the people of the period of the golden calf whom G’d had forgiven their participation in that sin, hence they were called בני מחול, “people who had been pardoned.” 
    The Book of Kings there continues in quantifying Solomon’s wisdom by attributing to him no fewer than three thousand parables (proverbs) and over one thousand poems. Concerning this enigmatic statement Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmeni opines that he made a search of the entire Bible and could not come up with more than approximately 800 verses in which Solomon is mentioned as saying anything of significance. We are therefore forced to interpret these numbers mentioned in the Book of Kings not as original sayings recorded in the Bible but as the number of interpretations offered by Solomon on a far smaller number of texts. When Kings I 5,13 speaks about Solomon “speaking about trees,” one such example may be that Solomon examined the phenomenon of a person afflicted with the skin disease tzoraat requiring some of the wood from the tallest tree (cedar) and some of the wood from the most lowly tree (hyssop) to effect his purification. Solomon suggested that the cause of the affliction was that the person so stricken was guilty of arrogance, considering himself superior to his contemporaries. In order to be cured of this psychological defect he had to “lower” himself (even in his own eyes) to the level of the hyssop, the lowest of the trees in order to be fit to rejoin society. The Book of Kings goes on to describe part of Solomon’s wisdom as his ability to speak על הבהמה ועל העוף ועל הרמש ועל הדגים, “on the mammals, the birds, the creeping creatures and the fish.” He defined the reason why mammals, if fit to eat, require the severing of both the gullet and the windpipe, whereas birds require the severing of only one of these organs. He explained that this was related to the raw material these creatures were made of, i.e. the mammals were created from the soil (Genesis 1,24), whereas the birds were created from a mixture of water and soil, i.e. from mud (Genesis 1,20). 
    When Solomon is reported as speaking about the creeping things, the meaning is that he explained why eight of these species confer ritual impurity on contact with their carcass, etc. Also why people who hunt or injure these species on the Sabbath are guilty of a major infraction of the Sabbath legislation whereas other related creeping creatures are not treated in that way by halachah, i.e. because these eight species are covered by skin (Shabbat 107). Concerning the statement in Kings that Solomon spoke about the fish, he explained why they do not require ritual slaughter in order to make them fit to eat for Israelites, as we know from Numbers 11,22 where Moses speaks of slaughter for mammals and fowl, but implies that the mere gathering in of fish make them fit to be eaten. In short, Solomon declares that whereas he was able to figure out satisfactory reasons for all the legislations of the Torah concerning these creatures, the reason for the red cow legislation has escaped him. It is interesting that the numerical value of the words והיא רחוקה, which Solomon uses to describe his inability to fathom the meaning of something is the same as that of פרה אדומה, “red cow” (341). 
    When perusing the Bible and the Talmud we find that there have been a total of 9 red cows (view of the sages in Parah 3,5) The first one was burnt during Moses’ life time.; the second one was burnt during the period of Ezra in the early years of the second Temple. Shimon Hatzadik, as well as Yochanan the High Priest (early Hasmonean period), each burnt 2 such red cows. The seventh was burnt by Elihueyni, the eighth by Chanamel the “Egyptian”, whereas the ninth and last was burnt by Ishmael ben Pabi. The tenth and final one will be burned by the Messiah (according to Maimonides).
    
    The meaning of Kohelet 8,1: מי כהחכם ומי יודע פשר דבר, חכמת אדם תאיר פניו ועז פניו ישנא, ”Who is like the wise? Who knows what things mean? A man’s wisdom lights up his face, and the boldness of his face is transformed” is as follows: the words: “Who is like the wise?” refer to G’d of Whom it is written: “the Lord founded earth with wisdom.” (Proverbs 3,19). The words: “who knows what things mean?” are also a reference to G’d who explained the Torah to Moses. Concerning the words: ”a man’s wisdom lights up his face,” Rabbi Yudan said that the power of the prophets is great as they are able to draw relevant comparisons between the manifestation of power in the celestial regions and the appearance of man. Rabbi Yudan bases this on Daniel 8,16: “and I heard a human voice in the midst of Ulai.” Rabbi Yehudah in the name of Rabbi Seymon derives this point from Ezekiel 1,26: ועל דמות הכסא דמות כמראה אדם עליו מלמעלה,  “on top of this semblance of a throne, there was a semblance of a human form.” Concerning the words: “and the boldness of his face is transformed,” this is understood to refer to G’d’s ability to switch from His manifestation as attribute of Justice to manifesting Himself as attribute of Mercy when dealing with the Jewish people. Compare Tanchuma Chukat end of verse 6.
    Tanchuma goes on (on verse 7) that there are four pieces of Torah legislation which are targeted by the evil urge especially, all of which have been defined by the Torah as חקה, statute. They are: 1) the prohibition of marrying the wife of one’s brother (as a divorcee or widow with children, whereas she is to become the wife of that same brother-in-law if her husband had not sired children). 2) the prohibition of wearing wool and linen in one garment or sowing different species of seed in the same field. Seeing that it is permitted to make a talit of linen and attach woolen tzitziyot, the evil urge targets this legislation presenting it to us as illogical. 3) the law of the scapegoat which apparently carries the sins of the people as a gift to Satan. The Torah demands that the person accompanying said scape-goat purifies himself (as if the sins of these people “carried” by the beast had contaminated him whereas the scapegoat itself is killed while conferring life (forgiveness) on the sinners whose sins the beast “carries” (Leviticus 16,26). 4) The legislation of the red cow. What arouses the ire of the evil urge is the fact that all those who are involved in the ritual of the red cow, though of superior degree of ritual purity, are contaminated by it, whereas the ash of the same beast sprinkled on a ritually impure person has the power to purify such a person. According to that Midrash, Job 14,4 had this legislation in mind when he said: “who can produce a clean thing out of an unclean one? No One!” (only G’d). Examples of G’d being able to produce the clean out of the unclean are 1) Avraham sired by an arch idolater such as his father Terach. 2) The king Chiskiyah of Yehudah whose father Achaz was a confirmed heretic. 3) Mordechai who was descended from Shimi of the tribe of Binyamin who had cursed David in the vilest terms. The people of Israel who emerged from amongst all the idolatrous Gentile nations are another example of  the seemingly impossible becoming reality. So is the promise of the world of the future which will be the outcome of a transformation of this present world of lies and deceit. Job meant that the only one able to orchestrate such totally unlikely phenomena is the Unique One, the Lord! The Midrash adds some minor halachic details about the minimum size which makes an afflicted person subject to the tzoraat disease and contamination (size of half a bean) as well as the fact that if the entire surface of the skin is covered by the eczema the person thus afflicted remains ritually pure.
    The Midrash just quoted explained to us the remarkable and illogical aspects of these four pieces of legislation the Torah introduces under the heading of “statute,” and in particular the totally incomprehensible fact that a little of the red cow’s ash can reverse the most severe kind of ritual impurity known as אבי אבות הטומאה, i.e. the sword which has killed a person. No wonder that the evil urge at the instigation of Satan tries to seduce us into refusing to accept such statutes which defy our intellect!. The Midrash cites the verse in Job to postulate that indeed what is legislated here could never be ordained by mortal man but had to be reserved for G’d the Creator Who alone can legislate this having demonstrated in life, (the examples of Avraham emerging from Terach, etc.) that it is not as far-fetched as meets the eye.
    The Midrash implies that if we can accept that a skin disorder involving a patch of skin less than the size of a bean can result in a person being completely ostracised from society whereas someone whose skin is completely covered with the same disease remains pure,  we can also accept the four examples of legislation which form the specific target of the evil urge.
    Niddah 9 points out that the verse from Job 4,14 also may be applied to the Creator Who saw fit to convert woman’s menstrual blood into milk, i.e. something symbolising a wasted opportunity (not becoming pregnant) turns into a life-giving nutrient for babies. Such phenomena seen in nature surely make it easier to observe legislation of the Torah even if we do not understand it. Using such reasoning Rabbi Eliezer Hakalir (the famous liturgical poet) pointed out in his poem siluk before the kedushah recited on the Sabbath we read this portion that if the dead body remains inside the house the house itself has not yet become ritually unclean. As soon as the dead body (the source of the ritual impurity) has been removed, the house itself has become ritually impure. On the face of it, this is halachically quite untenable. However, Rabbi Eliezer Hakalir uses the term “house” as a simile for a woman’s womb. His comments describe the halachah we learned in Chulin 71 that  if an embryo dies within the womb of the mother and the midwife touches it upon examining the mother internally, such a dead fetus does communicate severe ritual impurity on said midwife though the mother of that fetus is not affected. As soon as the dead fetus exits from the mother she herself becomes ritually impure for seven days without touching the fetus. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Tumat Met chapter 25,12). [I believe the Midrash also wants to imply that in the event anyone accuses Moses of having invented this kind of legislation this is totally impossible as a human mind could not come up with such illogical-appearing legislation. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach to our paragraph. The red cow is an allusion to the oral Torah, the attribute of Justice in its most severe form. This attribute is the source of ritual impurity. The reason why this chore was given to Eleazar to perform was in order that he should address the attribute of Justice in its most concentrated form. Such thoughts would not be held against him [seeing the author had stated repeatedly that all offerings are addressed to Hashem, the attribute of Mercy, Ed.] as it was slaughtered outside holy precincts and was not considered as a sacrificial offering. This is also the reason this legislation was prefaced with the words זאת חקת התורה, as if to say: “this new kind of legislation that the Torah has seen fit to reveal here as something to be performed outside the precincts of the Temple is not meant to convey the impression that it is addressed to someone other than G’d, G’d forbid.” Its is anchored, i.e. embedded, נחקקת in the Torah itself. However, its origin is the oral Torah, which is the sixth of the emanations (counting from מלכות upward). Even though a full comprehension of the mystical dimension of this statute is way beyond our ability to understand,  it is important to understand that the concept of ritual impurity is allowed to spread no further (upward) than the sixth emanation, that of גבורה. This is the emanation, attribute, which characterised Yitzchak who lay on the altar bound by the attribute of Mercy on the outside. If the attribute of Mercy would not have been present and active and the attribute of Justice would be allowed full reign the world would face destruction immediately. This is why the Master of Mercy provided us through this procedure with a method of turning the attribute of Justice at its fiercest into a milder form of itself. This is the meaning of the words: “they shall take to you a cow, one that is red, an unblemished specimen, an animal which has not been tainted by having been subservient to any (other) master such as the emanations (attributes) on the lower rungs of that diagram.” We know that even the next lower emanation was not saved from having a “master” impose a yoke upon it as that emanation, תפארת, harmony, has been associated with the Holy Temple which has been destroyed and therefore has been "mastered” by impure forces on earth. (compare Isaiah 64,10 בית קדשנו ותפארתנו, and Psalms 78,61: ויתן לשבי עזו ותפארתו ביד צר, “He delivered into captivity His power and glory into the hand of the oppressor.”) The cherubs (on the cover of the Holy Ark) were exiled together with the other furnishings of the Temple and we do not find that they had been hidden, as had the Holy Ark itself as well as the Menorah, the lampstand. The emanations which are “higher” than that of תפארת, are described as בתי גנזי, “the houses of My hidden (treasure)” in Beytzah 16. I have already discussed this in connection with Genesis 6,6 (compare our translation page 163). 
    The reason that this red cow was slaughtered outside the holy precincts of the Temple was in order for it to be able to chase away, to diffuse the spirit of impurity. This is why the remains of the cow (ash) together with water from an original source, מים חיים, would effect purification by means of the vessel within which it was contained (verse 17). Purity is derived from an influence exerted by the attribute of Mercy, an emanation higher than that of גבורה, i.e. the attribute (emanation) of Justice, the emanation responsible for every kind of impurity. 
    You will need to appreciate that some Kabbalists are in doubt whether the fact that the procedure involving the red cow was carried out completely outside the confines of the Temple meant that it represented a higher degree of sanctity than that which pervaded the Sanctuary. In other words, everything connected with the red cow would have represented “holy of holies,” whereas only a small portion of the Sanctuary itself was designated as “holy of holies.” If so, the level of sanctity represented by the red cow as well as its remains would have been superior to that of the sacrificial animals offered on the Altar inside the precincts of the Temple so that there was really no comparison between the red cow and its counterparts inside the Holy  Temple.
    On the other hand, some Kabbalists think that the reason the procedure of the red cow was conducted outside holy precincts points to the fact that its sanctity was below that of even the lowest level of sanctity inside the holy precincts and that this is the reason that no part of it was processed inside those confines. These people then raised the following question: assuming that the red cow was of such a high level of sanctity that it surpassed the levels of sanctity in the Temple, how could it possibly confer impurity on its (uncontaminated) handlers? On the other hand, if it was of such inferior sanctity that it had to be slaughtered and its remains kept outside sacred ground, how was it capable of conferring purity on the previously impure?
    Some Kabbalists answered these questions by saying that indeed the entire red cow was “holy of holies” and that the reason it conferred impurity on its handlers was that any pure person on earth will automatically become impure through contact with extra-terrestrial purity (which is of far higher degree). Seeing the red cow represented extra-terrestrial i.e. celestial purity (or sanctity) we do not have a problem. This concept is reflected in the Torah writing (Exodus 29,37) “anyone touching the Altar will become holy,” i.e. will be burnt (as had happened to the two sons of Aaron Nadav and Avihu). Total terrestrial sanctity is relegated when it confronts celestial sanctity. What applies to relative sanctity, i.e. terrestrial sanctity versus celestial sanctity, also applies to terrestrial purity as opposed to celestial purity. This may be the meaning of Yuma 21 that אש דוחה אש, אש אוכלת אש, “one category of fire displaces, relegates, another category of fire.” The “fire” of the Shechinah displaces or relegates terrestrial fire.
    The Talmud there describes the penalty incurred by the angels who had opposed the creation of Adam by saying that he did not deserve G’d’s consideration. G’d is reported as having stretched out His finger at these angels and burning them. If differences in the quality of fire exist among the angels in the celestial regions it is easy to understand why terrestrial fire should be inferior to even the lowest of the celestial fires.
    We are told in a Midrash that when Moses ascended Mount Sinai he reached a certain spot where the angel Matniel barred his way. This angel instructed Moses to proceed further and meet the angel Sandalfon. Moses answered that he was afraid to do so as that angel (angel of fire) would likely burn him. Thus far the Midrash. [our author’s point in quoting this excerpt is simply to draw our attention to “fires” in celestial regions. Ed.]
     According to some Kabbalists the red cow was entirely in the category of holy of holies. Personally, I feel that in some respects it was holy whereas in other respects it was totally secular in status. Seeing that the red cow transmits a spirit of ritual impurity it contains a purely secular element. Seeing, however, that the Torah refers to it as חטאת, i.e. acting as a means to expiate, it must also contain an element of holiness. Because of the fact that it is composed of two opposite elements the Torah applied stricter rules to it than apply to the animals which serve as sacrificial offerings on the Altar, seeing no one is in doubt about their status.
    The reason that the Torah writes here about the rules of purification for people contaminated by impurity conferred by contact with the bodies of human beings who have died, is that the ash of the red cow is so crucial in the purification process of such people. The root cause of living creatures contracting spiritual impurity dates back to the original cause of death, the serpent in Gan Eden. This root cause is known as כח המושל, or הר הגדול, (compare Kohelet 10,4 and Zecharyah 4,7 respectively) Nachmanides writes that the bodies of people whose death is due to נשיקה, a “kiss” by G’d, do not become ritually impure. The prophet Zecharyah in that verse describes the elimination of death, the angel of death, etc., in the future. He employs the simile of the “great mountain which will be flattened at that time” as the simile describing the overcoming of the greatest obstacle in our lives on this earth prior to the coming of the Messiah. This is what Maimonides had in mind when he stipulates that the red cow which will be burned by the Messiah will be the tenth and final one as with the absence of death there will be no need for further such means of purification.
    
    19,11-12. הנוגע במת, הוא יתחטא בו, “whoever touches the corpse of a human being...he shall purify himself with it , etc.” The word בו refers to the mixture of the ash of the red cow and the spring-water from its respective container. This verse is the origin of the widely accepted practice that when we leave after  a visit to the cemetery we wash our hands as a symbolic gesture. It is merely an allusion to the ritual (nowadays impossible to fulfill) of the purification through the red cow. At the same time the practice is also an allusion to the resurrection of the dead seeing the prophet (Ezekiel 36,5) described this resurrection in the following words: “I will sprinkle upon you pure waters and you will become pure.” The practice of plucking some blades of grass from the cemetery is also an allusion to the concept of the resurrection of the dead as the grass which wilts at night and resurrects itself in the morning is referred to by the psalmist (Psalms 72,16) “let men sprout up in towns like country grass.”
    
    19,13. ולא יתחטא, את משכן ה' טמא, “if he fails to purify himself, he has contaminated the Tabernacle of the Lord.” The warning contained in this verse applies if the individual in question enters the courtyard of the Temple (Tabernacle) even if he had immersed himself in a ritual bath without having undergone the ritual of sprinkling the holy water with the ash upon himself on the third and seventh day of the purification process. The meaning of the word את in front of the word משכן is the same as if the Torah had written שמשכן ה' טמא. We have a similar construction in Psalms 71,18 where the psalmist writes לכל יבא גבורתך,  where the meaning of the words is לכל שיבא גבורתך, “so that I can tell everyone (of the next generation) of Your mighty acts.” There are many other examples in the Bible where the letter ש has not been written but is implied.
    In verse 20 of our chapter the Torah changes its syntax writing: כי את מקדש ה' טמא, “for he has contaminated the Sanctuary of the Lord.” Why did the Torah once refer to the Sanctuary as משכן and once as מקדש? The reason the Torah uses both expressions is to tell us that although the Tabernacle was only a temporary structure to be replaced by a permanent one and I would have thought its sanctity is inferior to that of the Temple, this is not so. On the other hand, I could have thought that the Tabernacle was holier seeing it had been anointed with the holy oil of anointing as opposed to the Temple which was not so anointed. By writing both expressions the Torah equates both structures in their levels of sanctity.
    Nachmanides writes that in our verse (13) where the person who had failed to purify himself has entered the holy precincts he is guilty of the karet penalty even if he had immersed himself in a ritual bath beforehand seeing he had failed to apply the ritual involving the ash of the red cow. When the Torah appears to repeat itself in verse 20 the subject is not the entering of holy precincts before purification but the consuming of sacred food, meat from the offerings before one has completed the purification process involving the ash of the red cow. The difficulty is that the Torah did not need to tell us this as we know it already from Leviticus 7,20 where the karet penalty is spelled out for anyone eating sacred meat while in a state of ritual impurity [even a lesser degree than impurity caused through contact with a corpse. Ed.] Nachmanides therefore understands the word מקדש in verse 20 as similar to מ-קדשי, “the sacred things of,” similar to Numbers 18,29 את מקדשו ממנו,“sacred parts of it.” The portion here would then include both kinds of impurities resulting in the karet penalty for the person remaining in that state and becoming guilty of either transgression while contaminated.
    It is possible to understand the word משכן in verse 13 as a reference to the Tabernacle on earth, whereas the word מקדש is a reference to the Sanctuary in the celestial regions and the Torah teaches us that both Tabernacle and the eventual Temple were parallel in their function to the Sanctuary in the celestial regions. All of this is based on Exodus 15,17 מכון לשבתך פעלת ה' מקדש ד' כוננו ידיך, “the foundation of Your dwelling place that You Hashem have made, the Sanctuary my Lord which Your hands estab-lished.” You find משכן and מקדש equated in that verse. When someone introduces impurity into the Sanctuary or Tabernacle on earth he simultaneously defiles the Sanctuary, i.e. Tabernacle in the celestial regions. Ezekiel 45,4 speaks of מקדש למקדש, Nachmanides understands verse 20 as a reference to the concept expressed by the prophet, i.e. that the כנסת ישראל lends sanctity to the Temple in the terrestrial regions by taking up residence there. It is also possible that it relates to the Sanctuary in the celestial regions whose sanctity is enhanced through the כנסת ישראל, so that it will serve as Sanctuary for the highest attribute of the Lord, a concept expressed by Solomon in Kings I 8,14 when he said: בנה בניתי בית זבול לך, “I have surely built a residence for Your celestial region known as zevul.” This whole idea is expressed even more directly by Psalms 122,3 and explained in Taanit 5 ירושלים הבנויה כעיר שחוברה לה יחדו, “Jerusalem derives its sanctity because it is a city joined with its counterpart, i.e. celestial Jerusalem.” This is the mystical dimension of the very word ירושלים which, because of its plural ending, points at a dual city, one terrestrial the other celestial. It is similar to the word עינים, meaning “two eyes,” רגלים, meaning “two feet,“ and many other similar examples. Whenever the word ירושלם is spelled without the letter י it means that the missing letter is the reference to the celestial Jerusalem seeing that on the five occasions the word is spelled in the Bible with this letter this is a reminder that seeing the letter ה, “five,” is the last letter in the tetragram, that in due course Jerusalem on earth and Jerusalem in the heaven will be joined in a real sense. 
    
    19,14. אדם כי ימות באהל, “when a person dies in a tent (or house), etc.” although the legislation which follows applies equally to people dying inside a house or other roofed structure, the Torah chose the example of “tent” since at the time the Israelites in the desert lived in tents. Legislation mentioned here is valid both at the time it was written and for all future generations. We learn from here that contamination caused by being in the same enclosed airspace with a corpse results only from the corpse of a Jew as only Jews qualify for the title “אדם.” (compare Ezekiel 34,31 “for you My flock are אדם”). Although there are verses scattered throughout the Bible in which the Gentiles are referred to by the same “title” (Numbers 31,11), the sages have already answered this apparent contradiction in Yevamot 61, namely the word had to be used there in order to distinguish Gentiles from beasts which were also numbered as part of the booty. A similar explanation applies to the verse in Jonah 4,11 where אדם is contrasted with the beasts. In other words, the only time the term אדם is used for Gentiles is when it is in contradistinction to בהמה, beast. We are still faced with the word אדם referring clearly to Gentiles in Psalms 124,2. Megillah 11 explains that in that verse the word אדם means “ordinary human,” not a “king.” Another instance which appears to bestow the title אדם on Gentiles is found in Isaiah 43,4. The Talmud Berachot 62 suggests that the word in Isaiah be read as אדום instead of as אדם, i.e. that the “people” G’d will give as ransom  for the Jewish people will be the Edomites. A more problematic text involving the word אדם is Leviticus 18,5 on which Sanhedrin 59 suggests that even a Gentile who studies the laws of sexual chastity and observes them attains the level of purity reserved for the High Priest. It is pointed out that in the relevant verse the word for the Gentile is האדם as distinct from אדם. Whenever the Torah speaks of האדם, Gentiles are not excluded. This leaves us with Jeremiah 32,20: where G’d speaks of miracles performed “before Israelites and אדם,” which appears to imply that both peoples merited the miracles, i.e. were on similar ethical levels. The problem is answered by pointing out that whereas these miracles were beneficial for the Israelites, they were at the same time extremely damaging to the Egyptians who are referred to in that verse as אדם. It is clear therefore that far from equating the Israelites and the אדם, i.e. Egyptians as on a similar moral level the prophet wanted to contrast the levels of Israelites with that of people characterised as אדם.
   כל הבא אל האהל, “anyone entering the tent, etc.” is contaminated as a result. If someone carries the corpse or touches it he is most certainly no less contaminated than someone merely sharing the same airspace with the corpse. Seeing that we have legislation decreeing ritual impurity on anyone carrying dead beasts which had died by natural causes as opposed to ritual slaughter although such impurity lasts only for a day, it is clear that carrying a human corpse would be at least as much a cause for contracting severe ritual impurity as if one merely shared the same airspace with it. This is why the Torah did not have to bother to spell out this detail in connection with contact with a corpse through carrying it. We find a similar silence of the Torah on the prohibition of a father sleeping with his daughter seeing the Torah had already forbidden sexual relations between the same man with his granddaughter (Leviticus 18,10). Another example of the Torah remaining silent on a law that can be derived by simple logic (קל וחומר) is the prohibition to eat meat and milk together. If the Torah had already forbidden for milk and meat to be cooked together, it is clear that it must not be eaten together either after it has been cooked.
    
    19,16. בחלל חרב או במת, “someone slain by the sword or one that died naturally;” if the Torah had wanted to equate the two examples of corpses it should have used the expression: בחלל או במת, “someone slain or dead of natural causes.”  Why did the Torah mention חרב, “sword?” The Torah chose an example of most victims who die a violent death. Although the Torah chose the example of the “sword” as the cause of death, the same contamination occurs when the victim was killed by a stone or a wooden arrow, for instance (Maimonides Hilchot Tumat Met 1,2).
    Our sages in Shabbat 101 point out, however, that the example חרב, i.e. a metal tool, means that the metal weapon contracts the same degree of impurity אבי אבות הטומאה, the absolute primary cause of ritual contamination, as does the corpse itself. The reason is that the sword, by definition, is a means for causing death, is designed to cause death and therefore ritual impurity. The sword, while halachically contracting a degree of impurity equaling that of its victim, the corpse, in that the impurity it confers upon those touching it lasts for seven days, and requires the same purification rites as does the one who became defiled through contact with the corpse itself, does not  confer such impurity by the person being merely in the same airspace with it. We derive this from the words אדם כי ימות באהל, “i.e. when a human being dies inside a tent, etc.” the corpse can confer ritual impurity upon such a person, the sword by which he was killed, however, cannot confer that particular type of impurity. The truth of this statement is guaranteed, as if such a sword could confer impurity by a survivor being in the same tent with it, all the priests would be forbidden to enter their own houses seeing each of them contains a sword or metal tool such as a nail which by its very presence would confer impurity on the priest concerned.
    This concept has been illustrated by Rabbi Chayim from Germany who sent the following inquiry to Rabbeinu Tam (grandson of Rashi): Seeing that every house at one time or another contains a corpse, and it also has metal nails which are an integral part of its construction, what house can one build in order to avoid ritual contamination by these factors? (The Rabbi quoted Isaiah 66,1 “which is the kind of house that you (man) can build for Me (G’d)” as the gist of his question.) Clearly, Rabbi Chayim understood the reference to חרב in our verse as including all kinds of objects made of iron, otherwise his question does not make sense. [this is in contrast to some authorities who understand the word חרב as applying only to the murder weapon or other weapons made of the same material]. The question therefore presupposes that Rabbi Chayim applied the term חרב to mean that any metal object would confer the status of absolute prime cause of ritual contamination on anyone in the same airspace as it. This understanding of the halachah is based on a statement in Shabbat 101 where Samuel said that a ship (and contents) which lay at anchor and was connected to the harbour by means of iron chains will incur ritual impurity of primary severity (אב הטומאה) if the chain touched such a source of ritual impurity on the quay. Samuel’s statement was meant to apply to degrees of ritual impurity which are of Biblical force, as opposed to ritual impurity due to Rabbinic decree. At any rate it is clear from what he said that he did not distinguish between a sword and some other tool made of metal.
    In Pessachim 14, where mixing oil of the Menorah which has been disqualified by differing degrees ritual impurity is discussed, the Talmud states  that the words בחלל חרב in our verse mean that a metal lampstand which has become contaminated by a primary cause of impurity has the same degree of impurity as the corpse which made it impure in the first place. This is beyond dispute where the lampstand was in direct contact with the corpse (after death) as opposed to it having been the cause of death of the person who contaminated it.
    We have learned in Keylim 1,1: “primary causes of ritual impurity are: 1) a dead unclean reptile; 2) semen which is still virile; 3)  a person who became ritually unclean through a corpse. Seeing the person who was in some kind of contact with a corpse becomes a primary source of ritual impurity, it is clear that the source of that impurity, i.e. the corpse itself must be of a higher degree of impurity, i.e. the one known as אבי אבות הטומאה, “the root cause of impurity.” It is well known that derivatives of such a root cause of impurity have the ability to confer descending degrees of impurity to a sixth level (generation) not further. [In other words, anyone more than six persons or objects removed from the root cause cannot be negatively affected by such a root cause. Ed.] The six levels of ritual impurity are known in descending order of severity as: 1) אבי אבות הטומאה, 2) אב הטומאה, 3) ראשון לטומאה, 4) שני לטומאה, 5) שלישי לטומאה, (applicable only to תרומה, produce imbued with a low level of holiness. 6) רביעי לטומאה, (applicable only to matters imbued with high levels of sanctity such as sacrificial meat). We do not encounter a further 7th level of impurity as permanent purity is attached to anything that far removed from a primary cause of impurity. These waters are known as מים טהורים, “pure waters,” as we know from Ezekiel 36,25: “I will sprinkle upon you (the people of Israel) pure waters.” During periods of exile, these waters are known as שערי דמעה, “the gates of tears,” seeing that tears are a derivative of the power reposing in water. Our sages in Baba Metzia 59 are on record that even when all other “gates” (such as the gate of prayer) are locked, the gates of tears always remain open, i.e. our prayers when accompanied by tears always can reach heaven. This seventh level of purity [i.e. a level beyond possible contamination, Ed.] is known as the מים העליונים, the waters of the upper regions (Chagigah 15). This is another name for the attribute (emanation) of חסד which is the seventh emanation counting from the lowest one, מלכות. In the Torah these waters are described as מים חיים, “waters which retain the quality of life.” They are the waters which the prophet Zecharyah refers to as emanating from Jerusalem on the day heralding the redemption (compare Zecharyah 14,8). When the prophet describes these waters as coming forth from Jerusalem, he refers to celestial Jerusalem. When you peruse the Torah’s report of the creation you will find the word מים mentioned 5 times in connection with the second day of creation and 2 more times in connection with the third day of creation. These seven occasions when מים is mentioned on those two days allude to the fact that the work of the second day was not really complete until the third day. [This is also why the words: “G’d saw that it was good,” are absent in the Torah’s report of what was created on the second day. Ed.]
    Our sages in tractate Machshirim 6,4 speak of the existence of seven different kinds of liquids and the potential ability or otherwise of these liquids to contract and confer ritual impurity. The liquids in question are 1) dew; 2) water; 3) wine; 4) oil; 5) blood; 6) milk; 7) bees’ honey. The first time the word מים appears in the Torah in the report of G’d’s creative activity on the second day corresponds to the basic concept of water, a regular liquid. The other six times when the Torah refers to מים in its report of G’d’s activity on the second and third day what are meant are the derivatives of the basic element water, i.e. the six additional liquids (something fit to drink) mentioned in Machshirim. All the six other liquids listed in the Mishnah in Machshirim appear in the Bible as “drinks” employing either the term שתיה or השקאה. In Exodus 17,6 the Torah writes: “some water emerged (from the rock) and the people drank.” In Genesis 24,43 Eliezer asks Rivkah to let him drink some water. In Leviticus 10,9 the Torah forbids the priests to drink wine or liquor on certain occasions. In Jeremiah 35,2 G’d told the prophet to go to the house of the Rechabites and to give them wine to drink. The term used there is והשקית. Oil is used as a liquid used for drinking in Isaiah 25,6: “the Lord will make on this mount for all the peoples a banquet, משתה, containing rich oils.” Blood is mentioned in the Torah as a drink in Numbers 23,24: “Israel will drink the blood of the slain” (Balak’s prophecy/blessing). Another verse mentioning blood as a drink is found in Ezekiel 39,17  where G’d tells the prophet to address the birds promising them: “assemble and gather from all around for the sacrificial feast I am preparing for you;..... eat flesh and drink blood.”  Dew is referred to as water, מים, in Judges 6,38 where Gideon is described as “squeezing the dew from the fleece, a bowlful of water.” Bees’ honey is mentioned as a drink in Deut. 32,13: “He made him suck honey from a rock.” Finally, milk is described as a drink in Judges 4,19: “she (Yael) opened a skin-bottle of milk and gave him some to drink.”
    
    19,19. והזה הטהור על הטמא, “the ritually clean person is to sprinkle on the ritually impure person, etc.” Rabbi Akiva derived from the words על הטמא instead of simply עליו, “on him,” that the extra word teaches that if the ritually impure person was sprinkled with the ash/water mixture he would be purified by it, whereas if accidentally a ritually pure person was sprinkled with the same ash/water mixture such a person would become ritually impure as a result (compare Yuma 14). This is why Solomon said in Kohelet 7,23: “I said I want to acquire wisdom, but it has remained still far from me.”
    
    19,21. ומזה מי הנדה יכבס בגדיו, “the one who administers the ash/water mixture has to wash his clothes.” Seeing that he himself is ritually pure and he administers the ash/water mixture to a ritually impure person why should he be required to immerse his clothing in a ritual bath? The reason is that in the process of sprinkling the ash/water mixture on the ritually impure person some of it may have splashed his clothing. This is what I have heard as an explanation of this halachah. However, the collective opinion of the sages in Yuma 14 is that the person concerned does not need to immerse his clothing in a ritual bath at all. The sages there understand the word מזה in our verse to mean נושא, “carries.” The reason why the Torah chooses the unusual word מזה to describe carrying is that the amount of water needed to wash the clothes in question is no larger than the amount of the ash/water mixture needed to sprinkle on the ritually impure person, just enough water as is absorbed by dipping the tips of the hyssop stalks in the mixture.
    
    19,22. וכל אשר יגע בו הטמא יטמא, והנפש הנוגעת תטמא, “Anything which the contaminated person will touch shall become contaminated, and the person who touches him will become contaminated.” The meaning of the words והנפש הנוגעת is: “a person who touches another who has been contaminated by direct contact with the corpse will also be contaminated.”
    
    20,1. כל העדה מדבר צן, “the entire congregation to the desert of Tzin.” The reason the Torah speaks of כל העדה, “the whole congregation,” is because in the interval all the people who had to die in the desert had already died and the congregation was “whole” again. Now, in the first month of the fortieth year since the Exodus the new generation was about to enter the land of the Canaanites. You should remember that the Torah basically reports only what had transpired during the first year and during the last year of the Israelites’ wanderings.
   וישב העם בקדש, ‘the people settled in Kadesh.”  Kadesh is the name of a town. The desert Tzin mentioned in our verse is also referred to in the list of all the points where the Israelites made camp in Parshat Massey. (33,36). The “Kadesh” mentioned here is not the same as the “Kadesh-Barneiah” mentioned there. We must not confuse the desert of Tzin with the desert Sin, a word spelled with the letter ס. That wilderness is situated between Eylim and Mount Sinai. Psalms 29,8 mentions יחיל ה' מדבר קדש, “the Lord convulses the wilderness of Kadesh.” Numbers 33,11-15 enumerates 5 way stations between the desert of Sin and the desert of Sinai.
    The Jewish people remained in the town called Kadesh  for many years as we know from Deut. 1,46.  Our sages (Tanchuma Vayeshev 1) have stated that whenever the Torah speaks of וישב, “he settled,” this is an introduction to the people concerned experiencing something painful. This is why the Torah follows the report of the Israelites settling in Kadesh with the report of the death of Miriam. Her death and its ramifications became the direct cause of Moses and Aaron not being allowed to enter the Holy Land.
    
    20,2. ולא היה מים לעדה, “The congregation had no water.” As soon as Miriam died the well which had traveled with the Israelites all these years ceased providing water. The water which the people had enjoyed all these years was due to the merit of Miriam who had stood by watching what would happen to her infant brother when he was in a basket in the reeds at the edge of the river (Exodus 2,4). G’d had rewarded her for that act of kindness by making her the provider of water for Moses’ people. The people had not appreciated this until the well ceased with Miriam’s death. Our sages in Tanchuma Chukat 20 claim that the song Israel sang in Numbers 21,17, i.e. אז ישיר ישראל את השירה הזאת, “then Israel would sing this song, etc.,” was sung at the end of the forty years whereas the well had been provided for them at the beginning of the forty years.
    
    20,3. ולו גוענו בגוע אחינו, “if only we had died as our brethren died, etc.;” they referred to the older generation who had died in the desert.
    
    20,6. ויפלו על פניהם, “they prostrated themselves” in an attitude of prayer.
   וירא כבוד ה' אליהם, “the Lord’s attribute of kavod appeared to them.” To Moses and Aaron but not to the people.
    
    20,8. והשקית את העדה ואת בעירם, “you shall provide water for the congregation and for their beasts.” This verse proves G’d’s concern for the Israelites’ possessions. (Tanchuma Chukat 9).
   ודברתם אל הסלע לעיניהם, “You will speak to the rock in their presence, etc.” the rock called סלע in our verse here is identical with the one called צור at Mount Chorev. It is also identical with the well of Miriam. This is the opinion of our sages in Taanit 9. We find that this rock appears under four different names סלע, באר עין משפט, צור,. In Genesis 14,7 it is called עין משפט, (the well of judgment) seeing the Torah reports the four kings as returning from a battle to a place known (to the reader) as עין משפט, identical with Kadesh. The former name derived from the fact that Moses was judged there. It was also called צור, seeing that in Exodus 17,6 G’d had told Moses that when he would stand at that rock at Chorev he should strike it with his staff and it would produce water. The name צור, a name for G’d, [instead of סלע, Ed.] was given to this rock as it was a site at which G’d revealed Himself. Seeing that here at Kadesh G’d did
not reveal Himself, it is referred to merely as סלע, seeing that G’d instructed Moses and Aaron: “you shall speak to the סלע.” It is also referred to simply as באר, seeing the Torah says (Numbers 21,16) “it is the same באר where G’d had said to Moses: ‘assemble the people so that I can give them water.’” [if, at that point the rock had already been a well as suggested by the word באר, G’d’s instructions would not have made sense. The point was to convert the rock into a well. Ed.]
    Seeing that at the death of Miriam this well had ceased providing water, G’d wanted it to resume to function as a well by means of the merit of Moses. The fact that this rock is referred to as הסלע instead of merely as סלע, shows that it had previously functioned as a well.
    You should know that there are many different opinions concerning the precise nature of Moses’ sin in this portion. Rashi holds that Moses had not been commanded to hit the rock at all but only to speak to it, and to instruct it in the name of the Lord to produce water. He bases himself on the words: “you shall speak to the rock.” If we were to ask what was the point of his being told to take his staff if not in order to strike the rock, this is no argument seeing that practically all the miracles Moses had performed involved his staff although not necessarily that he used the staff to strike something with. For instance, we find in Exodus 4,17 that G’d told Moses to take his staff in order to perform the miracles with it but no mention is made of his using the staff to strike something or somebody. His sin therefore (according to Rashi) consisted in his striking the rock without having been commanded to do so. The penalty was applied to both Moses and Aaron as apparently they had agreed to use the staff to hit the rock instead of speaking to the rock. By doing so they minimised the impact of the miracle, seeing that G’d had wanted to demonstrate that the rock would respond to G’d’s command even if merely spoken to. Had Moses carried out G’d’s instructions  the people would have said to themselves that if a mere rock responds to verbal instructions by G’d to completely change its nature by turning into a well, how much more must intelligent people like themselves heed all instructions given to them by the Lord! Now that that they saw that the rock responded only to Moses’ physical force as a result of being struck, this gave some of them a chance to use this as an argument that Moses had achieved his objective by superior wisdom and machinations but that there was no question of the rock having responded to a command from its Creator. The people’s faith in G’d’s ability had been undermined by Moses’ hitting the rock. This is why G’d said to both Moses and Aaron: “because you did not have enough faith in Me to sanctify Me in the eyes of the Children of Israel” (verse 12). Had they only spoken to the rock this would have resulted in a great sanctification of the Lord’s name.
    Maimonides, in the fourth chapter of his introduction to tractate Avot, views Moses’ sin as being that he addressed the people as מורים, “rebellious” (verse 10). Had he not been angry at the people which caused him to use such an unflattering description of them he would not have forgotten the instruction that he was to speak to the rock. When a man of the stature of Moses allows himself to become angry the result is liable to be a desecration of the Lord’s name. Even the bodily motions of a man of Moses’ caliber normally inspire people who see him, give them confidence of their progress towards a better world, the hereafter. When people observe that their leader reveals frustration such confidence is undermined. Public display of frustration displays an internal conflict in man. This in turn reduces his disciples’ confidence in him. The people were very intelligent as they had experienced visions which even a great prophet such as Ezekiel had not experienced (Mechilta Shirata 50). When the people observed Moses being angry they assumed that Moses’ anger at them reflected G’d’s anger at them for having demanded water. This was an erroneous conclusion as the Torah does not indicate with a single syllable that G’d considered their request as inappropriate. When G’d said (verse 24) מריתם את פי, “you defied My word,” He referred to the mistaken image of G’d’s reaction to their request conveyed to them through Moses’ demeanour.
    Rabbeinu Chananel  believes that Moses’ sin consisted of the word נוציא, “we shall extract,” or: “shall we extract?” By using the first person plural Moses created the impression that it was his and Aaron’s task to extract water from the rock. He should have said יוציא, “He, G’d, will extract water for the people from the rock” (verse 10). The moment Moses said: “we shall extract water,” some of the people thought that whereas on the first occasion when Moses had struck the rock this had been a miracle, a demonstration of G’d revealing His power (Exodus 17,5-7), this time there would not be a similar intervention by G’d in their fortunes. These people simply thought that Moses and Aaron used their own devices in order to produce water from the rock. This is reflected in the Torah writing: “because you have missed an opportunity להקדישני, “to demonstrate My Holiness before the eyes of the Children of Israel” (verse 12). According to Rabbeinu Chananel the expression להקדישני is reflexive, i.e. to cause G’d to appear as Holy, whereas the words לא האמנתם בי are to be understood as transitive, i.e. “you have failed (to exploit the opportunity) to instill in the people an additional dimension of faith in Me.”
    The verses in front of us all support parts of the opinions expressed by Rashi, Maimonides, and Rabbeinu Chananel. But the overall meaning of the subject discussed in our paragraph is not explained satisfactorily by either one of these illustrious Rabbis. Rashi’s approach would be acceptable if the speaking to the rock would be the only miracle at issue and not the striking of the rock. However, how can we ignore the fact that if water emerges from a rock after the rock has been struck that this is by itself a powerful miracle? Is there then a qualitative difference between the two kinds of miracle? Seeing G’d had instructed Moses to take his staff (instead of leaving it in his tent) surely he was meant to use it to strike the rock!
    Also the words of Maimonides do not clarify all the problems raised by the text. He was himself aware of this as he said that he clarified one of the problems in our paragraph by his comments. His comments would be acceptable if indeed there were proof that Moses was angry and displayed anger during this episode. However, the  words: שמעו נא המורים, do not necessarily reflect anger on Moses’ part but mean that he addressed the people as a group which needed to be admonished. Aaron, who stood beside him, certainly had never been angry during his career. He was known as always pursuing peaceful means. Had he permitted himself to become angry and display anger he would not have qualified for the title רודף שלום. Why would he suffer the same fate as Moses if he had not been angry, had not displayed anger, had not said anything inappropriate?
    Also the words of Rabbeinu Chananel are not totally con-vincing. If Moses had said: מן הסלע הזה נוציא לכם מים, “we will produce water for you from this rock,” he would be correct. However, this is not what Moses said. He said ה-מן הסלע וגו', “shall we produce water from this rock?” Moses implied that they themselves most certainly did not have the power to produce water from that rock. Moses made it clear that only G’d could orchestrate such a miracle. Still, his words are the most plausible of all the commentators.
    A kabbalistic approach: The sin is connected to the word פעמים, “twice” (verse 11). This solves all the problems which have been raised previously. The mystical dimension of the whole episode is as follows: The Lord, the Unique One, Who had descended to the mountain, i.e. Mount Sinai at the time He gave the Ten Commandments, was the same attribute that had revealed Himself to Moses in Exodus 17,6 where Mount Chorev is identified with the צור, the site also known (Psalms 132,5) as משכנות לאביר יעקב, “an abode for the Mighty One of Yaakov.” The expression צור in connection with G’d revealing Himself to Moses occurs again in Exodus 32,21 where G’d tells Moses to take up a position “next” to Him describing that place as על הצור, “next to the Rock” (the Lord). When G’d had instructed Moses to hit the rock in Exodus 17,6, He had first described His presence in the words הנני, i.e. הנה אני עומד לפניך שם על הצור, “Here I am standing in front of you by the rock at Chorev and when you strike the rock water will emerge, etc.” The attribute of י-ה-ו-ה appears frequently in the guise of the word אני. Moses had struck the rock only a single time, seeing he had been receiving his instructions from a single attribute of Hashem. Here at Kadesh G’d had not spelled out which attribute of His had issued the instructions as He had not said הנני וגו', “here is My attribute אני, etc.” There had not been a manifestation of the glory (attribute) of G’d such as there had been in Exodus. As a result of doubt as to which attribute had issued the instruction Moses and Aaron both agreed to hit the rock twice, i.e. once in respect of each attribute which could have issued such an instruction, i.e. either the attribute צור or the attribute Hashem. They considered it quite likely that the Shechinah was angry at the people [for having blamed Moses for the shortage of water, Ed.]. The people, who had all been privy to manifestations of the Shechinah on the previous occasions associated with the phenomenon described as צור, were aware that this time there had not been such a manifestation of G’d’s glory. In view of all of these considerations Moses and Aaron felt the need to attract the attribute of Hashem, attribute of Mercy, hence they struck the rock twice (instead of merely once). It is important to realise that neither Moses nor Aaron entertained any wrongful thoughts in any of this. Their sin resulted exclusively from the fact that by their action they missed an opportunity presented to them by G’d to aggrandise His name, i.e. להקדישני לעיני בני ישראל.
    When Moses, in referring to this incident in Deut. 3,26 as well as in Deut. 1,37 says once ויתעבר ה' בי למענכם, or גם בי התאנף ה', בגללכם, he meant in both instances that the attribute of Hashem had become angry at him for having missed an opportunity למענכם, or בגללכם, “for your sakes,” to strengthen your faith in the Lord. Although their intentions had been good, striking the rock twice could have led the people to believe that Moses’ powers [and by extension G’d’s power, Ed.] had waned and that this was why he had to strike the rock twice instead of merely once. His sin was inadequate faith in G’d. He should have had faith enough not to hit the rock twice. This is why the Torah writes in verse 12: לא האמנתם בי, “because you did not plant sufficient faith in Me.” G’d referred to His attribute אל-הים, which is usually referred to as שם. This is the G’d known as אלו-ה יעקב ההפכי הצור אגם מים, “the G’d of Yaakov who coverts the rock into a pool of water” (Psalms 114,7-8). The expression מריתם פי also means: “you rebelled against that attribute פי, an alternative name for אלו-הים.
    We find support in the Midrash (Eycha Rabbati 1,61) for the statement that the word פי is a name for G’d’s attribute אלו-הים. The prophet (Jeremiah in Eycha 1,18) speaks of “Hashem is righteous for I  disobeyed His attribute פי” (i.e. אלו-הים). It is as if the prophet described Israel as disobeying G’d’s essence as well as His attributes, i.e. agents. We can understand this better by means of the parable in Bereshit Rabbah 27,6 (described by the author in the latter half of his commentary on Genesis 6,6 our translation page 161). In Deut. 32,51 on the other hand, the Torah describes the sin of Moses and Aaron as מעלתם בי, “you have committed a trespass against Me,” meaning: “you have denied My name.” In either event, it appears to us based on all these different expressions that the sin was primarily an indirect one, i.e. that Moses’ and Aaron’s actions resulted in some undesirable fallout in the minds of the people who observed their actions. Sifri Haazinu comments in the same vein. 
    We should reflect on the fact that at the burning bush the miracles which occurred were performed by the attribute of Justice, to wit that Moses’ staff turned into a serpent (as a punishment for his making an inappropriate remark about the faith of the Jewish people). Moses’ hand turned white as a result of his suffering the skin affliction known as tzoraat surely also a miracle orchestrated by the attribute of Justice. Water turning into blood was certainly also a manifestation of the attribute of Justice at work. Our sages in the Midrash and the Talmud (Shemot Rabbah 3,19) are on record that originally “the sela dripped blood,” i.e. that when Moses hit the rock it first produced blood instead of water. This may also be the source of Psalms 78,20 speaking of ”here he struck the rock and water flowed.” The word ויזובו used by the psalmist to describe the flow is one that does not usually describe water flowing but blood flowing (compare Leviticus 15,25).
    Although Moses himself did not even hint at such a thing in his various references to this episode, we do find allusions to it in the writings of the prophets a well as in the hagiographa. Assaph alluded to it in Psalms 78,20. Isaiah 48,21 hinted at it when he wrote both the word הזיל and the word ויזובו מים in the same verse referring to the same event. (“He made water flow for them from the rock, He cleaved the rock and water gushed forth”). Psalms 114,8 also suggests that the blood turned into water (the word אגם, “a pond,” has the same numerical value as דם, blood). Seeing that the sin of Moses and Aaron involved the צור, another term for the word הארץ in Genesis, their punishment was denial of entry into the ארץ. (compare our translation page 162 about the kabbalistic approach to G’d being saddened at the need to bring on the deluge. Ed.]
   ונתן מימיו, “it will yield its waters.” The Torah should have simply written ונתן מים, “it will yield water.” What is the meaning of the suffix “its?” Had the Torah not written the suffix we might have concluded that there was water beneath the rock which had been freed through Moses’ addressing it, moving it by giving it an order to move. This would not have been a special miracle. The Torah therefore reports that Moses was instructed to release water from the rock itself merely by giving such a command in the name of Hashem. Another way of looking at this suffix  is that the potential of this rock producing water goes back to the six days of creation. Now G’d had seen fit to activate this potential. Our sages in Avot 5,6 already mentioned that the well of Miriam was one of the things created at dusk on the sixth day to be activated when the occasion would arise. Seeing that the word מימיו, “its waters,” allows people to think that perhaps the waters of this rock were natural, the Torah had to emphasise “you will produce waters for them out of the rock.” The Torah also chose the expression הוצאה because it is usually associated with supernatural events. When G’d told Avraham that He had taken him out of the fire of the Chaldeans (Genesis 15,7) saying אשר הוצאתיך מאור כשדים,  He referred to the miracle of saving him from the furnace of Nimrod. When G’d referred to having taken Israel out of Egypt, He also used the expression הוצאתיך (Exodus 20,2). He referred to the miracles associated with the Exodus. Isaiah 48,21 is similar in nature where the prophet referred to צור to stress the miraculous nature of what occurred. The words והוצאת להם מים indicate that whole rivers of water flowed from the rock seeing that otherwise it would have been impossible for several million Israelites to drink water from that rock as well as to water their beasts. Psalms 78,16  makes this point clear when referring to the event in a second verse: “He brought forth streams from a rock and made them flow down like a river.”
    
    20,12. לכן לא תביאו, “therefore you will not bring, etc.” Our sages in Pessikta Zutra claim that the expression לכן always denotes a statement equal in force to that of an oath. We find this word introducing G’d’s oath to punish the descendants of the house of Eli in Samuel I 3,14: “Therefore I have sworn, etc.” In our verse it means that G’d swore that neither Moses nor Aaron would enter the Holy Land. This is the reason why the paragraph is followed immediately by Moses sending messengers to the King of the Edomites to let the Israelites pass his country on their way to the Holy Land. In Kadesh Moses had forfeited his right to enter Eretz Yisrael and it was from there that he sent emissaries. 
    
    20,13. המה מי מריבה, “they are the waters of strife, etc.” according to Tanchuma Chukat 11 this is proof that the location Kadesh was instrumental in G’d associating Moses’ punishment with water. We read in Genesis 14,7: “they turned around and came to the well of judgment which is Kadesh.” It was called thus as it had been predestined to serve as a place to sanctify the Lord’s name.
   ויקדש בם, “He was sanctified through them,” (Moses and Aaron). G’d’s characteristic is to make the punishment fit the crime. Seeing that Moses and Aaron had been the cause that G’d’s name was not sanctified there by them, it had to be sanctified through them. Just as G’d’s name was sanctified through exacting judgment from Aaron’s sons Nadav and Avihu through killing them, and the Torah describes this as an example of בקרובי אקדש, “I will be sanctified through those who are near Me,” (Leviticus 10,3) so He was sanctified here through the decree not to let Moses and Aaron go unpunished. Seeing the sin began through the Israelites, they were the cause that Moses and Aaron committed an unintentional trespass. Psalms 106,32 makes it plain that G’d was angry at Moses and Aaron on “their account,” i.e. on account of the Israelites. It was they who were the root cause of this tragic episode. 
    The matter may be understood by means of a parable: There were two women both of whom were sentenced to corporal punishment by their king, one for unchaste behaviour, the other for eating unripe figs of the shemittah year (a minor offense). The latter woman asked the King to make public the cause of her punishment so that people should not think that she was guilty of a serious crime such as that of her companion. Similarly, Moses himself asked G’d to make public the sin for which he had been condemned to die outside the Holy Land so that people would not speculate that he was guilty of a far greater sin than he had actually been punished for. Moses’ downfall was the indirect result of G’d’s anger with His people in first withholding water from them. Seeing that the tribe of Levi was not included in the decree issued against the people on account of the spies, Moses too would not have had to die in the desert had it not been for his error at the rock. Numbers 14,29 speaks of כל פקודיכם למספרכם, ”of all of you who were recorded in your various lists from the age of twenty and up, etc.” In other words, only the men of military age who would have had to form part of the invading armies were doomed to die in the desert, not the Levites who 1) were counted from one month and up, 2) would not have served in the army. The Levites had been counted as if they were a separate people.
    
    20,14. מקדש אל מלך אדום, “from Kadesh to the king of Edom.” The Torah means the town Kadesh, as opposed to Kadesh-Barneya. The latter is not a town but a desert as we know from Psalms 28,8 יחיל ה' מדבר קדש, “the Lord convulses the wilderness of Kadesh.” I have already mentioned this previously
   כה אמר אחיך ישראל, “thus said your brother Israel, etc.” Moses referred to the time when Esau and Yaakov were brothers, described as the sons of Avraham. Seeing that in Genesis 15,13 G’d had told Avraham: “your descendants will be strangers, etc.,” it is clear that Esau too was included in that prediction. It had therefore been Esau’s fate to share this status of being strangers and being enslaved. If he escaped this far, at least he had to help his erstwhile brother to complete his redemption by allowing the Israelites passage. Moses’ argument was that seeing the Israelites, i.e. a single member of Avraham’s offspring had paid the whole price of the prediction at the covenant of the pieces the least the Edomites could do was to let them pass through their land.
    
    20,15. ולאבותנו, “and to our forefathers,” this was a reference to the Israelites who, though enslaved in Egypt, had not lived long enough to experience the redemption. According to our sages in Tanchuma Chukat 12, the word is a direct reference to the patriarchs, all of whom are described as participating in the pain of the enslavement their offspring had endured in Egypt even in their graves.
    
    20,16. וישמע את קולנו, “He listened  to our voice (prayer).” This was a reference to the power of prayer i.e. הקול קול יעקב, “the voice is the voice of Yaakov,” bequeathed by Yitzchak to  his son Yaakov (Genesis 27,22). 
   וישלח מלאך, “He dispatched an angel, etc.” A supernatural being, not an emissary such as Moses (Ibn Ezra). This is based on Isaiah 63,9 ומלאך פניו הושיעם, “and the angel of His Presence delivered them.” It is also possible to see in the word מלאך a reference by Moses to himself (Rashi) as we find in Chagai 1,13:  ויאמר חגי מלאך ה', “and Chagai, the Lord’s messenger said to the people.” In the eyes of the people Moses enjoyed the status of an angel in that he was so totally devoid of preoccupation with matters pertaining to the body. We have proof that this is how the people had viewed him as at the time when they thought he would not come back from Mount Sinai they said: “this man Moses who has taken us out of Egypt we do not know what happened to him.” Apparently, until Moses’ failure to return on time the thought that Moses could be an ordinary mortal had not occurred to them (compare Exodus 32,1). [As soon as Moses did return they clearly thought of him as an angel even more, seeing he went without food or drink for 40 days. Ed.]
    
    20,17. נעברה נא בארצך, ‘let us pass through your land.”  This is a hint to Edom not to challenge Yaakov’s inheritance of the land of the Canaanites seeing the Edomites had not fulfilled the other half of the condition, i.e. to endure being strangers and being enslaved in a foreign land.
   לא נעבור בשדה או כרם, “we will not traverse field or vineyard.” We will not cause any damage.
   לא נשתה מי באר, “we will not drink water from wells.” According to the plain meaning this means that Moses undertook not to drink from sources of water belonging to the Edomites. According to Tanchuma Chukat 12, Moses made a more far-reaching promise saying that while on their march through the land of the Edomites the Israelites would not even drink from their own well. They would buy water from the Edomites instead.
   דרך המלך נלך, “we will only travel along the King’s highway.” This may mean that they would only make use of the road used by the King himself; or it could mean that they would only travel a route allocated to them by the King.
   עד אשר נעבור גבולך, “until we have traversed the far side of your borders.” Moses did not  say: “until we come to the land G’d has promised us, etc.,” although this is what he had in mind. He felt it was better not to mention that land altogether so as not to annoy the King who might re-open the subject of Yaakov having stolen Esau’s birthright. You will note that later on when Moses asks similar permission to pass through the land of Sichon, Moses was not shy to spell out his intention (Deut. 2,29).
    
    20,18. לא תעבור בי, “You will not pass through me!” He meant his country (political entity). The King referred to the direct route to the land of Canaan. Neither he nor his people made any attempt to hinder the progress of the Israelites when they straddled his country marching around it through the region known as Mount Seir. This is why Moses referred to this in a positive sense when he said in Deut. 2,29: “as did for me the sons of Esau who dwell in the Mountain of Seir.” When the Israelites asked permission from Sichon, King of the Emorites, to pass through his land they meant “in the same way as we passed through the land of Edom.” I will elaborate on this theme when we discuss that passage.
    
    20,19. במסלה נעלה, “we shall go up on the highway.” Originally, Moses had asked permission to travel through their cities, assuring them that they would not cause any damage. After being denied permission to traverse any urban areas of the country, Moses tried once more to obtain permission to travel on what was the equivalent of an international highway, away from urban areas, a highway used by different nationalities freely without the need to obtain special travel permits. According to Nachmanides the words אין דבר mean that no possible inconvenience or negative political fallout could be caused to the King by the Israelites taking such a route (for which they did not even need to ask permission). Only when the King refused this too and assumed a threatening posture did the Israelites accept his decision.
   ברגלי אעברה, “let me pass through on foot!” Clearly, the word ברגלי means “with my army.” This expression at this point also enables us to understand the meaning of Zecharyah 14,4: ועמדו רגליו על הר הזיתים, “His legs stood on Mount Olives.” The word רגליו is a simile for “His Hosts.” All those like Onkelos who are careful not to translate anthropomorphic expressions literally will interpret the word in this vein. You might counter that there is no comparison as the armies of mortals march literally on their feet, something not applicable to G’d’s “armies.” The fact is that when we speak of celestial phenomena we apply the term רגלים “feet”, to the lowest part of the manifestation and the word ראש, head, to the highest part of such a manifestation. The word does not have to be understood literally as we do here in our terrestrial spheres. Seeing that the Creator is always the highest form of celestial manifestations it is clear that all manifestations of a lower level are automatically described as רגליו, as compared to the ראש, i.e. G’d Himself, they are like “feet.”
    Alternatively, we can understand the word רגליו in Zecharyah to refer to the results of G’d’s planning, something described as סבותיו, For instance, the words: ויברך ה' אותך לרגלי, (which Yaakov said to Lavan (Genesis 30,30) do not mean: “the Lord blessed you at my feet,” but “the Lord blessed you on my account.” I have already dealt with this whole problem in Genesis 6,6 on the words ויתעצב אל לבו, (the commentary of “the plain meaning”).
    
    20,22. כל העדה, the entire congregation.” Seeing that we had been told that the King of Edom confronted the Israelites with all his military might, the Torah wanted to tell us that the people’s arrival at Hor Hahar found all of them intact. They had not suffered a single casualty.
    According to Tanchuma Chukat 14 the meaning of the word הר ההר is: “a small mountain atop a bigger mountain.” Aaron was buried in the part referred to by our text as הר. We derive this from the words: “Aaron died there at the top of the mountain.” Even though the cloud which traveled in front of the Israelites was in the habit of leveling all mountains and valleys, three mountains remained in the desert which the Israelites traversed. They are: Mount Sinai (in order to give the Torah to the people), Mount Har Hor Hahar as the burial place of Aaron, and Mount Nevo as burial site for Moses.
    
    20,25. קח את אהרן, “take Aaron, etc.” The Torah employs the same term it had employed when Aaron was appointed as High Priest where G’d had also said to Moses: “take Aaron” (Leviticus 8,2).
    
    20,28. ויפשט משה את אהרון את בגדיו, “Moses stripped Aaron’s garments from him;” he removed the garments he wore in his capacity of High Priest and gave them to Eleazar his son in his presence. At this point Moses took back what he had given Aaron, i.e. the clothes, as we know from Leviticus 8,7, and G’d took back what He had given Aaron, i.e. his soul. Moses instructed Aaron to enter a cave in that mountain and Aaron entered it. He saw that a bed stood all prepared with fresh linen and that a light was burning beside it. Moses told Aaron to lie on the bed and Aaron complied. He then told him to stretch out his hands and Aaron did so. He told him to close his mouth and Aaron did so. He then told Aaron to close his eyes. Aaron complied. At that point Moses became desirous of dying in the same manner that he observed his brother dying. This is the meaning of G’d saying to him in Deut. 32,3: “just like your brother Aaron died,” i.e. the kind of death you wished for yourself.
    The sages in Torat Kohanim (96,130) explain that some miraculous events took place with Aaron’s priestly garments. Under normal circumstances outer garments remain outer garments and underwear remains underwear. If Moses undressed Aaron in the order in which he had originally dressed him, (compare Leviticus 8,7) then obviously G’d Himself must have provided his תכריכין, his shroud and put it on him, i.e. he qualified for greater honour in his death than even in his lifetime. 
    The location where Aaron was buried, i.e. on a mountain facing south, near the boundary of Edom was especially suitable for him as he represented the “right” attribute, [חסד, an emanation on the right side of the diagram, Ed.] i.e. “south.” It was equally appropriate for Miriam to have been buried at Kadesh, a location midway between south and north. Moses’ grave on Mount Nevo was situated between Kadesh and Hor Hahar so that from Moses’ grave (if its exact location were known) one could have easily reached either one of the other two graves. This is the reason that Mount Nevo is also known as הר העברים, “the mountain of passage”, i.e. it was open for passage in either direction. The reason that the three were not buried in the same location was to make their grave site fit their dominating attributes. An additional reason was to enable their graves to serve as some kind of protection for the Jewish people and to afford them some atonement for the sins which had been committed nearby. [compare all this in Zohar Chukat, Sulam edition page 23. Ed.]
    According to Tanchuma Chukat 14 the reason why the paragraph dealing with the death of Aaron was written adjoining that of the refusal of the king of Edom to allow the Israelites passage reflects  a criticism by the Torah of the attempt made by Moses to establish friendly relations with this wicked King by obtaining his permission to rub shoulders with his people on their way through his land. As a result, the Jewish people lost one of their leaders, i.e. Aaron. The Midrash quotes Chronicles II 20,37 “as you have made partnership with Achazziah (King Jehoshaphat of Yehudah) the Lord will break up your work,” as support for its view.
   וימת אהרן שם בראש ההר, “Aaron died there at the top of the mountain.” We have a tradition that three people died by divine “kiss,” Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. In connection with Aaron and Moses the Torah spells this out when it wrote that they died על פי ה', literally: “by the mouth of the Lord.” In connection with Miriam this is not spelled out (seeing she was female, and the Lord is perceived as male). It is somewhat puzzling that in our verse the Torah does not write the words על פי ה' in connection with Aaron’s death although in Numbers 33,38 we do find this expression in connection with Aaron’s death. Presumably, the Torah did not want to write it in our paragraph as this paragraph had dealt with the sin causing his death; it would have sounded almost like a reward for his sin if the Torah had described his death as a kiss from G’d so shortly after reporting his fatal error. Seeing the Torah had omitted this vital detail of Aaron’s death at this point, it was forced to make mention of it in 33,38.
    
    20,29. ויבכו את אהרן שלשים יום כל בית ישראל, “the entire house of Israel wept for the passing of Aaron for thirty days.”  The expression בית ישראל includes men and women. When the Torah reports the mourning of Moses the word בית is absent, as the Torah writes ויבכו בני ישראל את משה, “the Children of Israel wept for the passing of Moses in the fields of Moav for thirty days” (Deut. 34,8). The difference was that Aaron, in his capacity of striving always to restore harmonious relations between people patched up many marriages. This is why men and women alike wept for his passing (compare Rashi).
    
    21,1. וישמע הכנעני מלך ערד יושב הנגב, The Canaanite, i.e. the King of Arad who dwelled in the south heard, etc.”  Actually, this was not a Canaanite tribe but Amalek (Tanchuma Chukat 18). The King is described as a Canaanite as he decided to speak the Canaanite dialect in order to deceive the people about his identity. He hoped to thereby make the Israelites pray for deliverance from the Canaanite attack whereas they had not been attacked by Canaanites at all. If G’d would deliver them from the Canaanites he, Amalek, would remain unscathed. Israel were not taking chances as they appealed to G’d to be delivered from the attacker without specifying his nationality. They simply said: “if You will deliver us from this nation, etc.” ( verse 2).
   דרך האתרים, “by the route of the spies.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of this expression is “the spies.” The Torah means that the Amalekites had heard that the Israelites now were moving along the same route that the spies had traveled 38 years earlier. This is also Onkelos’ understanding of these words.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Chukat 18: the word האתרים is an allusion to the “great traveler (spy),” i.e. the Holy Ark which was in the habit of traveling three days’ march ahead of the main body of the people in order to spy out (find a location) for the people to make camp (Numbers 10,33). 
    Some commentators feel that the king described here as the King of Arad was in fact Sichon the King of the Emorites and the reason he is referred to here as “the Canaanite” is that that every Emorite is also a Canaanite by definition. 
    Our sages  in Rosh Hashanah 3 say that the news which the Canaanites had heard was that Aaron had died and that the protective clouds above the camp of the Israelites had disappeared. This is the meaning of 20,29: “the whole congre-gation saw that Aaron had died.” How could they all have seen it? They had not climbed Hor Hahar! They noticed that the cloud had disappeared and they realised that its presence had been due to Aaron’s merit. Up until that time the encampment of the Israelites had not been visible to the other nations at all. Rabbi Avohu said that instead of reading the word ויראו, “they saw,” it could be read with the vowels tzeyre and kametz, and the meaning would be: “they had become visible.” Tanchuma also writes in that vein, i.e. the Jewish people now looked like a woman whose head-covering had been removed.
    
    21,4. ויסעו מהר ההר דרך ים סוף לסבב את ארץ אדם, “They journeyed away from Hor Hahar in the direction of the Sea of Reeds to commence their trip around the land of Edom.” Seeing that the King of Edom did not permit them to cross his territory they were forced to backtrack seven way stations before taking the route around the land of Edom. Our sages in Tanchuma Chukat 18 link this to Deut. 10,6: “the Children of Israel had traveled from Be-erot Yaakon to Mosserot where Aaron died. We know that Aaron had died at Hor Hahar. The meaning therefore is that they backtracked and only eulogised Aaron at Mosserot so that it appeared to them as if Aaron had died then.
    
    21,5. כי אין לחם ואין מים, “for there was neither bread nor water.” The statement that there was no bread seems incompre-hensible seeing they received the manna daily! They also must have had plenty of the water which had gushed forth from the rock in great quantities!
    We must understand the people’s complaint as being a rebellion against their unnatural state of existence. Other nations had abundant supplies of bread and water both of which could be stored whereas the Jewish people wondered from day to day if they would have bread and water on the morrow. Seeing that the continued existence of the people appeared to hinge on immediate reward and punishment they felt themselves in a uniquely disadvantaged position when compared to the Gentiles.
    Moreover, they claimed, “even the daily manna we receive is an inferior kind of bread as instead of giving our stomachs the feeling that it is full after having eaten it, our stomachs feel quite light, i.e. empty.” They expressed themselves as being fed up with that kind of existence. They knew of no other creature born of a mother that continuoulsy imbibed food without having to excrete any of it (based on Yuma 75). G’d had intended that the daily dependence of the people on that day’s manna would teach them to put their faith in Him so that their dependence on Him should be like that of the slave on his master. He had related to the people as if they were on the level of angels.
    They now had become guilty of a terrible slander against the heavenly manna. The people now used this fact as something negative, found fault with the heavenly food! Seeing their sin consisted of slander, G’d sent against them the creatures which had invented slander, i.e. snakes. Tanchuma Chukat 19 describes the punishment as fitting the crime seeing that however many different kinds of creature a snake devours they all taste like dust to it, as it had been cursed with: “dust you shall eat all the dsys of your life!” (Genesis 3,14). The Israelites by comparison had been given a single type of food, which however assumed all kinds of different tastes in accordance with the owner’s wishes. Another reason they were being punished through snake bites was that during the entire 40 years G’d had ensured that the snakes whose natural habitat is the desert would not attack any Israelite. Seeing that the Israelites had not appreciated this G’d simply did not continue to work this miracle and the snakes which now bit the people were not a plague, but merely the inhabitants of that desert.
    The reason why the Torah does not write: “G’d sent snakes against the people,” i.e. seraphim, but it writes: ”the snakes which are the seraphim,” underlines that these snakes were not a new or different phenomenon at all. When Moses had told Pharaoh that G’d would punish him with an invasion of wild beasts (Exodus 8,17), he did not say הנני משליח בך ערוב, “here I am about to sent against you wild beasts,” but he said את הערוב. By this he meant that the wild beasts which are normally content to stay in their habitat will change their nature and invade the urban areas. Similarly here; the snakes which had suppressed their lifestyle by not harming the Jewish people though biting Gentiles, would now not practice any restraint whatsoever in their habitual confrontation with human beings, Israelite or not. The term לחם הקלוקל, is an insult, as if the Torah had written that the manna was the לחם קל שבקלים, “the least valuable kind of bread there was.”
    
    21,7. ויאמרו חטאנו כי דברנו בה' ובך, “they said: ‘we have sinned in that we spoke out against G’d and against you.’” They asked forgiveness from Moses and admitted their guilt. Moses then prayed on their behalf as it says: “Moses prayed on behalf of the people” (verse 7). This episode teaches that if someone asks a person’s forgiveness for insults committed against him the injured party should not be cruel and refuse to accept the apology (compare Tanchuma Chukat 19). We find, for instance that Avraham prayed on behalf of Avimelech who had wronged both him and Sarah (Genesis 20,17); also Job had prayed on behalf of his friends (Job 42,10). If someone refuses to pray on behalf of his fellow when called upon to do so he is called “a sinner.” Samuel explained this to the people when he explained to them why he was prepared to pray on their behalf (Samuel I 12,23).
   ויסר מעלינו את הנחש “so that He will remove the snake (plague of) from us.” Actually, we would have expected the word הנחשים, “the snakes” (pl.), instead of the word הנחש, “snake” (sing.). The reason the Torah uses the singular is to allude to the lethal power of the snake, serpent, mentioned earlier. The Torah refers to the spiritual representative of the snakes whose residence is in the desert. When the Jewish people said מעלינו, instead of ממנו, they meant “the one who is above us,” instead of merely “away from us.” We find a similar expression in Numbers 14,9 where Calev described that the protective force of the Canaanites had already been withdrawn from them as: סר צלם מעליהם, “their protective shadow has departed from above them.” This will also enable you to understand a verse in Zecharyah 6,1 וההרים הרי נחשת, “and the mountains are mountains made of copper.” [a comment which appears irrelevant at first glance. Ed.] The word נחשת is understood as derived from השחתה, “destruction.” Although the mountains mentioned by the prophet are destructible,  the four chariots representing the glory of the Lord mentioned in that same verse are indestructible (based on Maimonides  Moreh Nevuchim section two 10th chapter). It is a reference to the “great mountain” which features in the vision of Zerubabel as an insurmountable obstacle but which G’d promises will be reduced to level ground.  (vision of Yehoshua High Priest, Zecharyah 4,7)
    
    21,8. עשה לך שרף, “construct for yourself a type of snake called seraph.”  In response to this instruction the Torah writes that instead of a seraph, Moses made a נחש נחשת, “a snake of copper.” Moses had understood that what G’d had in mind was that he should make a snake of copper. He did not mean to countermand G’d’s instruction. G’d had refrained from referring to this snake by its proper name so as not to mention the creature (original serpent) by name which had brought mortality into the world. By speaking of seraph, G’d referred only to the adjective associated with the serpent, the result of its bite. When G’d added the word לך, i.e. that Moses should make the seraph for himself, instead of saying simply: make a seraph,” He meant  that He had accepted Moses’ prayer on behalf of the people to the extent that He forgave them their trespass against Himself; however Moses had to do something for himself in order for the people’s insult against him, Moses, to be forgiven, in order to demonstrate to the people how seriously G’d takes an insult against His chosen instrument, i.e. Moses. 
    
    21,9. והביט אל נחש הנחשת וחי, “if he looked up to the copper snake he would live.” The cure was the opposite of the natural process. If the person who had been bitten would look at the snake which bit him he would endanger himself. [The author explains the cure in the same way as the working of inoculation, i.e. injection of the ingredient causing the disease, except that when we use inoculation this is done before the disease has struck. Ed.] King Chizkiyah (Kings II 20,7) was cured by applying dried figs to the area infected by boils (a procedure which normally intensifies the skin rash he suffered from); the bitter waters at Marah (Exodus 15,25 compare Mechilta) were sweetened by throwing bitter (not sweet) wood into it. Here too, instead of an antidote to the snake and what it looks like the people had to look at an even more deadly looking snake. Red copper, the material Moses’ snake was made of symbolises the planet Mars associated with war and death. In this instance by looking at “death” the people were cured. In other words, there occurred what our sages describe as “a miracle within a miracle.” It is a well known fact that if someone who has been bitten by a rabid dog subsequently looks into water and sees a reflection of a dog he will surely die. The Talmud Yuma 84 also discusses antidotes for bites by a rabid dog including the need to drink water only from copper vessels. The danger continues for 12 months during which time an appearance of the reflection of the dog may be lethal to the victim of the bite. Physicians warn people not even to mention the word “dog” or “rabid dog” to the victim of such a bite as it brings to mind associations which may prove fatal for the victim. Such people have been known to imagine seeing the image of such a dog even in their urine. At any rate, the reason we mention this is to demonstrate that here the requirement to look at the very symbol of what bit them had therapeutic effects for the victims instead of the reverse. This demonstrates the magnitude of the miracle. G’d’s purpose in commanding Moses to make a snake and for the people to focus on it was to show them that it was not the snake that causes death but the sin (compare Berachot 33).
    
    21,10. ויסעו בני ישראל ויחנו באובות, “The Children of Israel journeyed and camped at Ovot.” Tanchuma Chukat 19 proceeds to comment on the significance of these various way-stations mentioned in the verses following, seeing in each of them an allusion to what occurred there. The word אובות is related to אויב, “enemy,” i.e. that the people still suffered from a display of G’d’s anger at that place. The next location mentioned, i.e. עיי העברים, is an allusion to anger, עברה, i.e. G‘d remained angry at the people for 38 years. The name “river זרד,” which is mentioned next as a resting place, is understood to describe such a narrow body of water (זרת, the distance from thumb to the little finger when the hand is extended) that the idea that it took 38 years before the people could cross it was also a source of frustration for them. Moses repeated this theme in Deut. 2,13 where he recalls that G’d finally gave the instruction to the people to cross this “river.” The point is reinforced when the Torah writes in Deut. 2,14 that it took 38 years for the people to travel the distance from Kadesh Barnea to the river zered. When the Torah continues in verse 13 of our chapter to describe that משם נסעו ויחנו מעבר ארנון, “from there they journeyed and camped “beyond” Arnon, the word מעבר is understood by Tanchuma as signifying that finally G’d’s anger at the people i.e. עברה, had passed and they were in G’d’s good graces again. The normal construction in that verse should have been ויחנו ב-עבר ארנון, “they camped on the far side of the river Arnon.” The change from בעבר, to מעבר gave rise to the Midrash’s insight on that verse. We find that immediately after the people crossed the river Arnon G’d addressed Moses once again. [there had been a silence of verbal communication from G’d ever since the decree that the generation of the spies had to die. Ed.] (compare Deut. 2,24, that G’d spoke to Moses immediately after the people  reached the river Arnon).
    
    21,14. על כן יאמר בספר מלחמות ה', “therefore it is said in the Book of the wars of Hashem.” The verse refers to the encampment and the miracles which took place at that place. The words: “in the Book of the wars of the Lord,” is a separate verse not connected to that which preceded it. It is a reference to a Book in which the Israelites had recorded all the wars G’d fought on behalf of those who revere Him. It is entirely possible that this Book as well as many others were lost in the course of our long history and wanderings. The Book’s first entry may well have been Avraham’s campaign to rescue his nephew Lot (Genesis 14,14-24). It is likely that Chronicles I 29,29: “the acts of King David, early and late, are recorded in the history of Samuel the seer, the history of Nathan the prophet, and the history of Gad the seer, together with all the mighty deeds of his kingship, etc., etc.,” are further examples of historical records which have been lost in the course of time. This is the view of Ibn Ezra on Kings I 5,12.
    
    21,17. אז ישיר ישראל את השירה הזאת, “Then Israel sang this song:” According to the plain meaning of the text the principal content of this song is the reference to the Emorites who drowned in the river Arnon and whose blood mingled with the waters from the well which accompanied the Israelites on their journeys (compare Rashi). This might account  for the mention of ואת והב בסופה ואת הנחלים ארנון, “and the gift of [the Sea of Reeds and the rivers of Arnon”] (verse 14)
    Personally, I believe the meaning  of the verse is that what occurred there was also recorded in the Book of the wars G’d fought on behalf of the Israelites, and the word בספר in verse 14 does not mean “book” so much as “enumeration;” i.e. this “war” which the Israelites only learned about after they saw all the blood in the river Arnon was accounted another one of the wars recorded for posterity. G’d had destroyed a town known as והב by means of a tornado or something like it, סופה being a reference to a great storm. The tributaries of the river Arnon were also destroyed by that storm.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Chukat 20: the words את והב בסופה mean “what He had given to them (the miracles G’d performed, i.e. the assistance He had given) at the Sea of Reeds.” The words ואת הנחלים ארנון mean “and the rivers and the miracles He performed for them at the river Arnon and its tributaries.” What precisely were the miracles performed at Arnon?  Answer: אשד נחלים “so much blood was poured into these rivers that they looked red.” Onkelos uses the word שפך here for the spilling of the blood of the Emorites, a similar expression he used in Leviticus 4,12 on the words אל שפך הדשן,  which he renders as מישד קיטמא, a place for shedding blood.
    The background to all this is the tradition that the Emorites were hiding in the clefts of these high rocks on either side of the river Arnon. The river was narrow but deep, its banks forming a deep canyon. The opposite sides of the rocks were so close together that people on one side could converse with those on the opposite side. However, the only way they could get across to one another was by first descending to the river and then climbing the cliffs on the opposite bank. The Emorites planned to exploit this phenomenon to ambush the Israelites when the latter would attempt to cross the river by bombarding them from above with a hail of all kinds of missives, rocks, burning torches, etc. G’d brought about a storm or earthquake which banged together the two opposing sides of these cliffs squashing he Emorites who had been hiding inside them. The blood of these people drenched the river so that the Israelites did not even become aware of their miraculous escape until hey saw that the river had become red with blood. This was the comparison with what happened at the Sea of Reeds that our verses alluded to in poetical form. The words אשר נטה, “when it veered,” in verse 15, describes the motion of the cliff in the opposite direction toward Moav during this happening. The cliff then stuck to its opposite number across the river.
   ומשם בארה, “and from there to the well;” from there (the river Arnon) the stream of blood flowed all the way to the well which was the source of drinking water for the Israelites. When the people realised their miraculous escape upon seeing this blood, they immediately composed the song of thanksgiving  described in verses 17-20.
    
    21,18. באר חפרוה שרים, “a well dug by princes.” A reference to Moses and Aaron. The reason the Torah calls them by the title שרים and נדיבי העם, is because they used their staffs to dig the well. Seeing that the Torah (or the authors of the words of the song) equated Moses and Aaron by referring to them by the same titles, the Torah had to add the word במחקק, “through a lawgiver” (sing.) to teach us that after the death of Miriam the well became reactivated only through the merit of the lawgiver, i.e. Moses.
   וממדבר מתנה, “and from a desert, an inhospitable place to a great gift.” The gift of the well was considered an historic gift. From there the people proceeded to the rivers and tributaries of Arnon where the great miracle we just described took place. All the words of the song relate in one form or another to acts of kindness G’d performed for His people. From the rivers of Arnon the people traveled to Bamot, the land of the mighty Kings Sichon and Og who qualified for such a title. From the Bamot Hagay as far as the field of Moav there was no other river that could have provided water for them except the well of Miriam/Moses.
    A Midrashic approach: The introductory words אז ישיר ישראל את השירה הזאת, “then Israel sang this song,” appear deficient. Surely we would have expected the additional words: “to the Lord” as we have in Exodus 15,1 where Moses composed the song. The appropriate wording would have mentioned first the name of G’d and afterwards the name of Moses or it should have described Moses as the composer of this song also. The reason this was not done was that this very well was the cause of Moses having to abort his mission of leading the people to the Holy Land, the reason he had to die and be buried on foreign soil. It would not have been fitting to refer to such matters so directly in a song of thanksgiving for that well. The Torah was so sensitive to Moses’ feelings on the subject that it even omitted mention of G’d’s name Himself in this song although clearly the song is addressed to G’d. We can understand this by means of a parable. A king was invited to a festive meal somewhere. He responded to the invitation by saying that he would only attend if a certain friend of his would be there also. 
    
    21,19. וממתנה נחליאל, ומנחליאל במות, “from Matanah to Nachaliel, and from Nachaliel to Bamot.” Rabbi Yehudah (Midrash Tehillim 5) said that the Jewish people merited receiving the Torah as a result of their being in the desert (last word in verse 18). Unfortunately, at Matanah [the very site where they received this gift. Ed.] they acquired idolatry by saying: “these are your gods O Israel, etc.” (Exodus 32,4). The word מתנה referred to Moses giving the Torah to Israel (Exodus 31,18). The same Rabbi Yehudah reads the word במות not as “heights,” but as ב-מות, death; i.e. after having received the Torah (נחליאל a heritage from G’d) they became subject to death for violating this gift, this heritage, i.e. the Torah. He quotes Numbers 14,35: “in this desert they shall perish, they will die.” The words ובמות הגיא he understands as a reference to Moses having to die in the valley (compare Deut. 34,6: “He buried him there in the valley”).
    A different Midrashic approach to the allusions contained in this song of the Israelites involving their well: The words וממדבר מתנה imply that when a person abandons himself totally to the toil of studying Torah, i.e. he is as devoid of other claims upon him as is a desert, then the Torah (insights) will be granted to him as a gift, מתנה. Seeing that Torah was given to such a Jew as a gift, נחל אל,”a G’d given inheritance,” as we know from the word נחליאל, he will ascend to spiritual greatness במות, heights. Should he allow this to fill him with pride, arrogance, G’d will bring him down from such eminence, i.e. ומבמות הגיא, “and from lofty heights down to the valley.” If he will learn the lesson to become humble, G’d will elevate him once again, i.e. כל גיא ינשא, “every valley (humble person) will become elevated.”
    A kabbalistic approach to this paragraph (song). The song  just as the prayer draws celestial lofty thoughts and preoccupation earthward into our domain. Seeing that this is so both the individual as well as the community who recite such songs in praise of the Lord will draw G’d’s blessings down to earth. Remember that the numerical value of the word שירה is the same as that of תפלה, i.e. 515. Both words appear in the same verse and are compared to one another, to wit: יומם יצוה ה' חסדו ובלילה שירה, עמי תפלה לאל חי, ”By day may the Lord vouchsafe His fanciful care, so that at night a song to Him may be with me, a prayer to G’d my life” (Psalms 42,9). In this verse the psalmist speaks of שירה, (noun) when in fact he should have spoken of שירו, an imperative of the verb “to sing.” When the Torah writes in our paragraph that the Israelites sang את השירה הזאת, you are already aware of the meaning of the word זאת, that in kabbalistic terms it is a reference to the emanation מלכות, the link between the עולם העשיה, our terrestrial world and the next higher kind of “world” the emanation יסוד, lowest level of the עולם היצירה. The terrestrial world we live in is directly “inspired,” נאצלת, from this emanation known as מלכות or זאת. The mystical dimension of Lamentations 2,19: קומי רני בלילה לראש אשמורות שפכי כמים לבך, is that the prophet does not speak of בראש אשמורות, which would mean that the supplication discussed in that verse takes place during the early part of morning, but he said לראש אשמורות, “to the head of these watches of the night”. The speaker addresses celestial forces of the emanations. He appeals to the ראש, the head, i.e. the highest of these forces, the tenth emanation, to Hashem Himself. In the song offered by the people of Israel here, the words עלי באר ענו לה are also an appeal in the first instance to the באר, the well, the lowest of the emanations. By saying עלי באר, they encourage that force to rise up to the highest emanation, the source of all blessing whence their prayers will be answered, i.e. ענו לה. The reason they called the emanation זאת or מלכות by the name באר, well, is that a well collects water, the essence of all blessings on earth. This lowest emanation is the receptacle of G’d’s outpourings of blessing. The simile of באר as a vessel collecting G’d’s bounty recurs again and again in the Sefer Habahir of Rabbi Nechunyah ben Hakanah. In his book the terms באר and כסא represent the lowest and the highest (כתר) emanations respectively [The author proceeds to trace the journey of such prayers (songs) through the various emanations until they reach the highest emanation as represented by similes in our text. I have contented myself with providing you, the reader, with an outline of his approach. Ed.]
    
    21,24. כי עז גבול בני עמון, ”for the border (territory) of the Children of Bney Ammon was powerful.” The verse is a simile. It is a reference  to G’d’s instructions to the Israelites not to harass either the Bney Ammon or the Moabites (Deut. 2,19). This instruction made the territory of the Bney Ammon inviolate against any assault by the army of the Israelites. When the Torah mentions in verse 26 that Cheshbon was the capital of Sichon who had conquered it from the first king of Moav, this indicates that the reason Israel was allowed to conquer the lands of Sichon was that it was not included in the part of the territory concerning which G’d had warned the Israelites. This is also the meaning of the somewhat enigmatic statement in Chulin 60  עמון ומואב טהרו בסיחון, that “Ammon and Moav were purified through Sichon.” The conquest by Sichon of some of their territories invalidated the injunction to the Jewish people not to harass them. If the Torah saw fit to mention poetry by the local Emorites (verse 28) in which the victory over Moav is celebrated, our sages have reported to us details of the bravery and mighty deeds of Sichon and the power of the city Cheshbon by saying that even if Chesbon had been filled with only flies no ordinary army could have conquered it. They added that even if Sichon had been in the valley (without the added advantage of being on a mountain) no one could have overcome him (Tanchuma Chukat 23). They claim that even his name Sichon meant that his personal strength was tabletalk all over the country (the word סיחון sounding like שיחה). They deduce from the fact that the Torah makes special mention of the Israelites also killing Sichon’s son, [something which is included in the statement that no one escaped. Ed.] that this son was a mighty warrior in his own right already at that time. Possibly this is deduced from the fact that in Deut. 2,32 the Torah writes בנו instead of בניו as here when describing the fate of Sichon’s sons (son). According to Bamidbar Rabbah 19,29 although both Og and Sichon were Emorites they were so sure of themselves that they did not come to each other’s assistance in their fight against Israel. According to Tanchuma end of Chukat, Sichon’s son was even tougher than his father.
    
    21,27. על כן אמרו המושלים, “this is what prompted the poets to say, etc.” According Ibn Ezra this is a reference to Bileam and Be-or his father, seeing both of them made pronouncements regarding future events in poetic language. According to Tanchuma Chukat 24, when Sichon at the time had been unable to conquer Cheshbon he had called on the services of Bileam to curse the inhabitants. This is why Balak had said to him (via his messengers): ”for I know if you curse someone he will be cursed” (Numbers 22,6).
   תבנה ותכונן, “let it be built and firmly established.” They meant that it would serve Sichon as his capital.
    Our sages in Baba Batra 78 see in the word מושלים a reference to people who have control of their evil urges, people who weigh the loss they would sustain by failing to carry out certain commandments in order to garner profit in this terrestrial world. They interpret the words תבנה ותכונן to mean that such people will be built up in this world and will acquire a firm footing in the hereafter as the result of their way of life. In the words עיר סיחון they see an allusion to people who control their urges to become like a city (not just a mere individual). The word סיחון alludes primarily to the people who control the words which come out of their mouths, no slander, no frivolity, no idle talk. In the words תצא אש מחשבון, they see an allusion to people who are in control of their speech devouring those who do not exercise such control by fire. The word להבה, “flame,” is a continuation of the previous thought, i.e. from the city of Sichon, a city symbolising the righteous, flames will come forth devouring Moav, i.e. people who exercise no restraint  over their biological urges. The words בעלי במות ארנון are understood by the Talmud there to mean “the arrogant ones.” The word ונירם (beginning of verse 30) is understood as  paraphrasing the wicked who deny the existence of an all-seeing power in heaven, i.e. אין רם. Such people claim אבד חשבון, “there is no accounting to be rendered for the way we behave while alive on earth.” The words עד מידבא, describe the response by G’d to people who question the success of the wicked in this terrestrial world. The answer is that G’d has to reward them for the good they did before He can destroy their souls and deny them the hereafter [literally until they will be lost forever. Ed.].
    
    21,28. כי אש יצאה מחשבון, ”for a fire has come forth from Cheshbon.”  This is an allusion to Moabites who had dwelled in Chesbon and commenced a revolution against the local king. 
   אכלה עד מואב, “it consumed people as far away as Moav.” Moav here is the name of a place not a people, just as  מבית לחם יהודה is the name of a place.
    21,29. אוי לך מואב, “woe unto you Moav (the people)!” He cursed it that it should fall into the hands of Sichon. כמוש, a reference to the favourite god of the Moabites. נתן בניו, this is an appeal to the power that be to make fugitives and prisoners out of the Moabites (part of  Bileam’s curse  at the time).
    Alternatively, the words may refer to Kemosh, Moav’s deity. The verse would then tell us that the people of Moav who served the deity Kemosh, built altars for it and had more faith in that deity than any other nation (as we know from Isaiah 16,12), paid the price for their misplaced faith, and the poet writing these lines ridicules the people for having put their trust in that deity. Their deity is the reason that the believers now have to either flee or become prisoners. Maleachi 2,11 speaks about the worshippers of idols as his sons and daughters. This is the way Nachmanides explains our verse.
    
    21,30. ונירם, “When we threw stones.” Moses describes that as soon as the Israelites threw or shot missives at the Emorites in Cheshbon and thereabouts the country was lost, first as far as from Chesbon to Divon, eventually the whole country including Nofach-Meydva.
    
    21,34. אל תירא אותו, “do not fear him!” Since it was not appropriate for Moses to be in awe and trepidation of any human being seeing he always had the power of the Shechinah at his side, why did G’d have to tell him not to be afraid of Og? Do we not have the prophet telling even lesser individuals than Moses “who are you (Israel) that you should be afraid of mortal man?” (Isaiah 51,12). The prophet means that if the righteous display (or feel) fear of mortal man this undermines the well-being of his soul, his personality. Even Moses personally warns the people in Deut. 1,29 and 31,6 not to be afraid of  the Canaanites.
    The reason Moses did fear Og was because he had earned some merits when he told Avraham of Lot’s being captured. [The fact that this man had survived all these years plus at least 300 years prior to Avraham when he rode out the deluge on the roof of the ark, made Moses worry (compare Niddah 61). 
    Seeing we have a tradition that Og and Sichon were brothers, why was Moses afraid of Og whereas he is not reported as being afraid of Sichon? [G’d’s telling Moses not to be afraid of Og makes it clear that he must have been afraid.]. Og’s longevity and size made Moses wonder if his merits had been used up. This is why he was afraid and needed reassurance.
    Some of our sages do not agree that this Og was the same as the one who had told Avraham about Lot being captured. However, even this Og was a descendant of the person described as the פליט in Genesis 14.13. Moses was still afraid that this Og should not still be a beneficiary of merits accumulated by his ancestor. If the sages describe Og and Sichon as brothers and they mean “biological brothers sharing the same father and mother,” Moses should have been afraid of both of them as the merit of their ancestor would protect both of them. We must assume therefore that they were half-brothers sharing only the same mother so that Sichon who was not fathered by a direct descendant of the original Og would not be able to count on the merit from the original Og.
    At any rate, we have only one authentic source concerning the genealogy of this Og, our sages, i.e. that we are dealing with the original Og. A glance at Tanchuma Chukat 25 will show you that Moses erred in believing that Og’s telling Avraham of Lot’s capture had been a meritorious deed. On the contrary, Og’s intention had been to involve Avraham in a war he could not possibly win and that when he would be killed Og would claim Sarah as his wife. G’d allowed Og to live this long, i.e. He rewarded him for the effort he had made with his feet to inform Avraham. He punished him for the evil intent he harboured when telling Avraham by killing him through Avraham’s descendants. He who had meant for Avraham to be killed was killed by one of Avraham’s  descendants. The punishment was fitted to the crime. Moses’ original concern was that seeing he was only 120 years old, how was he going to defeat a man who had already lived over 500 years! [I make this over 800 years seeing the deluge occurred in 1656 and the Israelites left Egypt in 2448 and another 40 years had passed since. Ed.] G’d answered Moses not only not to be afraid of Og but that Moses would slay him with his own hands. This is the meaning of: “I have delivered him into your hand and you will do unto him  just as you have done to Sichon.” Thus far Tanchuma.
    The problem with this Midrash is that seeing that Sichon and Og were brothers and only Og had survived the deluge and we have a tradition that only eight people survived the deluge, i.e. Noach, his three sons and his wife and their respective wives, where did Sichon originate? How could he have been a brother of an antediluvian Og?
    I have found a Midrash that both Og and Sichon were sons of Mechazael, who was one of the people described in Genesis 6,2  as בני האלו-הים (compare Niddah 61). According to this Midrash Mechazael had sexual relations with the wife of Cham shortly before they entered the ark and Sichon was born while Noach and family were in the ark. This would explain why Cham had intercourse with his wife while in the ark (although it had been forbidden) so as to clear his wife from suspicion of infidelity. [this does not solve the problem of Og being the ninth survivor of the deluge, something which contradicts other Midrashim. Ed.]  According to the opinion of our sages that Og and Sichon were biological brothers we must assume that Sichon was also extraordinarily old at that time. G’d had a special reason why He granted both these individuals such a long life. Who can fathom what G’d had had in mind? We are told in Berachot 54 that Moses who was 10 cubits tall (one cubit taller than Og) took a ten cubit-long axe and jumped ten cubits into the air and killed Og with it. The wording in the Talmud appears to be an allusion to Moses having countered the merit of Og and the reward he had received for making an effort with his feet at the time when he informed Avraham of Lot’s capture. The author credits his teacher the Rashba with the following aggadic explanation: The Talmud writes this passage (in Berachot) only so that we should not think that Moses’ fear of Og concerned Og’s physique, his prowess as a warrior. Enjoying G’d’s grace is totally independent of one’s physique and physical strength. G’d relates to people in relation to the merits they have accumulated. We have this on the authority of Psalms 147, 10-11: “He does not prize the strength of horses, nor value the fleetness of men; but the Lord values those who fear Him, those who depend on His faithful care.”
    
    
    
   וירא בלק
    
    
   ברב עם הדרת מלך ובאפס לאום מחתת רזון, “When there is a multitude of people, this is the king’s honour; when the people are absent a ruler is ruined” (Proverbs 14,28). In this verse Solomon explains that a multitude of subjects and their presence constitute a king’s honour and pride. The reason that this is so is because among his subjects there may be individuals who can match or even surpass the king in wisdom, in prowess, in wealth or in other characteristics. The king’s  superiority over all these people who can compete with him in individual attributes comes to the fore only in his commanding a multitude and in the size of the kingdom he controls. If, for some reason, the people abandon him, this spells the ruin of his glory.
    The word רזון comes from רוזנים, rulers. Seeing Solomon had commenced his sentence with the words הדרת מלך, he should by rights have continued the contrast by writing מחתת מלך, instead of מחתת רוזנים. However, Solomon wanted to convey the idea that the absence of the usual multitude so affects the king that even the title מלך can no longer be applied to him. He will be merely like any other “ruler” whose sole distinction consists in the fact that he can impose his will on a number of inferiors. The title מלך is simply not appropriate for someone who does not have a (willing) people at his disposal. It follows that the self-confidence of a king, i.e. his faith is bound up with the people at his command. This is the reason that G’d did not really want that the Jewish people should have a king. If his faith would be placed in the people under him, how could he be faithful to the Lord above him and make Him the focus of his trust?! Not only that! The people too would place their trust and faith in the visible king instead of in the Lord (who remains invisible).
    We, the people who are the recipients of the Torah, have been commanded  את ה' אלו-היך תירא, “fear the Lord your G’d” (Deut. 6,13). We have also been commanded not to fear the Canaanites (both in Deut. 7,18 and elsewhere). Seeing the Torah has forbidden us to fear mortal man and has commanded each one of us to place our trust and faith exclusively in the Lord it follows that if  we truly keep this commandment not only do we have no need for a mortal king, but we will be far better off than if we did have a king of flesh and blood .
    However, seeing that G’d foresaw in His wisdom that the time would come when even the Jewish people would demand to be governed by a mortal king just as is the norm among the Gentiles, the Torah forestalled some of the negative fallout of such a phenomenon by stipulating rules both for who could become such a king and how such a king would have to conduct himself. This is the reason for Deut. 17,14-16 writing: “when you will say: ‘I wish to appoint a king for myself similar to the nations around me, you shall certainly appoint a king over yourself.’” Actually, the very demand for a mortal king should have been considered a sin by the people seeing that when G’d took the people out of Egypt He had demonstrated that He could do so much more for the people than any king of flesh and blood.
    It would seem logical that He who controls the whole universe should be king. This is especially so when this king has seen fit to manifest His presence among the people in the Temple. No wonder that G’d considered the very demand of the people as an insult directed at Him rather than at the previous leader Samuel (Samuel I 8,7). What could possibly prompt the people to “trade” G’d’s benevolent leadership for a mortal king? The fact that King Shaul eventually fell in battle was a demonstration to the people that they had not done well in demanding a king of flesh and blood as their political leader. Based on such considerations Solomon said in the verse we quoted above that the glory of a king is in the multitude who willingly pay homage to him. 
    A righteous person who places all his faith in the Lord is on safer ground than if he were to rely on his king, as the king who places his faith in the loyalty of his people will sometimes fall into the hands of his enemies and all his soldiers will not then be able to save him.
    Sichon and Og, mighty kings, placed their trust in their armies and it did not help them. They did not realise that in the last analysis success in life does not depend on numbers but on G’d’s decrees. David expressed this clearly in Psalms 33,16: “kings are not delivered by a large force, warriors are not saved by great strength; horses are a false hope for deliverance; for all their great power they provide no escape.” Seeing some of the mightiest kings of their time all fell victim to Moses it is not surprising that Balak was terrified at the approach of the Israelites who had defeated nations far stronger than his own. This is why our portion commences with the words:
    
    22,2. וירא בלק בן צפור את כל אשר עשה ישראל לאמורי, “Balak son of Tzippor saw all that the Israelites had done to the Emorite.”  This Balak was the king of Moav as the Torah reveals almost immediately (verse 4). Why did the Torah describe his kingship in such a peculiar fashion, i.e. “he was a king over the Moabites at that time?” Why did it not simply write: “Balak King of Moav saw what the Israelites had done, etc.?” Perhaps the Torah wanted to contrast the attitude to Sichon and Og to the Israelites to that of Balak. The former had been full of self-confidence, arrogance, even. Not so Balak. As soon as Balak realised the fate that had befallen Sichon and Og he no longer considered himself as a king. Kings are arrogant by definition. Balak had learned בעת ההיא, “at that time,” i.e. at the time of the defeat of Sichon and Og, that kings with mighty armies were no match for the Jewish people who did not even have a crowned head at their helm.
    The fact that Sichon and Og were not just “average” kings amongst the Canaanites is pointed out by G’d Himself who, whenever He speaks about His defeating the Canaanites cites the Emorites as the ones whom He humbled, i.e. they (compare Amos 2,13); represented the mightiest tribe of the Canaanite nation. Balak had previously considered the proximity of Sichon and Og as his insurance policy against being invaded by the Israelites. When he saw that his paid “protectors” had themselves proved inadequate he suddenly became filled with fear.
    A Midrashic approach, based on Tanchuma Balak 2: The word וירא, he “saw,” means he foresaw some kind of disaster. We have a rule that whenever wicked people are described by the Bible as having “seen” something, the “something” is invariably some kind of disaster. Compare Genesis 9,22, (where Cham “saw” his father’s nudity, resulting in his offspring being condemned to be slaves). Compare also Genesis 6,2 where the elite of mankind is described as intermarrying with the morally corrupt, resulting eventually in the inevitability of the deluge. Compare also Genesis 12,15 where the Egyptians saw the physical beauty of Sarah and this resulted in her being abducted to Pharaoh’s palace. Still another example is that of Shechem, son of Chamor “seeing” Dinah, which resulted in his raping her and in the whole city of Shechem being destroyed (Genesis 34,2 and subsequent verses).
    
    22,4. ויאמר מואב אל זקני מדין, “Moav said to the elders of Midian, etc.” The sudden consultation between two peoples whom we know as enemies of one another (Genesis 36,35) is remarkable. Fear of the Israelites drove these two people into each other’s arms. When two dogs which were fighting one another perceive themselves as being threatened by a wolf, they suddenly start to cooperate. Here too the survival instinct drove Midian and Moav to bury their hatchets. Why did the Moabites choose the Midianites to consult with? [there were other nations in the region. Ed.] They had realised that Moses’ success was due to supernatural forces. Having learned that the leader of the Israelites, Moses, had spent many decades in Midian they wanted to find out more about his personality and abilities. The Midianites explained to their Moabite neighbours that Moses’ power was not of a military nature but lay only in his mouth. Thereupon the Moabites (Balak) decided to fight Moses by means of someone (Bileam) whose power was also in his mouth (Tanchuma Balak 3). They were under the impression that Moses was simply a superior astrologer.
    
    22,5. פתורה, “to Petor;” according to the plain meaning of the text this was the name of a place. Deut. 23,5 describes  Bileam as “son of  Beor, from Petor of Aram Naharayim.”
    Tanchuma Balak 5 sees in the word פתורה an allusion to the word פתרון, “solution (to problems).” Bileam was reputed to have started his career as an interpreter of dreams, promoting himself to became a magician. Eventually, he was even granted Holy Spirit.
    
    22,6. כי ידעתיו את אשר תברך מברך ואת אשר תאור יואר, “for I am aware that those whom you bless are blessed and those whom you curse are cursed.” This verse teaches that Bileam had established a reputation as someone whose curses always came true. This confirms a saying of our sages: “do not relate disdainfully to even the curses of ordinary people” (Baba Kama 93). Ibn Ezra thought that Bileam was an astrologer who, when he observed the horoscope of a person being at a low ebb, used this knowledge of curse him so that when misfortune struck such a person he could take the credit for it, i.e. attributing it to his having cursed him. Seeing this was so he had to tell the emissaries of Balak that he would be unable to transgress the command of the Lord and do anything on his own (verse 18). He did not foresee misfortune for the Jewish people in the stars, hence his curse if it did not materialise would ruin his reputation. Our sages do not agree and attribute real powers to Bileam. However, G’d in His mercy, thwarted Bileam who had thought that he saw reason for G’d expressing anger at the Jewish people (Compare Berachot 7).
    22,7. וקסמים בידם, “with charms in their hands.” This proves that Bileam was a magician employing charms. The emissaries brought along charms so that Bileam would not be able to stall them by saying that he did not have any charms available at that time. An alternative explanation [seeing it is most unlikely that a man whose trade depends on charms should not have the tools of his trade available. Ed.] They brought money to pay Bileam for using his own charms on their behalf. (compare both Rashi, for the former view and Ibn Ezra quoting Rabbi Shmuel Hanaggid for the latter view)
    
    22,8. לינו פה הלילה, “stay here overnight!” Bileam’s great arrogance made him view Balak’s emissaries as people not deserving especial consideration; this is why his invitation was of the grossest variety. Instead of inviting them graciously as he did the second set of emissaries to whom he said: שבו נא בזה, “please stay here,” he said: “spent the night here.” There is no mention of food, making them comfortable, etc. The word שבו by contrast implies a longer stay such as in Deut.1,15 “they stayed in Kadesh, וישבו, for many years.” Also, the word נא, used by Bileam to the second set of emissaries indicates that he urged them to stay, pleaded with them.
    
    22,9. ויבא אלו-הים אל בלעם, “G’d came to Bileam, etc.” The only reason that Bileam was granted a divine vision at this point was in honour of the Israelites. This situation was similar to G’d revealing Himself in a nocturnal vision to Lavan to prevent him from harming Yaakov (Genesis 34,24). Something similar occurred in Genesis 20,3 where G’d revealed Himself to Avimelech, King of the Philistines, for the sake of Avraham.
    
   ויאמר מי האנשים האלה עמך, He said: “who are these men with you?” We do not find anywhere throughout the Bible that G’d asks (as if He did not know) except when the people whom G’d asked are wicked and G’d gives them a chance to incriminate themselves by giving untrue answers. This would provide G’d with the excuse to execute His judgment on them. This is what Job 12,23 had in mind when he said: משגיא לגוים ויאבדם, “He exalts nations then destroys them.” [they initially feel complimented by being found worthy of a divine revelation. Ed.] G’d had asked Kayin at the time (Genesis 4,9) “where is Hevel your brother?” Kayin (instead of expressing remorse) had answered defiantly: “am I my brother’s keeper?” Seeing Kayin had thereby denied that he believed that G’d knew what goes on in His universe and holds people accountable was punished. G’d had misled Kayin as if He really did not know what had happened to Hevel and by whom. Here too, G’d asked Bileam a rhetorical question to see if Bileam would try to deceive Him.” He gave Bileam the impression that whereas at certain times He knew everything, at other times He did not.
    Tanchuma Balak 5 quotes Proverbs 28,10: “he who misleads the upright into an evil course will fall into his own pit, but the blameless will prosper,” as applying to our situation. According to the Midrash, in earlier times people observed sexual mores, respecting laws laid down by G’d. They base this on Genesis 29,9 “and Rachel came with the flocks which belonged to her father.” [Her father did not need to worry that the male shepherds would molest her. Ed.] We have a similar statement concerning the seven daughters of Yitro who were not scared of encountering male shepherds when watering their father’s flocks (Exodus 2,16). Then there arose Bileam who misled people into practicing sexual  permissiveness. He would therefore fall victim to being misled himself. This is the reason G’d asked him the question: “who are these men with you?” Bileam jumped to the conclusion that there are times when G’d can be deceived and decided to accept the mission to curse the Jewish people looking for a point in time when G’d’s “blind side” would be turned in his direction.
    
    22,12. לא תלך עמהם, “do not go with them!”  G’d offered as His reason that even if Bileam would go with Balak’s emissaries he would not be able to curse the Jewish people seeing He Himself had already blessed them.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Balak 6), (describing how Bileam wriggled out of this prohibition). G’d said: “do not go with them.” Bileam therefore decided to curse the people while he was at home. G’d then added: “do not curse them,” to which Bileam replied: “O.K. then I will bless them.” G’d told him not to bless them as He had already blessed them so here was no point in Bileam duplicating G’d’s work. The whole episode recalls the popular saying applied to hornets: “spare me your sting and I will gladly forego your honey.”
    
    22,13. ויאמר אל שרי בלק, “he said to Balak’s princes, etc.” He did not make mention of the elders of Midian at all. The reason was that they were merely secondary as the delegation had been initiated by Balak.
   כי מאן ה' לתתי להלוך עמכם, “The Lord has refused me permission to go with you.”  Bileam implied that G’d was totally opposed to such a mission. He could not imagine that G’d would permit him to go at all, even if more princes of a higher rank than the original ones would be sent to him. Balak suspected Bileam of having made up this refusal in order to blackmail him into paying a higher price for his services. This is why he sent a larger  delegation composed of even more prominent emissaries. He wanted to show Bileam that cost was no obstacle as long as Bileam would perform the services for which he was being hired. Bileam therefore had to tell him that he was mistaken, that money was not the issue at all, but that he Bileam was a tool in G’d’s hands and could not contravene His instructions.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Balak 6) to the words: “G’d has refused to let me go with you.” His emphasis was on the word “you.” Bileam implied that if a larger and more prominent delegation would come to him G’d might give him permission to accompany them. Bileam’s hint teaches us three things about him: 1) he had the evil eye, 2) he was arrogant; 3) he was greedy. We learn that he had the evil eye seeing the Torah specially mentions his negative feelings against Israel when he saw them camped “according to their tribes,” orderly, peacefully (24,2). This irked “his eyes.” We know that he was arrogant from his emphasis on not being willing “to go with you,” i.e. the lower level emissaries. We know that he was greedy from his reference to Balak giving him a houseful of silver and gold.
    
    22,18. ואמר אל עבדי בלק, אם יתן לי בלק, “He said to Balak’s servants: even if Balak were to give me, etc.” Earlier the first group of emissaries had been described as שרי בלק; the new delegation is described by Bileam as עבדי בלק. The first delegation who had behaved towards Bileam with deference had been rewarded by him in that he considered them as שרי בלק, Balak’s princes. The second group who related to Bileam in a peremptory manner, saying: “Balak said not to refuse to come to me,” he treated with disdain seeing they had been arrogant towards him. Hence he treated them as merely  עבדי בלק “Balak’s servants.” He also wanted to allude to the fact that they who were merely the servants of a mortal king and not allowed to disobey their ruler, must surely understand that he as a servant of an immortal King, G’d, could most certainly not disobey His instructions. 
    
    22,19. ועתה שבו נא בזה, “and now, please stay here, etc.”  The word בזה refers to “this place.”
   גם אתם הלילה, “also you, for the night.” [according to the cantillation there is a comma between “also you” and “night.” Ed.] Our sages claim that G’d punished Moav for this “night” which its emissaries spent with Bileam. They derive this from Isaiah 15,1 in which the prophet deals with G’d’s judgment of Moav. The prophet writes: “Ah, in the night Ar was sacked (a capital of Moav), Moav was ruined; Ah, in the night Kir was sacked, Moav was ruined.” The two nights which two delegations of Moav spent with Bileam attempting to get him to curse the Jewish people proved ultimately to boomerang on them. [This writer believes that the dropping of an atom bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the Americans also boomeranged i.e. the men the U.S. lost in Korea and in Vietnam. Ed.]
    
    22,20. אם לקרא לך באו האנשים קום לך אתם, “if these men came to call you, arise and go with them.” Seeing G’d had previously told Bileam: “you must not go with them (עמהם)”, how could G’d reverse Himself? You may compare this to G’d saying to Moses: “send for yourself men, etc.,” (the spies in Numbers 13,2). G’d said to Moses: “send according to your considerations.” G’d meant: “I do not command you to dispatch spies seeing I already told the Jewish people: ‘I will bring you up from the poverty of Egypt to a good and generous land (Exodus 3,17).’” However, when I told them (Deut. 1,21) “go up and take possession,” they did not believe Me but said: “let us (first) send men (spies), etc.” G’d therefore consented to let the people do what they wanted. Here, on an individual basis, we face a similar situation. Although G’d had told Bileam previously (in his own interest) “do not go,” now that He saw that Bileam was bent on going he did not restrict his freedom of choice. This is an illustration of the Rabbinic dictum  (Tanchuma Balak 8) that G’d allows a person to pursue the lifestyle he chooses for himself.
    Nachmanides approaches our verse differently, understanding the words: “you must not go with them (verse 12) as merely prohibiting Bileam from going with the intention of cursing the Jewish people.” G’d never meant to issue travel restrictions to Bileam. This is why this time G’d added the introductory remark: “if these people merely came to call you (invite you) you may accept their invitation.” The understanding was that whereas Bileam would go with them he would not do so for the purpose of cursing the Jewish people. 
   ואך את הדבר אשר אדבר אליך, “but only the word which I will speak to you, etc.” G’d meant that that even if G’d would tell him to bless the Jewish people Bileam would agree to do so (as the price for being allowed to go). He was not to be afraid of Balak’s anger, etc.
    At this point we may well ask if Bileam possessed the power to either curse or bless at all. You might well ask how it is possible for a mere mortal to countermand decrees which issued from G’d? If G’d blessed a people, as we know from verse 12 כי ברוך הוא, what possible point was there in anyone attempting to turn such a blessing into a curse? If you were to answer that indeed, Bileam’s curse would have been totally ineffective, then why did G’d bother to dissuade or even prevent Bileam from going? Why did He say to him: “do not curse the people!?” Let Bileam curse all day long, as long as the people enjoyed G’d’s blessing what did it matter? After all we have a verse on this subject in Psalms 109,28: “let them curse, but You bless.” 
    The answer is that indeed Bileam neither possessed independent power to bless nor to curse. If we want to look for proof that his curses were ineffective we only need to look at the ineffectiveness of his blessings. If he himself had believed that his curses or his blessings were effective, seeing that he was prevented from cursing Israel, a nation which already enjoyed a blessing, why did he not simply bless Balak and his people, a people concerning which he had neither been forbidden to curse nor to bless? If Balak was so afraid of the Jewish people, why did Bileam not extend the protection of his prophetic blessing to Balak? Moreover, if Bileam thought of himself as powerful by means of his words, why would he demean himself by earning his livelihood through handouts from Balak and the like, instead of blessing himself by bestowing material riches on himself? In fact, we find that he did bless himself when he said (23,10) “may my soul die the death of the righteous!” If he could do this, why did he not bless himself with silver and gold, something he sorely desired? We know that even the wish to die the death of the righteous was not fulfilled as the Torah tells us that Bileam died by the sword in battle, hardly the death “of the righteous?” (Joshua 13,22) Job 11,20 also makes it plain that Bileam’s hereafter (if he had any) was certainly not that of the righteous. 
    What we learn from the above is that Bileam’s power most certainly did not reside in his mouth, his pronouncements. However, any power he had emanated from his wisdom. Seeing that he was able to divine when G’d was angry and at whom, and whom G’d was favourably disposed at at a given moment in time, he would exploit  that knowledge making it appear as if he had originated those people’s good fortune of misfortune. Even allowing for this fact, the question remains that seeing that at the time Balak hired Bileam G’d was not angry at the Jewish people (Berachot 7), what chance would Bileam have to even appear to curse the people effectively when he would be shown up as a charlatan in short order? Neither his pronouncements nor his insight into G’d’s “moods” would produce any results at all? Seeing that at this time Bileam would be totally ineffective why did G’d bother to restrain him in any way? Why not let him discredit himself instead? The answer is that it was known to G’d that there would shortly occur a pestilence among the Jewish people (Numbers 25,1-9). G’d did not want anyone to assume that the reason for this pestilence was Bileam’s curse. This is why He warned Bileam not even to open his mouth by mouthing any curses, however ineffective He knew those curses to be. The fact that we must remember is that Bileam was certainly unable to effect the fortunes of the Jewish people by his pronouncements.
    
    22,22. ויחר אף אלו-הים, “G’d’s anger was kindled.” G’d was angry because He realised Bileam had gone in order to curse.
   ויתיצב מלאך ה' בדרך לשטן לו, ”an angel of Hashem positioned himself on the way in such a manner as to obstruct him.” Bileam had tried to appropriate to himself a vocation which was meant to be exclusively that of the Jewish people, i.e. הקול קול יעקב, “the use of the voice is a use reserved for Yaakov” (Genesis 27,2). In retaliation for this trespass, the angel also made use of a weapon which is not really his, i.e. the sword, the weapon allocated to Esau. He was an angel dispatched by the attribute of Mercy. [Had it been an angel dispatched by the attribute of Justice he would have killed Bileam instead of preventing him from carrying out his sinful intent. Ed.] We find here another demonstration of the principle מדה כנגד מדה, measure for measure.
    22,23. ותרא האתון את מלאך ה' נצב בדרך, “When the she-ass saw the angel of Hashem standing in the way, etc.” The word “saw” in this instance does not mean “saw with its eyes,” but “she realised, she had a distinct feeling of a dangerous obstruction in front of her.” Seeing that as a rule angels do not appear in such guise in front of human beings, the likelihood for them to reveal themselves in such a fashion to animals is nil. We do not have to stress that this was not a mental vision, something originating in the brain seeing that animals do not possess such a brain, i.e. intelligence. All the ass knew was that if faced a frightening phenomenon and therefore she tried to dodge the obstacle she perceived. Had the ass had a clearer perception of precisely who it was that blocked her way, she would have said to Bileam: “an angel of G’d with drawn sword is facing me and therefore I had to deviate from the path.” This is Nachmanides’ view of the incident (pages 290 Chavell edition).
   ותט האתון מן הדרך ותלך  בשדה, “the she-ass turned from the path and walked in the field.” Bileam’s desire to curse the Israelites was so strong that he was blind to any indications which were designed to deflect him from his purpose. Anyone else in his place would have noticed if not the first sign then the second sign or at least the third sign. Bileam, the “seer” was so blind on this occasion that he ignored even the clearest indications that his mission was not to be crowned with success. It is almost inconceivable that an individual whose profession was the interpretation of all unusual phenomena, who interpreted every inconsistency in nature, should not have realised that he was being given the grossest possible hints of G’d’s displeasure. Even the power of speech which the she-ass suddenly displayed did not stun him into realising the error of his ways. He should have realised what Moses was told in Exodus 4,11 when he used his speech impediment as an excuse not to accept the position of leader of the people that G’d can grant the power of speech to whomsoever He wants to just as He can withhold it from those who possessed it. The fact that Bileam did not display the slightest amazement at the ass talking is his greatest indictment. This is why eventually the angel had to reveal his presence to him and had to address him directly telling him that as of this time, he had to continue on his way but could only say what he was told to say. The reason Bileam had offered to abandon his journey and to return home was that once he had seen that even his ass could talk, he realised that his so-called power of speech was quite meaningless. He could no longer boast of his power of speech.
    
    22,28.  ויפתח ה' את פי האתון, “Hashem opened the mouth of the she-ass.” If we look at the plain meaning of the text, the fact that the ass could suddenly speak intelligently was a great miracle. The performance of this miracle has to be construed as a compliment to the Jewish people for whose sake G’d performed this miracle. G’d made even the animal kingdom realise that any mission undertaken in order to curse G’d’s chosen nation was totally inadmissible. Such an undertaking would be equivalent to telling the mountains “to bury us” under them or for the hills to fall upon us” (compare Hoseah 10,8). There was no need to tell intelligent human beings that cursing the Jewish people was both forbidden and futile if even the animals understood this.
    If we approach the mystical dimension of our paragraph you will find that there is a similarity between the original serpent speaking to Chavah (the only previous time the Torah mentions animals as speaking) and the she-ass speaking to Bileam. Neither the serpent nor the she-ass said what they said of their own free volition, seeing that they did not possess the kind of soul necessary to formulate their own thoughts and then express them verbally. The serpent’s words had been inspired by Satan.
    You will note the sequence of “the Lord opened the mouth of the she ass,” etc., followed in verse 31 by: “G’d uncovered Bileam’s eyes so that he saw the angel of Hashem.” As soon as the she-ass had said what G’d wanted her to say she died. Only then did an angel of Hashem appear to Bileam. The reason the she-ass is described as having seen an angel three times is that she saw three different angels in the guise of men. When the angel, on the fourth occasion, challenged Bileam why he had struck his she-ass three times, he referred to three separate signs G’d had sent him to realise that he should not proceed with his evil plan. The angel used the same words as had the she-ass when he said על מה הכית את אתונך שלוש רגלים, “why did you strike your ass three times?” whereas the she-ass had also employed the expression שלוש רגלים to signify “on three separate occasions.” When the angels used the word יצאתי, “ I have come forth” (now) he meant that prior to this the she-ass had experienced other angels in the guise of men. 
    
    
    22,29. כי התעללת בי, “because you mocked me!” As we pointed out already Bileam should have expressed his amazement at the ass’s sudden ability to speak to him. However, Bileam was so intent on reaching his destination and accomplishing his evil intent that he related to the ass’s speaking with utter naivity, taking the phenomenon for granted, and conversing with the ass as if with an equal. If the Torah does not report any reaction by the Moabite members of the delegation or of Bileam’s personal valet, perhaps they had not been privy to this conversation having walked some distance ahead (compare Nachmanides). This great miracle may have occurred when Bileam remained alone with the ass. Alternately, no one else had become privy to the miracle just as the prophets who were disciples of Elijah had not seen him ascend to heaven except for Elisha, or just as Daniel’s companions had not experienced Daniel’s visions even while walking alongside him, Daniel 10,7).
    
    22,31. וחרבו שלופה בידו, “with a drawn sword in his hand.” This was a hint to Bileam that he would ultimately die by the sword. It presages Joshua 13,22: “and Bileam the magician they killed by the sword.”
    
    22,33. אולי נטתה מפני, “if she had not turned aside on my account, etc.” The word אולי which often means: “maybe, perchance,” here means “if not.” The words “instead of killing her” clearly demonstrate that after the she-ass spoke the angel killed her. He now told her that the she-ass’s very speaking had been the reason he had spared her master, Bileam.
    The Midrash cites another possible reason for the ass being killed, namely to prevent the Emorites deifying an ass that was able to speak like a human being (Tanchuma Balak 9). A third reason is simply that the ass had performed the function it had been created for and kept in limbo since dusk on the sixth day of creation (Avot 5,8). We observe a similar phenomenon with the fish whose purpose on earth (in water) had been to swallow and subsequently spit out Jonah. We read in the Book of Jonah 2,2: “G’d appointed a large fish, דג גדול, to swallow Jonah.” The reason that fish was described as גדול “large,” is “great in years,” i.e.very old. Although there were many fish in the sea with bodies larger than that which swallowed Jonah, there was none that was as old, i.e. which had been assigned this particular task since the days of creation.The intention of the author of the Book of Jonah in writing the word וימן is to tell us that this fish and none other had been appointed for this specific task already during the dawn of history. This thought is also reflected in the word לבלוע, “in order to swallow,” instead of the simple ויבלע, “it swallowed,” when the Book of Jonah describes this fish. The peculiar wording alerts us to the fact that the sole purpose of G’d creating this fish when He did was to swallow Jonah. It is also peculiar that initially the fish is described as דג, fish (masculine) whereas in the course of the narrative the author changes to describe it as דגה, fish (feminine). Jonah is described as praying from the entrails of the דגה (Jonah 2,2) after he had first spent three days inside the דג. The term דגה repeatedly occurs as describing dead fish such as in Exodus 7,21 when the fish of the river Nile which had died due to the plague of blood are described as והדגה אשר ביאור מתו. [Perhaps the fact that the fish had died was the catalyst which caused Jonah to pray. Ed.] When he said: מבטן שאול שועתי, “I have cried out from the belly of Sheol,” he meant that the fish had become his grave (Jonah 2,3).
    
    22,34. ויאמר בלעם אל מלאך ה' חטאתי, ”Bileam said to the angel of the Lord: ‘I sinned;’” our sages in Tanchuma Balak 10 state that this verse is proof that if someone confesses his guilt by saying “I have sinned,” the angel no longer has permission to touch him.
   כי לא ידעתי, “for I had been unaware, etc.” He, who had boasted that he was יודע מחשבות עליון, “aware of the thoughts of the Supreme One,” now had to humble himself by admitting that he did not know anything.
    
    22,35. אותו תדבר, “it you shall say.” Previously (verse 20)  G’d had said to him in the dream: “it you shall do.” Clearly, the angel warned Bileam specifically about what to say. G’d’s permission for Bileam to accompany the delegation extended precisely to that, not one iota more. 
    
    22,41. במות בעל, “the heights of Baal.” Bileam (Balak) built a total of 21 altars in three different locations, seven in each. He built the first seven altars in the place described as במות בעל, the next seven in a place known as שדה צופים ראש הפסגה, “the field of the lookouts, the top of  the height” (verse 14), whereas he built the last seven altars at ראש הפעור, “the summit of the height” which looks down on the face of ישימון (23,28). On each of these altars he sacrificed a bull and a ram, i.e. a total of 42 burnt-offerings. If verse 40 speaks of בקר וצאן, cattle and flocks, the meaning is that he offered only one of each species (Rashi). Our author wonders what prompted Rashi to interpret the words בקר וצאן in this fashion as elsewhere this is always a reference to something more comprehensive. His reason may have been that these animals which were meat-offerings intended for the consumption of the entourage of Balak as well as for Bileam should be kept to a minimum so as not to delay the principal part of the mission, i.e. to find a place from where G’d might let Bileam curse the Jewish people. The normal meaning of the expression בקר וצאן or צאן ובקר certainly does not imply a minimal number of specimens of each.
   וירא משם את קצה העם, “He could see from there a portion of the people.” He could not see all of them. The reason was that their encampment extended in all four directions of the globe. Balak was very eager to lead Bileam to heights from which he could see them and focus his eye on them as he believed Bileam’s power to curse to repose in his evil eye. The eye, or the manner in which it sees, reflects the inner soul. Our sages in Baba Kama 117 comment on this: (in connection with a story involving Rabbi Yochanan and Rabbi Kahane where a stare from Rabbi Yochanan who mistakenly thought that Rabbi Kahane had made fun of him killed Rabbi Kahane). Rabbi Yochanan had used his eyes as conveying a curse. The reason that such stares from great Torah scholars can have such lethal effect is that these scholars  cannot stand being deflected from thoughts of Torah even momentarily. When they encounter persons who cause them to be deflected from Torah thoughts they resent this strongly and when they look at the person causing this their look reflects their anger. They view the person having caused them to become deflected from pure Torah thoughts as if guilty of heresy, deserving to be cursed. This may be the meaning of Kohelet 10,9 ”He who splits logs, עצים, will be endangered by them.” If someone becomes the cause of the עץ החיים, i.e. Torah, to be “split,” to be interrupted, he endangers his life by doing so.
    It is true, of course, that we find many times that the words or stares of great Torah scholars, pious individuals, do not appear to have any harmful effects at all; the matter is something which is subject to the individual. The makeup of the personality of the individual scholar determines if his stare can be potentially lethal. One requires this particular gift in addition to great Torah knowledge in order for one’s stare prompted by one’s anger to have such harmful effects as reported in the Talmud of certain outstanding personalities.
    
    23,3. וילך שפי, “he went alone.” Onkelos translates it in this manner. The word does not occur elsewhere in the Bible. Ibn Ezra believes that it is derived fromשפיים , meaning “a high place.” The word אל was omitted. We have a parallel construction in Numbers 11,35 נסעו העם חצרות, “the people journeyed to Chatzerot,” where the word אל is also absent. 
    The Torah reveals that Bileam made desperate efforts to find a spot from which he could see at one and the same time the entire Jewish camp; the fact that they were arranged in different directions made this impossible. He moved in the manner of someone trying to find clues on the ground. The word שפי would indicate the fact that the people were scattered in different directions, מפוזרות.
    A Midrashic approach (Sotah 10): Bileam was lame on one foot and could not walk upright, dragging one foot behind, his posture making him appear as constantly being at a slant. The word is related to שפיפון (Genesis 49,17) meaning viper. [the motion of a snake resembles someone part of whom is constantly at a slant. Ed.]
    
    23,4. ויקר אלו-הים אל בלעם, “G’d ‘chanced’ upon Bileam.”  According to the plain meaning of the text the fact that G’d arranged to appear to Bileam was a compliment to the people of Israel. Not only is this expression unusual but the expression ויבא אלו-הים אל בלעם (22,20) is equally strange, never occurring in connection with G’d communicating with any other prophet. This expression only occurs when G’d appeared to people below the level of prophet, such as Avimelech and Lavan (Genesis 20,3 and 31,24). The word ויקר suggests that Bileam experienced a type of inspiration normally only granted to real prophets who enjoy Holy Spirit at the time when they isolate themselves from society, deliberately seek solitude, and are trembling at the thought of being in the Lord’s presence (compare Nachmanides). 
    Later on you will find (verse 16) that ויקר ה' אל בלעם, that Bileam even experienced a vision from Hashem, a higher attribute than אלו-הים. This occurred as a result of Bileam’s visions already having elevated him to a status where he could receive prophetic inspirations from the same celestial source as did Moses. It was then that he realised that the notion of cursing Israel was quite absurd seeing Israel was under the protective wings of the attribute of Mercy.
    As long as Bileam had been “visited” only by the attribute of Justice he had dared hope  that he would somewhere find a weak spot in Israel’s spiritual armour enabling him to curse them so that the attribute of Justice would be arraigned ready to pounce on the people. As soon as G’d addressed him in His capacity as Hashem,  Bileam realised that he had hoped in vain. This great “spiritual promotion” which Bileam experienced when he was addressed by the attribute of Hashem did not last long as it had only occurred for the sake of the Jewish people not because of Bileam’s own spiritual achievements. G’d did not want the nations of the world to argue that if they had been granted the calibre of prophet of a Moses they themselves would have become spiritually uplifted similar to the Jewish people. By giving Bileam powers and insights similar to those of Moses, G’d demonstrated to the nations of the world that in spite of having at their disposal a spiritually outstandingly gifted individual such as Bileam this had had no impact on their moral/ethical modes of behaviour. This also gave the Jewish people an argument in favour of their preferred standing vis-a-vis G’d when they could point to the fact that the prophet and spiritual leader of all these nations had conceded the spiritual superiority of the Jewish people in that he sang their praises. 
    As soon as Bileam had concluded singing the praises of the Jewish people, i.e. their moral superiority over the other nations, G’d removed this spirit of prophecy from him. He reverted to relying on charms and that is why he wound up being killed by the sword instead of securing for himself the death of the righteous which he had wished himself.
    A Midrashic approach, based on Yayikra Rabbah 1,12 commenting on the words ויקר אלו-הים אל בלעם. The difference between Jewish prophets and Gentiles who experienced revelations by G’d or visions is 1) the former experience these visions by day whereas Gentiles do so only at night. In connection with Moses’ prophetic experiences the Torah speaks of: “it was on the day that Hashem spoke with Moses,” (Exodus 6,3) whereas in connection with communications by G’d to Gentiles the Torah writes: “G’d came to Avimelech in a dream at night;” (Genesis 20,3); G’d came to Lavan in a dream at night (Genesis 31,24);” G’d appeared to Bileam at night (Numbers 22,20).” The whole matter may be illustrated by a parable. A king had both a wife and a mistress. Whenever he would visit his wife he was not ashamed to do so by day in view of all the people. When he felt the need to visit his mistress he did so only at night, feeling embarrassed to be seen. Something similar occurs when G’d communicates with the prophets of the Jewish people. He has no need to hide the fact and does so by day and He speaks to them outright. This is documented by Leviticus 1,1 “G’d called to Moses.” When He communicates with the prophets of the Gentile nations He does so only in a חצי דבור, “half a communication,” that is why the Torah did not introduce this vision with the word ויקרא, but with the incomplete word ויקר.
    2) When G’d addresses the Jewish prophets He uses language which is pure and holy, the word ויקרא brings to mind וקרא זה אל זה ואמר קדוש. When He addresses the prophets of other nations  He uses words reminding us of ritual impurity  (ויקר suggests קרי, nocturnal seminal emission).
    3) A third difference, explained in the form of a parable. A king has two friends both of whom want to have an audience. One is healthy, the other is leprous. Whereas the king grants interviews to both friends he invites the healthy one into his palace while leaving his palace to interview to leprous friend outside. The words ויקר אלו-הים אל בלעם, suggest that “G’d went out to encounter Bileam.”
   את שבעת המזבחות ערכתי, “I have prepared the seven altars (Bileam speaking).” According to the plain meaning of the text Bileam spoke of the seven altars which Balak had built, on which he, Bileam, had offered sacrifices to the Lord. These offerings were supposed to ensure that G’d would look upon Bileam with favour. The reason he used the letter ה when referring to the altars, was to allude to the fact that prior to him seven people had similarly built altars for the Lord and had found grace. The people were: Adam, Kayin, Hevel, Noach, Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov. Each one of these people has built only one altar for the Lord whereas he, Bileam, had built seven altars. [there are other versions of this Midrash omitting mention of Kayin’s altar seeing his offering had been rejected and substituting Moses as building an altar. Ed.]
    An approach based on astrology: The reason the Torah speaks about Bileam favouring the number seven is because it represents the medium between four different kinds of cycles, the cycle represented by the day, the cycle described by the week, the cycle described by the month, and the cycle described by the year. The cycle represented by the day is a reference to the orbit described by the sun around earth each day in an east-west direction (remember the author lived in an era prior to Coperrnicus, Ed.). The “weekly cycle” is a reference to another cycle which repeats itself constantly but at weekly intervals. Similarly, we have the monthly cycle and the annual cycle, all the cycles repeating themselves at regular and predetermined intervals. The cycle which is the medium between the daily cycle and the monthly cycle is the weekly cycle consisting of seven days, i.e. featuring the number seven. It is viewed as something in between the lunar and the solar cycles, the month representing a lunar cycle whereas the day represents a solar cycle. (compare Maimonides in More Nevuchim 3,43). Seeing that all matters related to nature are governed by this medium cycle and Torah always approximates nature, many commandments reflect this number seven which represents the “happy medium” between the solar and the lunar cycles, both pillars of the system we call “laws of nature.” The number seven also symbolises the seven planets whose orbits dominate nature in a very recognisable manner.
    If, say Passover would extend for an entire year, i.e. corresponding to the fourth of the cycles we mentioned, it would not be recognised for what it is and represents. On the other hand, if Passover would be observed for only a single day, corresponding to the first of the cycles, it would be too short to be meaningful.  If it were to be observed for a whole month it would be too long and it would lose its meaning and impact on the people observing it. This is why the Torah legislated that it be observed for seven days, corresponding to the second cycle we mentioned. Bileam took his cue from studying the Torah and its relationship to natural events and this is why he chose to build seven altars, not 30, or not one. This is the opinion of Maimonides.
    A kabbalistic approach: The number seven, the use of the definitive article, i.e. the letter ה when referring to the altars was all carefully calculated by Bileam. He realised that there was a seven-fold connection, link, between G’d and Israel and he wanted to sever each one of them by first matching Israel’s attachment to G’d through building seven altars in G’d’s honour (compare Zohar Balak Sullam edition page 164). Israel is directly connected to G’d on all seven lower emanations. Bileam hoped to draw down to him divine emanations of goodwill not only from these seven emanations but also from the three higher emanations. In this way he would excel what the Jewish people had achieved. His 42 sacrifices rose heavenward from three separate locations. 
    It is possible that the seven altars represented the seven days of the week and the seven lights on the lampstand, מנורה, which are also known as צרור החיים, “a bundle of life.” These represent seven sources of life which are channeled from heaven to earth according to the degree of concentration with which man longs for them. [If I understand it correctly Bileam assumed a reciprocal action and interaction between the offerings he sent to heaven and the inspiration he would receive from heaven in return. Ed.] All of this is alluded to in the letter ה before the word מזבחות, i.e. he meant that his seven altars corresponded to the seven altars in the celestial spheres he was aware of. When he used the word ואעל, “I made rise up,” to describe the offerings he presented instead of the word הקרבתי, this was not accidental. He alluded to the interaction between heaven and earth or vice versa.
    According to Ibn Ezra who refers to Job 42,8 the mystical dimension of what Bileam did is concealed in the words of that verse, i.e. that G’d commanded Job’s friends who had been guilty of misrepresenting G’d’s attributes and ways of judgment, to offer seven bulls and seven rams after bringing them to Job. Job would then pray for them to receive a pardon for their trespass against the Lord. Bileam realised the mystical power which reposed in the offering of these seven bulls and seven rams in each location. Just as G’d is perceived as שלם, complete, the number seven represents the concept of a complete cycle. By offering a complete cycle to the Complete One, Bileam hoped to attain the בינה  input from the eighth emanation called בינה.
    
    23,7. מן ארם ינחני בלק...מהררי קדם, “from Aram, Balak...led me, from the mountains of the east;” The word קדם here means “east.” When Bileam quoted Balak as asking him: ארה לי יעקב, “curse Yaakov for me,” he ridiculed Balak for even imagining that it would be possible to curse a nation of whom G’d had said that they were “part of Hashem” (Deut. 32,9). If it had not been for Yaakov, i.e. the Jewish people, i.e. Avraham who had saved Lot the ancestor of Moav, Balak’s nation would not even exist at all. Lot had been saved from the destruction of Sodom only by an act of kindness G’d performed on account of Avraham as we know from Genesis 19,29: “when G’d destroyed the towns of the valley, He remembered Avraham and sent Lot away from there.” Bileam also conceded that he himself was only on earth due to Yaakov who had served Lavan who had admitted that his blessings were due to Yaakov’s presence (Genesis 30,27). The Torah speaks of the sons of Lavan in Genesis 31,1. He, Bileam, was one of the direct descendants of Lavan. In view of the above, how could either he or Balak be so ungrateful as to curse the very people responsible for their existence on earth?
   לכה ארה לי יעקב, “come curse Yaakov on my behalf!” In this verse Bileam mentions both names of Israel, i.e. Yaakov and Israel. This is proof that when one curses one must mention all the names of the person to be cursed in order for the curse to have any effect. Also, one needs to use the two attributes of the name of G’d representing the attribute of night and the attribute of day. This is why Bileam mentioned both the attribute י-ה-ו-ה and the attribute א-ל in verse 8. [Bileam would not have needed to change the name of G’d’s attribute and could have said: מה אקוב לא קבה א-ל ומה אזעם לא זעם א-ל. You will note that in Psalms 7,12 David does combine זעם with the attribute א-ל, i.e. the problem is not with the type of curse but with the attributes of G’d invoked. Ed.]
    In fact, Job did something similar when he cursed the day he was born and said (Job 3,8) יקבהו אררי יום. He had already cursed both the day and the night separately in the earlier verses of that chapter. According to our traditional sources the separate mention of day and night in verse 3 of that chapter was heretical, suggesting that separate powers are in charge of day and night respectively. Concerning that statement our sages in Shemot Rabbah 30,8 claim that this was heresy (although Nachmanides points out that Jeremiah (20,14) appears to have been guilty of the same offense and no one accused him of heresy).
    It is also necessary to see the intended victim of one’s curse with one’s own eyes as the curse will then be far more effective. This is why Balak went out of his way to take Bileam to the tops of surrounding hills and mountains. The same principle applies to blessings. In order for blessings to be fully effective the person to be blessed must be within an area that the one bestowing the blessing can see with his eyes. All his names should be mentioned just as Bileam did in 24,5 when he spoke of the goodness of the tents of Yaakov and the dwellings of Israel.
    When Balak is quoted as having said to Bileam: “curse Yaakov for me,” the question is why he did not simply say: “curse Yaakov?” Actually Balak had not added the word לי “for me.” Bileam had added it to point to the incongruity of Balak’s request. By adding the word לי, Bileam hinted that Balak’s request to curse the Jewish people was equivalent to Balak asking that he himself be cursed seeing he could not have existed but for the Jewish people. We find support for this in Tanchuma Balak 12 where the Midrash says: “whoever curses these people curses himself seeing G’d had told Avraham that anyone cursing him or his descendants would be himself be cursed by G’d” (Genesis 12,3). Every type of curse Balak mentioned in connection with his attempt to have Israel cursed (22,11; 23,13; 23,27) always is accompanied by the word לי, the Torah’s way of saying that such a curse would boomerang on himself.
    
    23,8. מה אקב לא קבה א-ל, “what point is there in my cursing when G’d has not cursed (the same people) first?” Bileam refers to the fact that even when the Jewish people had deserved to be cursed after their disloyal acts committed during the episode of the golden calf, G’d still did not cease to love them. How did Bileam know? The protective clouds did not cease to envelop the people, the manna did not cease to descend from heaven every day, the water from the traveling well did not stop flowing. This was not merely Bileam’s surmise; we have an explicit verse in Nechemyah 9, 18-20: “Even though they made themselves a molten calf and said: ‘this is your God who brought you out of Egypt,’ thus committing great impieties, You, in Your abundant compassion, did not abandon them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from them to lead them on the way by day, nor the pillar of fire by night to give them light in the way they were to go. You endowed them with Your good spirit to instruct them. You did not withhold Your manna from their mouth; You gave them water when they were thirsty.”
    It is possible to explain the choice of Bileam’s words מה אקב לא קבה א-ל as a reference to Yaakov who had been called א-ל by G’d Himself (Genesis 33,20). How could one curse someone who was characterised by G’d Himself as possessing divine attributes? Even when Yaakov had been angry (at his sons Shimon and Levi) and he had cursed (Genesis 49,7), he did not curse the two sons but only their anger, אפם. When Bileam continued: “how can I be wrathful when Hashem has not been wrathful?” He meant that during all these 40 years G’d had not been sufficiently angry at them. His own wisdom was only effective if G’d had first been sufficiently angry at the people (Berachot 7).
    
    23,9. כי מראש צורים אראנו, “for from the top of rocks I behold it.” According to the plain meaning of the text this is a reference to a place of high altitude which the Torah already alluded to when it described Bileam as climbing a solitary top in verse 3.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma 12: The word צורים is a simile for the patriarchs; the word מגבעות, “from elevated hills,” is a simile for the twelve founding fathers of the nations, Yaakov’s sons. The reason Bileam referred to the patriarchs as צורים is because they towered spiritually like mountains tower physically. They have been compared to mountains elsewhere such as in Micah 6,2: “Hearken, you mountains to the case (argument) of the Lord;” The same prophet also calls on these same “mountains” to hear what the Lord is saying when he portrays G’d as submitting His claims against the Jewish people. At the same time the prophet also portrays G’d as appealing to the hills. What is the point of mentioning the hills after the mountain? Clearly both words are similes. Seeing Avraham was the original rock of faith in G’d, his faith, etc., is compared to the leading rock, ראש צורים. The reason the twelve sons of Yaakov are described as hills is that they were on a lower spiritual level than the patriarchs, just as hills are lower than mountains. Having thus referred to the founders of the nation, Bileam now addresses the people at large by saying:
   הן עם לבדד ישכון ובגוים לא יתחשב, “they are a nation that dwells in splendid isolation, do not consider themselves as belonging to the nations.” The entire sequence of the verses 8-9 is to be understood as: “how can I curse or even express wrath when the nation I am looking at has such an outstanding past and to uproot such a nation is no easy matter both because of their past and because of the future in store for them Their past makes cursing them impossible as towering individuals such as Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov cannot be uprooted by mere mortals. The merits accumulated by the mountains and the hill, i.e. the patriarchs and the twelve sons of Yaakov are more powerful than physical mountains and hills. They (their descendants) will ultimately inherit the earth. When all the other idol-worshipping nations will perish this people alone will survive; this is the deeper meaning of the words: “they will dwell in solitude.”
    The word לבדד is similar to the word לבד, alone, or the word בדד as we have it in Lamentations 1,1. A hermit is described as בדד, as he isolates himself מתבודד, whereas the word לבדד conveys a double meaning. 1) the people are unique, no other people is like it. 2) They reside in freely chosen solitude, similar to the statement Moses made about G’d in Deut. 32,12 ה' בדד ינחנו “the Lord alone (unaided) guided it (the Jewish nation).“ Seeing Bileam wanted to convey both meanings of the word he did not simply describe the Jewish people as בדד ישכון, dwelling alone, but added the letter ל. The uniqueness of the Jewish people consists both of its sets of laws, the Torah, and of its religion, faith in the invisible Creator not in any intermediaries. Just as the G’d of Israel is unique among the deities of the nations so His people are not an integral part of the family of nations. Moses also alluded to this in his parting address to the people when he said (Deut. 33,29) about the people אשריך ישראל מי כמוך, “hail you Israel, who is like you? He continued extolling the uniqueness of Israel’s G’d saying אין כאל ישורון, “there is none like the G’d of Yeshurun.”
    We find that Daniel foretold the destruction of the other nations  whereas the Jewish nation would survive forever (Daniel 7,11), a prediction aimed especially at the Roman Empire which though given a prolongation of life will utterly perish. [the Roman Empire had not even begun during Daniel’s life time. Ed.] In verses 13-14 of the same chapter Daniel contrasts the eternal survival of the Jewish nation under the kingship of the Messiah with what he had predicted about the fourth kingdom (exile of the Jewish people).
    An investigative/astrological approach: When Bileam speaks about the צורים, the “rocks,” he refers to the seven planets which form the “bottom line,” or “bedrock” of the world view held by the philosophers of his time. The “hills”, גבעות refer to the 12 zodiac constellations.  Bileam drew a comparison between the signs of the zodiac which are affixed to the planetary system in space and to the fixed stars which were perceived as anchored in the earth (read: ‘matter’). Bileam was able to recognise that whereas the people whose world-view, religious orientation, was matter-bound would ultimately perish whereas the Jewish people whose entire orientation was dictated by considerations linking earth to celestial phenomena would survive the collapse of the terrestrial universe when the time comes for this. [The author discussed the time and the meaning of the word עולם, לעולם ועד and יובל as well as יובל הגדול in connection with that legislation in Leviticus 25,8 and elsewhere. Ed.] The compliment Bileam paid the Jewish people at this time was that they would not have to change their world outlook and their faith when these cataclysmic events would occur as opposed to all other nations who would then recognise the error of their ways [freely translated. Ed.]. 
    
    23,10. מי מנה עפר יעקב, “Who has counted the dust of Yaakov?” According to the plain meaning of the text Bileam asks a rhetorical question: “who can possibly count all the Israelites, they are far too numerous to be counted.” When he said ומספר רובע ישראל, this is a continuation of the same thought, i.e. “who can count even a quarter of the Jewish people?” The word Rova may be a reference to one of the flags, seeing the four camps of the Jewish people each had a flag signifying which group they belonged to.
   תמות נפשי מות ישרים, “may my (own) soul die the death of the upright.” At this time Bileam wishes for death provided that his own death would also be an entrance to the future in store for the Israelites after the death of their bodies. Just as they have an eternal future seeing they are an integral part of Hashem, so Bileam wished himself a similar future. The reason he gave expression to such a wish at this time was that he had foreseen quite a different death for himself, i.e. a violent death by the sword. (according to Ibn Ezra).
    A Midrashic approach to these verses (based on Tanchuma Balak 12). The words: “who counted,” or “who can count the dust of Yaakov,” is a rhetorical question describing all the command-ments which the Jewish people perform involving dust, i.e. the dust of red cow (Numbers 19,9), the dust of the parchment containing a portion of the Torah which a Sotah has to drink to clear her name from suspicion of infidelity to her husband (Numbers 5,17). Thus far the Midrash. Seeing that there are only very few commandments involving the use of earth, dust, the meaning of the Midrash must be that the reward for performance of the commandments involving dust is viewed as especially great, unlimited in fact.
    Another Midrashic approach views the word עפר as עופר, “young male offspring of the hind.” Bileam acknowledges in an oblique reference the piety of  young men (Israelites) who have a powerful sexual urge but conquer their urge to make sure they do not become guilty of indulging it with partners forbidden to them.
    A scientific/astrological approach: “counting the dust of Yaakov” is an allusion to resurrection of the dead in the future. Seeing that Bileam has already mused about how Israel will survive the destruction of the earth in the distant future whereas the nations of the world will perish, he now muses on the innumerable Jews who will be resurrected from their graves at that time and who will join their brethren who have survived the cataclysm. We know that this will be so from Daniel 12,2: “and many of those who have been asleep in the earth will wake up.”
    Bileam referred to these people with two different words, מנין and מספר, both meaning “number of.” The reason may be that Israel has been compared to the stars and the psalmist employs the root מנה as well as the root ספר to describe G’d counting stars (Psalms 147,4) מונה מספר לכוכבים, “He counts the number of the stars.” Bileam also refers to Israel both as Israel and as Yaakov in the same verse. We have already explained that Yaakov is the term used to describe the Jewish people in the context of their physical functions whereas the name Israel is applied when their spiritual functions are mentioned. The prophet Isaiah 43,1 speaks of בוראך יעקב ויוצרך ישראל, “the One who created you as Yaakov and fashioned you as Israel.” The second stage of Yaakov’s development is described as resulting in ישראל. The same prophet draws similar distinctions when he describes G’d’s creation of darkness as opposed to His fashioning light, i.e. something superior to darkness. Negative phenomena in this world qualify only for the elementary part of creation בריאה, as opposed to יצירה (compare Isaiah 45,7). By associating עפר with Yaakov, and רובע with Israel, Bileam hints that the soul upon leaving the body returns the four constituent parts of the body to the earth, the dust. The soul is immortal by definition. When Bileam spoke about his נפש dying this was an inaccuracy seeing the soul cannot “die.” [the assumption being that “death” means dissolution of matter which had previously been amalgamated to form a functioning whole. Ed.] Bileam referred to his body dying. This is not the only time the word נפש means “body.” When the Torah speaks about a נפש כי תחטא what is meant is “the soul in a body which sins,” seeing that a soul without a body is incapable of committing a sin. Similarly, when Leviticus 7,18 speaks of הנפש האוכלת, “the soul which eats,” clearly the meaning is the body inhabited by a soul which eats, as disembodied souls cannot eat. The reason we often find the word נפש when a whole personality, a functioning human being is meant is simply that the body without a soul is nothing; it would hardly do to refer to a human being merely as a “body.” When the Torah wants to include every type of human being, i.e. male, female, minor, senior, priest or layman, the word  נפש includes them all.
    Bileam revealed in these verses that there is a world (after death of the body) consisting of disembodied souls only, and that there is also a resurrection at a later stage when these disem-bodied souls will be reunited with their former bodies. This latter world is the ultimate purpose of man and his having been created to first live in this terrestrial universe.
    It is presumed to be generally known that immediately upon death of the body the soul enters the domain of disembodied spirits. Bileam had expressed the hope that when he would die he (his soul) would qualify for immediate transfer to that world (not the region in which the soul is being judged which precedes it). When he added the word ותהי אחריתי כמוהו, he meant: ”may my ultimate destiny be like that of the Jewish people,” i.e. may I enjoy the delights of life in a perfect world after my soul has been reunited with my body. All of this is included in what Bileam termed מות ישרים, ‘the death of the upright.’ The very fact that Bileam wished himself this kind of death and this kind of afterlife is proof that he paid the Jewish people the greatest compliment possible. He thereby acknowledged that Israel would inherit the physical world of the future also. If we had been paid a similar compliment by a Jewish prophet it would have been far less meaningful as Jewish prophets are naturally prejudiced in favour of their own people. When a Gentile, by definition one of our accusers, is forced to affirm our superiority, i.e. to say “Amen” to  G’d’s praises of His people, this is of special significance.
    23,15. התיצב כה על עלתך ואנכי אקרה כה, “stand here by your burnt-offering and I will seek a manifestation (of G’d) thus.” Bileam had reasoned that the Israelites had relied on G’d’s promise to Avraham (after the former had been taught to offer sacrifices in Genesis 15) כה יהיה זרעך, “thus will be your descendants.” They also relied on the merit of receiving the priestly blessing which G’d had introduced by telling the priests כה תברכו את בני ישראל, “thus you shall bless the Children of Israel” (Numbers 6,23). Moses, when requesting permission to traverse the land of Edom had also quoted his own people, Edom’s “brother” as saying: כה אמר אחיך ישראל, “thus said your brother Israel.” Seeing that the formula כה appears to be an appropriate formula for people to gain their objectives, Bileam used the formula כה when “inviting” divine inspiration or grace. He hoped to achieve with his wisdom what Balak would accomplish with his offerings. This is why he used the word כה both when telling Balak to stand by his sacrifices and when referring to his own part in the proceedings.
    
    23,19. לא איש אל ויכזב, “G’d is not a man that He should deceive.”  Bileam meant: “with words.” Seeing G’d had told him not to curse the people, the idea that Balak would instruct Bileam to curse the Jewish people from a certain lookout point and that G’d would agree was quite absurd.
   ההוא אמר לא יעשה, “Would He say and not carry out (what He said)?” If the word הוא refers to G’d the whole line is a question. If Bileam merely meant to explain something based on his wisdom, the word הוא refers to a human being who has second thoughts about an oral undertaking on his part who now will not carry out such an undertaking, someone who promises but does not keep his promise.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Massey 7: Bileam who foresaw that there would arise a man in the future who would proclaim himself as god (the founder of Christianity) exclaimed how can it be that a mere mortal so deceives his peers? He predicted that this individual would have to regret what he said seeing he would not be able to demonstrate the truth of it [seeing he was executed. Who can execute a god? Even men who had not claimed to be god were saved from fiery furnaces, etc. Should the god not be able to take care of himself if he really were god? Ed.] 
    However, of G’d it is to be expected that when He promises something good that He will invariably fulfill this promise, i.e. לא איש אל ויכזב, “G’d is not like man who promises without delivering.” On the other hand, when G’d threatens something harmful, such a threat need not come true (as it is merely a warning for the intended victim to change his ways). This is expressed here in the words ההוא אמר ולא יעשה, “He may say something (and is not bound by it) to carry it out.” Example: G’d told Avraham (Genesis 15,5) to count the stars and to see if he could count them, meaning that his descendants would be equally numerous. The promise was fulfilled as Moses told the people in Deut. 1,10: “here you are today as numerous as the stars in heaven” [no one challenged that statement. Ed.]. This was an illustration of the words: “G’d is not man that He deceives.” On the other hand, although we find the prophet Hoseah 1,9 telling the people (in the name of G’d) “you are not My people,” in Hoseah 2,25 the same prophet assures the people “I will say to Lo-Ammi,“ [the people who had previously been told that they were not G’d’s people. Ed.] “you are My people.” This is an illustration of what Bileam meant when he said about G’d: “He may say-but need not do.” This is the way Tanchuma  understands the verse.
    
    23,20. הנה ברך לקחתי, “here I have received instructions to bless.” This is an introductory comment similar to Genesis 27,39: “here from the fat parts of the earth, etc.” Bileam meant to say that he received the blessings from above, seeing G’d had put the words in his mouth.
   וברך לא אשיבנה, “whom He has blessed I will not contradict. it.” Seeing that the power of speech is G’d’s monopoly (as we know from Exodus 3,11).
    
    23,21. לא הביט און ביעקב, “He has not seen iniquity in Yaakov.” According to the plain meaning of the text Bileam meant that the people are not guilty of any iniquity. If they were guilty of iniquities the good they experience at this time would not endure long seeing that G’d’s promises are all linked to the condition of the recipients of blessing remaining worthy of them. Seeing that at this point in time they are not guilty of any iniquity ה' אלו-היו עמו, “the Lord G’d is with it (the nation).” Not only that, but they enjoy the privilege of blowing the teruah, i.e. the sound of the shofar of the King (G’d Who blew it at Mount Sinai) signifying His approval. 
    I have heard that the reason why Bileam had to refer to G’d as “King” in the course of his blessings was because G’d made him to. We know that if a blessing is reversed for some reason, the person concerned would be wiped out instantly through the power of G’d’s curse. In Hebrew such destruction would spell כלם. The letters in the word כלם are the same as in the word מלך, “king”, only rearranged. Bileam surreptitiously chose the word מלך anticipating a moment in time when G’d would reverse the blessings the Jewish people enjoyed at that moment. By mentioning the word מלך, the Torah indicated that any curse Bileam had had in mind was already converted into the opposite, a blessing, just as the word כלם reversed means King instead of destruction. This was what Moses referred to in Deut. 23,6 when he reminded the people [who, of course had been unaware of all this seeing none of it had been witnessed by a single Israelite. Ed.] that G’d in His great mercy had turned all of Bileam’s intended curses into blessings.  
    Some commentators  understand these words as: “when is the Lord G’d with the people? When they blow the teruah of the King, i.e. when they demonstrate that they journey at G’d’s command as indicated by the pillar of cloud moving from the Tabernacle.” [The reason that this sound is blown, compare Numbers 10,6]. According to this interpretation the word תרועה is related to רעות, companionship, i.e. the people seek out the Shechinah, G’d’s companionship.
    A kabbalistic approach: The expression ה' אלו-היו is a reference to the mighty hand of G’d employed during His orchestration of the Exodus. Moses had described this in the following words: אשר הוצאת מארץ מצרים בכח גדול וביד חזקה, “who took you out of Egypt with great force and a strong hand” (Exodus 32,11). Bileam paraphrased these attributes of G’d when describing the assistance Israel received from above. He acknowledged that the attribute Hashem was indeed Israel’s national G’d. This is the כח גדול Moses had spoken of.
   ותרועת מלך בו, “and their King’s acclaim is in their midst.” This is a reference to the “strong hand” we mentioned earlier. To make sure we understand this Bileam added immediately: ”the G’d who took them out of Egypt.” This is also why Onkelos renders this as “the Presence of their King is among them.” The word תרועה is related to רעיא, the כלה described in Song of Songs [chapter 4,8 where the Targum understands the word as the “Jewish people, the companion of G’d.”]
    
    23,22. אל מוציאם ממצרים, “the G’d who takes them out of Egypt.” Bileam counters Balak’s statement that the people of Israel had left Egypt under their own power, without Divine assistance (compare 22,5). He explains that G’d performed outstanding miracles overcoming horoscopic forces according to which the Israelites should have remained in Egypt much longer. Seeing he had already referred to תרועת מלך (in the sense of their being the King’s companion) he now describes that their companionship is the result of His taking them out of Egypt.
   כתועפות ראם לו, “is for them like the horns of an aggressive ox.” In this simile Bileam compares G’d’s power to that of a wild ox just as elsewhere Hoseah had compared Him to a roaring lion (Hoseah 11,10). These two animals are the most powerful ones in creation; seeing that the Torah employs syntax which is understandable in terms of our use of the language it is not a downgrading of G’d’s greatness to employ such similes. The Torah endeavours to make its message understandable to our ears (Tanchuma Yitro 13 et al).
    A Midrashic approach: the word תועפות is derived from עוף, bird. When the Israelites sin even marginally, G’d reduces their loftiness like a bird descending; on the other hand, when they perform G’d’s commandments they soar like birds (Tanchuma Balak 14). The Midrash derives this thought from Isaiah 60,8: “who are these who fly like heavy clouds?”
    
    23,23. כי לא נחש ביעקב, “for there is no divination in Yaakov,” seeing the people are close companions of the Lord and cleave to Him they have no need for divination, magic, etc. Israel can have prophetic revelation about what G’d is going to do at any time it chooses. All G’d’s activities have been decreed in advance.
    A Midrashic approach: The words כעת יאמר ליעקב ולישראל מה פעל א-ל, mean that this is a reference to the arch-angel Michael of whom Daniel said (Daniel 12,1) “at that time there will stand Michael, the great heavenly prince, who  stands in support of the children of your people, etc.,” The words יאמר ליעקב ולישראל  refer to times when the Israelites experience G’d’s goodness seeing they qualify for the title of יראיך, “the ones who revere You.” We have another verse in Isaiah 23,18 where the prophet assures G’d’s manifest support for those who revere Him i.e. “for those who sit before the Lord will have adequate food and clothing.”
    
    23,24. הן עם כלביא יקום, “behold they are a people who will arise like a lion.” This was a hint that Israel would defeat the kings of Canaan (according to Ibn Ezra). I think it is more likely that it is an allusion to the war against Midian (the punitive expedition in Numbers 31,49) an unheard of miracle as it was a war in which Israel did not suffer a single casualty. Five Midianite kings were slain in that war. There were no fewer than 32,000 young women who had still retained their virginity (31,35); we can therefore imagine the total number of warriors that the 12,000 Israelites must have faced in that campaign.
    A Midrashic view: The comment about Israel rising like a lion is a simile about Jews getting out of bed in the morning and devoting themselves to the performance of G’d’s commandments, such as the wearing of tzitzit, wearing phylacteries, and reciting the kriyat shema. The comment about “lying down only after consuming the prey,” is also a simile. Even when lying down to sleep at night they do not go to sleep without first consigning their souls to G’d in heaven. He prophesied that Moses would not die until after Israel had avenged itself from the Midianites. We know this from Numbers 31,2: “take vengeance for the people of Israel from Midian; after that you will be gathered in.”
    
    24,1. ולא הלך כפעם בפעם לקראת נחשים, “and he did not go as every other time towards divinations. The reason was that he had been told: “divinations are useless in connection with Yaakov” (23,23). As a result of abandoning this venue Bileam was granted a measure of Holy Spirit (verse 2).
   וישת אל המדבר פניו, “he set his face toward the desert.” Israel was encamped there in the wilderness of Moav. Bileam faced them to that he could see them, concentrate on what he was going to say, and make sure that his blessings would take full effect.
    Rashi explains the words in accordance with Onkelos, who says ושוי לקבל עגלא דעבדו למדברא אפוהי, “to the calf which they had made in the desert.” According to Rashi, Bileam hoped to be able to curse the people. The author queries if Rashi had an accurate text of the Targum, seeing he only quotes two words from the Targum, i.e. ושוי למדברא, These words need not mean that Bileam addressed the spirit of impurity which resides in the desert and which caused the Israelites to fall victim to the sin of the golden calf.
    Whenever Bileam wanted to receive inspiration from Hashem, the Torah first mentions that he offered an ox and a ram as burnt-offering (23,2). The reason Bileam requested Balak’s assistance in these sacrificial procedures was because he, Bileam, addressed the attribute of Mercy, whereas Balak was to address the attribute of Justice. This is the meaning of “he set his face toward the desert,” and on this occasion we do not read about Balak assisting in the procedures at all. [our author considers Bileam alone the subject of the word ויעל פר ואיל במזבח, he did not want the attribute of Justice to be addressed at all as this would interfere with his train of thought. It is difficult to read this into the text. Ed.]
    
    24,2. וירא את ישראל שוכן לשבטיו, “He saw Israel dwelling according to its tribes.” He saw the flags arranged in proper order. He noted that the entrances of the tents did not face each other so as to preserve a maximum of privacy for each family at all times. This would prevent an evil eye damaging the air-space of one’s neighbour. As soon as he realised the purpose of this arrangement, he exclaimed: “how goodly are your tents O Yaakov” (Baba Batra 60).
   נאם הגבר, “the words of the man, etc.” Bileam referred to himself as גבר, “man,” in the masculine sense of the word, seeing that the masculine rooster has intuitive knowledge of the moment dawn breaks. Bileam claimed similar knowledge of the “moods” of the Lord, as we pointed out earlier (compare Berachot 7 which states that he was the only human being able to do this). The rooster is the only one of the birds which possesses this talent. The rooster is credited with calling out seven times during the night. We also find that Bileam raised his voice i.e. וישא משלו, on seven different occasions during his visit to Balak. Just as the rooster is the sexually most promiscuous animal amongst the birds, mating with innumerable hens, so Bileam was stooped in sexual licentiousness, sleeping with any female he could get hold of. The reason that the rooster is not acceptable as an offering on the altar is precisely because of its sexual mores. Bileam is reputed to have slept even with his ass, and it is not surprising therefore that he tried to seduce the Israelites into becoming similarly indiscriminate in their sex life (compare Sanhedrin 105).
    
    24,3. שתם העין, “with the open eye.” The word שתם is the opposite of סתום, i.e. “closed, shut.” According to the sages in Avodah Zarah 69 the expression denotes the time it takes for a Gentile to open and reseal a casket of wine, i.e. if the wine was unsupervised for this length of time it is no longer fit for consumption by a Jew. In our situation, the Torah describes the time it takes for Bileam to open and then close his eyes.
    It is a well known fact that there are three types of knowledge and the way it can be acquired: 1) by means of seeing things and comprehending their nature. 2) by means of hearing things and understanding their nature. 3) perceptions other than by means of these two organs. The latter are called simply ידיעה, “knowledge.” In our verse Bileam refers to these three ways of acquiring knowledge as 1) שתום העין, 2) שומע אמרי א-ל; 3) יודע דעת עליון.  We find all these three ways of acquiring knowledge also applied to G’d Himself in a single verse in Exodus 3,7 where G’d describes His knowledge of the pitiful state the Jewish people are in with these words: ראה ראיתי את עני עמי....את צעקתם שמעתי...כי ידעתי את מכאוביו, “I have certainly seen the troubles of My people...and I have heard their outcries...for I know their pain.” Seeing that the terms “seeing” and “hearing” do not really apply to G’d who has no eyes or ears, it is clear that the word ידעתי, “I know,” applies to all three ways of acquiring knowledge.
    
    24,4. אשר מחזה שדי יחזה, “who sees the vision of Shaddai.” This verse clearly shows that Bileam did not achieve the level of prophetic insight achieved by our patriarchs. It most certainly did not even approximate the level of prophetic insight achieved by Moses. It was at least two levels below that of Moses. Whereas the level of the patriarchs was of the level described as א-ל שדי, that of Bileam was only that of the level of מחזה של שדי. This is why Bileam described himself as גלוי עינים, a level of prophetic insights characteristic of the בני הנביאים, “the disciples of the prophets” that we read about frequently in the Book of Prophets. In Kings II 6,17 for instance, we read of Elisha praying for G’d to open the eyes of his disciple. In our portion, chapter 22,31 we have a similar statement applied to Bileam when the Torah reports that G’d opened his eyes and he saw the angel. 
    When the sages in Sifri Vezot Habrachah comment on Deut. 34,10 where the Torah reports that “there never again arose a prophet of the level of Moses among the Jewish people who knew G’d face to face,” that there did arise a prophet among the Gentiles who was of similar stature, i.e. Bileam, the meaning is not that Bileam equalled Moses as a prophet. Rather, the author of Sifri compares the aspect of ידיעה, which Moses had of G’d’s ways to the clarity with which Bileam perceived that which he did perceive. He did not see fragmentary visions, unclear visions like other prophets, but had a perfectly clear understanding of what G’d conveyed to him -in honour of the people of Israel- (not because of his personal merit). This is the way Nachmanides understands the Sifri we quoted.
    There is another way of understanding the words of the Sifri who writes: ‘but among the nations of the world there did arise such a prophet;” Sifri means when Bileam bestowed blessings, i.e. addressed exclusively the attribute of Mercy, his stature as a prophet equaled that of Moses, his blessings were just as powerful. Had it not been for the blessings of Bileam which he addressed to the attribute of Mercy exclusively, the Jewish people’s future would have been questionable at best. But seeing that Bileam reverted to the use of magic after bestowing his blessings, his power as a prophet evaporated completely.
   נופל,  the word is to be understood as analogous to Genesis 15,12: ותרדמה נפלה על אברם, “and a deep sleep overcame Avram.”
   וגלוי עינים, “with his eyes open.” The meaning is: “he sees even while being asleep.” We have a similar verse by Solomon in Song of Songs 5,2: “I am asleep but my heart is awake.”
    
    24,5. מה טובו אוהליך יעקב משכנותיך ישראל, “how goodly are your tents O Yaakov, your dwellings O Israel.” According to the plain meaning of the text Bileam now prophesies about the future of the Israelites in the land of Canaan.
    According to Midrash Baba Batra 60 Bileam speaks of the tents in the desert, seeing that there the Israelites dwelled in tents. When he saw how the entrances of these tents were so arranged that they did not face each other, Bileam was inspired to compliment the people on this.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words אהליך are a reference to the tents of the Jewish people in the celestial regions, whereas the word משכנותיך refers to their terrestrial dwellings. The former is a reference to the name of Yaakov being engraved on G’d’s throne (Bereshit Rabbah 68,18 ). The word טובו is understood as meaning the same as בהטיבו את הנרות, “purifying, cleaning” the lamps of the Menorah (Exodus 30,7). The word אהליך is a composite of בהלו נרו, “when His lamp shone” (Job 29,3), the latter א having been added. It symbolises the word אור, light. Bileam perceives the משכנות, “terrestrial dwellings of the Israelites,” as deriving their input from the purity of the celestial light  this nation commands in those regions. Note how  the verse is constructed in such a way that the word טוב we referred to covers both the term אהליך and משכנותיך.
     כנחלים נטיו; “stretching like brooks;” the word נטיה is always applied to manifestations in our terrestrial world; in this instance it refers to the משכנות mentioned in the previous verse.
    
    24,6 כנחלים נטיו, our verse uses four separate expressions describing the dwellings of the Jewish people. The four expressions correspond to the four flags of each of the four camps of the people in the desert. Each expression symbolises another type of enjoyment, delight. Our sages in Taanit 20 consider the curse with which the prophet Achiah Hashiloni cursed Israel as better than the blessing bestowed on the Jewish people by Bileam [compare Kings I 14,15: “The Lord will strike Israel (the ten tribes) until it sways like a reed in water.”] You will note that reeds have a habit of bending with the wind without breaking, not being uprooted by the most powerful winds, whereas the cedars which Bileam used as similes for Israel in his blessings are prone to being uprooted by the wind. When that happens the trunk will not rehabilitate itself.
    
    24,7. יזל מים מדליו, “water shall drip from its boughs.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word דליות means “boughs, branches.”
    A Midrashic approach: The verse contains a warning to be careful in one’s treatment of the poor as they are the ones from which Torah emanates in great concentrations. We know this from Isaiah 55,1 who urges the thirsty to come for “water,” the word “water” being a simile for Torah. Accordingly the word מדליו is understood by the Midrash as מדלים שבהם, as “from the poor among them.”
   וזרעו במים רבים, “their roots have abundant water.” They get irrigated by abundant water supplies and continue to grow and develop day after day. It is similar to Isaiah 17,11: “on the day that you plant, you see it grow; on the morning you sow you see it bud.”
   וירום מאגג מלכו, “and may its kingdom be exalted over Agag.” A reference to King Sha-ul  who captured Agag, the  King of Amalek.
    
    24,9. מברכיך ברוך “the ones who bless you, may they be blessed.” Although Bileam combines plural and singular in this verse, we encounter something similar in both Genesis 49,22 and Proverbs 28,1.
    
    24,11. ועתה ברח לך אל מקומך, “and now, flee to your place!” According to the father of David Kimchi this is not a flight in the conventional sense of the word but means the same as “go quickly!” The word is used in a similar meaning in Isaiah 48,20: ברחו מכשדים, “flee from Chaldea! Declare with loud shouting, Announce this, bring out the word to the end of the earth!” It may describe that Israel departed from Egypt with great fanfare. When the prophet Jonah is described as לברוח תרשישה, “hiring a ship to escape to Tarshish” (Jonah 1,3) this must not be taken to mean that he imagined he could escape from the Lord; it means that he meant to travel to Tarshish quickly. This is also the meaning of the words מלפני ה' that we find there which means “away from the presence of the Lord” and not מפני ה', “on account of the Lord,” as we find in Psalms 139,7 where David makes plain that it is impossible to flee from G’d using the words: “Where can I escape from Your spirit (presence)?”
    The reason that Bileam was anxious to leave was to forestall G’d giving him a sign such as He did to the people of Nineveh (in later years) which would prompt them to do repentance, resulting eventually and indirectly in the destruction of the Northern kingdom of the Ten Tribes. Jonah himself told G’d that the reason that he was in such a rush to embark for Tarshish was to forestall that demise of the Jewish kingdom, not to escape from the Lord (Jonah 4,2). The “sign” to the people of Nineveh which prompted them to take Jonah’s prediction of their doom seriously and to repent their evil ways was undoubtedly that they had heard what had happened on the boat to Tarshish, how Jonah despite being thrown overboard had miraculously remained alive, etc., etc. This is a beautiful explanation although it clashes with that of our sages at the beginning of Mechilta 21 who do understand Jonah’s flight to Tarshish as an attempt to escape G’d in order not to be burdened with Holy Spirit, something he thought is not imposed when away from the Holy Land.  
   אמרתי כבד אכבדך, “I had said that I would honour you greatly;”  the reason Balak used the word כבד, “honour,” twice in succession is that it refers to the two locations to which Balak had taken Bileam, hoping each time that he would curse the Jewish people. Now that he had taken him to a third location he no longer even planned to honour Bileam since he had acquired a reputation of blessing the Israelites instead. As soon as Bileam had declared that those who curse the Israelites will themselves be cursed whereas those who bless them will be blessed, Balak had lost all hope of a successful confrontation with that people and he told him “to get lost.” He blamed his inability to reward Bileam on G’d, saying that “G’d has prevented me from honouring you.”
    
    24,14. ועתה הנני הולך לעמי לכה איעצך, “and now that I am about to go to my people, let me give you some advice.” He meant that he was going to give Balak advice how to trip up the Jewish people, to deflect them from their pious ways. He should encourage the Moabite women to make themselves sexually available to the Israelites. He, Bileam, knew that the G’d of the Jews hated sexual promiscuity. Although in our verse Bileam did not spell out precisely what he advised, it becomes clear in Numbers 31,16 where Moses tells the returning warriors that the Midianite women whom they failed to kill were the seductresses who, at the instigation of Bileam, were responsible for the thousands of Jewish lives lost in the pestilence.
   אשר יעשה, “what is going to do.” The complete sentence is: “I will hereby advise you of what this nation is going to do to your people in the distant future.” Later on in verse 17 he goes into detail saying: “it will pierce the nobles of Moav.” Bileam implied that at this point in history Balak had no cause for worry.
    Nachmanides understands the word איעצך as revealing to Balak a message Bileam had received from G’d telling him that the people of Moav would not fall into the hands of the Jewish people until the end of the pre-messianic period. We find that Bileam announced four separate prophecies. 1) The first prophecy described the Jewish people as part of G’d and His heritage; they would dwell in splendid isolation and not be considered as part of the community of nations. 2) He foretold that the Israelites would conquer the land of Canaan and kill the mighty kings of that country. This was the meaning of verse 24 that they are a people who arise like a lion  and do not rest until they have devoured their prey. 3) In the third of his prophecies Bileam saw a vision of the Jewish people firmly established in their homeland dwelling in security and having a king who would vanquish their first adversary after the Exodus, the Amalekites under the kingship of Agag. He foresaw King David rising to a still more powerful position than Sha-ul, and he knew that G’d had already planned for David to become king. David himself testifies to this in Samuel II 5,12. 4) In his fourth vision Bileam concentrated on the messianic future of the Jewish people, a period which he introduced with the words: “I see it but it will not happen now, I can foresee it but it will not come to pass in the near future” (verse 17). During all his previous prophecies Bileam had not tempered them by relegating them to the distant future. The true knowledge that G’d had given him concerned the messianic period.  He himself referred to himself as “the one who knows the mind of the Supreme One.” Anyone making such a statement about himself infers that he is familiar with G’d’s long-term planning of the history of mankind. It is something similar to Isaiah 63,4 saying: “For I had planned a day of vengeance.” 
    Our sages in Kohelet Rabbah 12,10 comment that if someone were to claim to know when the messiah would come we are not to believe him. G’d did not reveal to anyone by word of mouth when the final redemption would occur. They derive this from the verse in Isaiah we quoted that G’d keeps the date of when He will take vengeance as a secret in His heart.
    Seeing the matter is secret, G’d did not reveal it to His angels who in turn serve as His mouth(piece) revealing to the prophets what they are to say, in effect making the prophets their mouth(piece). The words of the Midrash לבא לפומא לא גלי, “He did not even reveal it to those who serve as mouthpiece,” mean that G’d did not reveal the timing of the arrival of the messiah even to the angels. He most certainly did not reveal it to the prophets and Daniel was told specifically (Daniel 12,9) that “these words are secret and sealed to the time of the end.” A “hidden” (secret) name for G’d is לב, heart, as the heart is where secrets are kept; this is the meaning of Psalms 73,26: “but G’d is the stay of my heart, my portion forever.”
    
    24,17. ארענו ולא עתה, “I can see it -but not now.” The prophecy being introduced refers to David who four hundred years from this date would smash the nobles of Moav. The words וקרקר כל בני שת, “and undermine the children of Sheth,“ is a reference to mankind as such which is descended in the main from the descendants of Sheth, Adam’s third son Noach being one of them. (compare Samuel II 8,2 where David’s victory over Moav is documented)
    Another way of understanding the reference by Bileam to the “descendants of Sheth.” The word שת may not refer to a human being but to “foundation.” We find the word שתין meaning “the foundations of the earth” in Talmudic language, a reference to the “navel” of the earth under the Holy Temple. Bileam foresaw that David’s victories would create havoc among the existing world order in the countries surrounding the land of Israel. The words “and Edom will become a conquest” also apply to that period as we know from Kings I 11,16 that Edom”s males were wiped out by David’s general Yoav. The words (verse 19) וירד מיעקב mean that someone descended from Yaakov will arise and destroy the remnants of all the cities of Edom. This may be a veiled reference to Rome. Finally, the words וירד מיעקב also mean that the messiah will be descended from Israel. The words ולא יהיה שריד לבית עשו, “no remnant will remain of Esau,” in Ovadiah 18 are the logical conclusion of Bileam’s prophecy here.
    A Midrashic approach: the words “I will see but not now,” refer to David, whereas the subsequent words: “I can see it but not in the near future,” refer to the messiah. The words: a star comes forth from Yaakov” refer to David, whereas the words וקם שבט מישראל, “a scepter-bearer emerges from Israel,” is a reference to King Messiah. The words ומחץ פעמי מואב again refer to David, of whom it is written in Samuel II 8,2 that “he defeated the Moabites and made them lie down on the ground and measured them with a rope.” The words וקרקר כל בני שת again refer to the King Messiah of whom it is written (Psalms 72,8) that וירד מים עד ים, “he will rule from sea to sea.” The words: והיה אדם ירשה again refer to David seeing the Edomites all became slaves to David (Samuel II 8,14) whereas the words וישראל עושה חיל, “and Israel will perform deeds of valour” refer to King Messiah of whom we have read (Ovadiah 21) “for the liberators shall march up on Mount Zion to wreak judgment on Mount Esau, and Dominion shall be the Lord’s.”
    
    24,20. וירא את עמלק, “he saw Amalek;” (in a prophetic vision, seeing that nation was hundreds of miles distant). The reason this prophecy commences with Amalek is that this nation is both a descendant of Esau and was the first to engage Israel in military combat after the Exodus. It will also be the last nation to do so prior to its utter destruction. In our days Amalek is represented by the Roman Empire. This is the reason Bileam concluded his prophecy with predicting the destruction of the Kingdom of the Kittim, another name for the Roman Empire. Bileam predicts utter destruction for these kingdoms, using the word עדי אובד as something parallel to G’d’s prediction in Exodus 17,14 where the words are מחה אמחה.
    
    24,21. וירא את הקיני, “when he saw the Kenite, etc.” This is the family of Yitro. They are described as Kenites in Chronicles I 20,25 (according to Ibn Ezra there). In Judges 4,11 they also appear under that name when Yael slew Siserah. Bileam uses a play on words when describing that these people have set their “nest” in a lofty rock. The word קן, meaning “nest” in Hebrew is employed by Bileam to contrast the advantages gained by that family which converted to Judaism and will share the glorious future of that nation with that of the enemies of the Jewish people. Bileam exclaims “sarcastically?” that even if the Amalekites had made their home in lofty rocks this would not help them against the wrath of G’d and Israel in the future he describes. They would be brought down even from such lofty heights.
    24,22. כי אם יהיה לבער קין עד מה אשור תשבך, “yet shall Kayin be consumed when Ashur takes you captive.” According to Ibn Ezra Bileam uses the word Kayin to describe the Kenite, saying: “how long can Ashur keep you captive, i.e. the exile of the Ten Tribes of the Jewish people by the Assyrians is of limited duration, whereas the other captives of Assyria would never regain their freedom. The reason the word Assyria is used in the feminine gender is that Bileam relates to the camp of Assyria, similar to Job 1,15 referring to Sheba in the feminine gender. The same feminine form is used to describe Israel in verse Samuel I 17,21.
    
    24,23. אוי מי יחיה משומו אל, “who will survive  unless G’d has willed it!” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of the verse is that no one can escape the decree of G’d in the world to be executed by the King of Ashur, seeing that that kingdom defeated every nation that stood in its way (Rashi as well as Ibn Ezra). 
    A Midrashic approach based on Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 30: the word קין refers to the descendants of Yitro who are, however, referred to as descendants of Kayin, Adam’s oldest son as in Judges 4,11 they are described as residing in the area to which Kayin moved after having been forgiven by G’d for killing his brother. At the time Bileam pronounced the blessing the Kenites were descendants of Ishmael, i.e. the word מי שומו אל should be read as מישמעאל, “from Ishmael.” This immediately raises the problem that all the descendants of the original Kayin had perished during the deluge, so how could there be any identifiable offspring of his be left alive? The answer clearly must be that people who resided in the part of the world where the descendants of Kayin lived prior to the deluge are called בני קין, “descendants of Kayin.” They too would be taken captive by the Assyrians. Seeing that G’d had made the name of Avraham’s oldest son Ishmael sound so similar to the name Israel, Bileam exclaims: “woe to those who survive bearing the name Ishmael in the days when these events will occur.” Thus far the comment in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer.
    If you will analyze this you will find that the accuser of Israel on earth, i.e. Bileam, alludes with these words to the great accuser of Israel in the celestial regions.” We refer to the celestial force Satan, the master of the desert. He is like a Seraph which flies all over, representing the planet Mars. Bileam, the terrestrial Satanic force who had been thwarted in all his efforts to attack the Jewish people on a spiritual level, not succeeding to make an impact on the attribute of Justice or the attribute of Mercy, now addresses himself to the desert in order to obtain some relief of his frustration from a spiritually negative celestial force.
    The comparison between the names of ישראל and ישמעאל, both G’d-given names that we referred to in the commentary of Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer, refers to the ending with the letters א-ל, i.e. that both these names contain the name of G’d. None of the seventy nations enumerated after the confusion by G’d of the languages and the nations (Genesis 10,5-29) contains the name of G’d. The word משומו אל is understood by the author as if it had been written with two letters ו, a common theory for whenever the dot on the letter ש is moved from right to left. The word really should have been mishumau el, i.e. “who bears the name of G’d.” By changing the dot it is as if an additional letter ו had been added. The anti-G’d, Satanic forces, are perceived to have at their disposal 12 “princes” just as the people of Yeshurun (Israel as a pro-G’d force) have at their disposal 12 princes. [the latest commentary, I believe, can best be understood by seeing even in the reformed Bileam someone containing a residue of his former self, much as Rashi viewed the words ויחד יתרו in Exodus 18,9 where Yitro is described as rejoicing over the salvation of the Jewish people, as containing an element of his former self, i.e. he was upset at what happened to the Egyptians. Ed]
    
    24,24. וצים מיד כתים, “and great ships from the coast of Kittim.” After Bileam had predicted that Ashur had taken the Kenites captive, Bileam continues prophesying that Ashur itself will suffer affliction by the Kittim who will oppress both Ashur and Ever. It is possible that the word צים is a plural of צי which appears in Isaiah as צי אדיר, “a large ship.” The reason that Bileam describes the עברים i.e. בני עבר as being captives also is that they had oppressed the Kenites. According to some opinions the Kittim  were the Greeks. According to Nachmanides it is a reference to the Romans, the fourth kingdom, Edom, or, in terms of Daniel’s vision the fourth of the chayot. It is fitting that Bileam concluded his prophecies with the prediction of Rome’s downfall (see Daniel 7,11).
    
    24,25. ויקם בלעם, “Bileam rose up.” As soon as Bileam concluded his prophecies he rose on his feet as he had not been standing when making all these predictions. He had described himself as נופל וגלוי עינים, “fallen and with uncovered eyes (24,5).”
   וישב אל מקומו, “he returned to his place.” This means he reverted to relying on charms, etc., instead of on Divine inspiration. He found that he had become privy to Holy Spirit only temporarily for the benefit of the Jewish people as I mentioned earlier.
    
    25,1. וישב ישראל בשטים, “Israel settled in Shittim.” This is the meaning of the words in Numbers 33,49: “they encamped by the Jordan, from Bet Yeshimot until the plains of Shittim, in the plains of Moav.” All of these events including the dispatch by Joshua of spies occurred during the encampment of the Israelites in the wilderness of Moav.
    A Midrashic interpretation based on Tanchuma Balak 17: the words “Israel settled in Shittim” indicate that there was a fountain at Shittim which caused people who drank from it to develop into adulterers, just as we know that there are fountains the waters of which cause the people drinking it either to become physically strong or weak, or to influence their characters in various ways. The waters of that well were the ones the people of Sodom had been drinking from (in former times). This is the meaning of Genesis 19,5: “where are the men who came to you this night, take them out to us so that we can indulge our libido with them.” Seeing that this fountain had such spiritually negative effects on the people drinking from it G’d cursed it and made it stop flowing. We know from the prophecy in Yoel 4,18 that in the future this fountain will re-emerge: “on that day the mountains shall drip with wine, the hills shall flow with milk; and all the watercourses of Yehudah shall flow with water; a spring shall issue forth from the House of the Lord and shall water the wadi of Shittim.”
   ויחל העם, “the people profaned themselves.” The word ויחל means to profane something which previously was sacred, holy. We encounter the same word in connection with Noach (Genesis 9,2), when Noach planted a vineyard and became drunk. Judaism describes people who are meticulous in their sexual mores as ”holy,” whereas those that are not are considered as “profane.” Whenever the Torah refers to the Israelites simply as העם, this term implies a criticism of their spiritual level (at that time). The Following are some examples of the Torah using this terminology: Numbers 11,1: “the people were looking for something to complain about.” Numbers 20,3: “the people quarrelled.” Numbers 21,5: “the people spoke out against G’d.” On the other hand, whenever the people of Israel are referred to as עמי, this is to be taken as a complimentary term; examples are: Psalms 81,14: “if only My people would listen to Me.” Exodus 7,4: “I will take out the hosts of My people.” Isaiah 40,1: “comfort, comfort My people.”
   לזנות את בני מואב, “to whore with the daughters of  Moav.” This reminds us of the popular proverb: “when one throws a stick into the air it always lands on its broad side.” [The reference is to the fact that the people of Moav had their origin in Lot’s daughters  sleeping with their father (Genesis 19,31)]. Licentious sexual behaviour was still part of their sexual mores, especially that of Moav seeing they were descendants of Lot’s older daughter who had thought up the scheme of bearing a child from her father’s semen. The fact that she had had the audacity to call her son מאב i.e. “from my father’s semen” speaks for itself, although originally, the Torah had not faulted the scheme itself seeing it was based on an innocent assessment of their chances to perpetuate the family or even mankind. 
    The daughters (also married women) of Moav lured the Israelites to their tents after having made themselves alluring.
    
    25,2. ויאכל העם וישתחוו לאלוהיהן, “the people ate and prostrated themselves in front of their deities.” The mixture of the use of feminine and masculine pronoun endings means that both the Israelites and the Moabites prostrated themselves to these deities.
    
    25,3. ויצמד ישראל לבעל פעור, “Thus Israel attached itself to Baal-peor.” The word ויצמד is from the same root as צמד בקר, “a yoke of oxen.” The meaning of the expression is that man and woman coupled together. There is a difference in meaning between the expression הצמדה and דבקות, although both express a state of togetherness, union, almost. הצמדה is a less intimate relationship, a looser coupling than דבקות. If the Torah had written here וידבק ישראל לבעל פעור, G’d forbid, this would have been such a grave sin that it could not have been repaired. This consideration is also reflected in the sages saying in Sanhedrin 64 that whereas the attachment of the Israelites to the deity בעל פעור was comparable to a lid over a pot, the attachment of the Israelites to their G’d (Deut. 4,4) is described as ואתם הדבקים בה' אלוקיכם, “you who cleave to the Lord your G’d,” i.e. a far closer attachment than that of the lid to the pot. The term דבקות when applied to two entities implies that they are so alike and clinging to each other as to be interchangeable. According to a Mishnah the term ויצמד means that the attachment to Baal-peor which the Israelites experienced was only through an intermediary, i.e. through the woman with whom they had intercourse. There was no direct attachment between an Israelite and the deity.
    
    25,4. קח את כל ראשי העם והוקע אותם, “take all the heads of the people and hang them!” This is not to be understood as a command to kill the leaders of the people by hanging. It meant that the leaders of the people should convict the guilty people, those who had worshipped the Baal-peor, of the death penalty. This is what Onkelos meant when he translated ”judge those guilty of death and execute them.” He did not translate: “kill the leaders of the people.” We find that during the episode of the golden calf Moses also told the judges of the people: “kill each his men (Exodus 32,27),” and the judges of the people mentioned there were identical with the people here described as ראשי העם, the leaders of the people. Although the Torah does not report that this command was carried out, the fact that G’d commanded Moses and he in turn commanded the judges makes it plausible to assume that these orders were carried out. Alternatively, they did not have a chance to complete their assignment before Pinchas killed Zimri without the benefit of a trial. Pinchas’s deed arrested the spread of the pestilence.
   לה', “for G’d;” i.e. for the glorification of His name.
   נגד השמש, “facing the sun;” this means “in public.” Just as they had desecrated G’d’s name in public, it now had to be sanctified in public.
    It is also possible to understand the words נגד השמש to mean that since the Israelites had sinned at Baal-peor against Yaakov who had also been known as “sun,” (compare the Midrash: Bereshit Rabbah 84,10 that Yaakov said: “who told this one that my name was שמש”), the Torah now had to write the words נגד השמש as if to say that their punishment also had to correspond to the manner in which they sinned.
    Another reason for these words may be connected to the commandment that a person who was executed by hanging must be lowered to the ground by evening and buried (Deut. 21,23). G’d meant that as long as the sun is in the sky the guilty have to remain visible, on the gallows; once the sun has set they may be buried, seeing the Torah wrote: “you must not allow his carcass to remain hanging overnight.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Balak 19: Moses asked G’d: ”who will tell me who has been guilty of prostrating himself to the Baal-peor“ [seeing that by the nature of this offense it occurred in the bedroom of the Moabite women; Ed.] G’d answered him: “I will make their sin public.” The cloud would double over and the sun would shine on all those who were guilty. They would then hang such a person immediately.
    
    25,6. ויקרב אל אחיו את המדינית, “he brought the Midianite woman near to his brethren;” the Torah really should have written: “a man by the name of Zimri, prince of the tribe of Shimon, went and brought the Midianite woman whose name was Cozbi bat Tzur near his brethren.” However, the Torah could not bring itself to reveal name of the wicked person who had become the reason for the raging pestilence until he had been dealt with, i.e. until Pinchas had killed him and until Pinchas had received his reward. Only then does the Torah mention the names of both the man and the woman involved (verses 14-15). All of this is to tell us the praises of Pinchas who displayed fearlessness. Although the people in question were a prince and a king’s daughter respectively, he did not let this stop him from killing them (Rashi).
   לעיני משה ולעיני כל עדת ישראל, “in the presence of Moses and the assembled community of Israel.” He (Zimri) accorded no respect to either heaven or G’d’s creatures. 
   והמה בוכים, “and they were crying.” The Israelites were crying on account of the pestilence which had begun to claim victims amongst them indicating G’d’s anger at the people. Our sages in Tanchuma Balak 20 say that they were crying because a religious decision, הלכה, had apparently escaped Moses and had made this pestilence possible. Zimri had asked Cozbi to sleep with him to which Cozbi had replied: I will not agree to sleep with any one of you unless it is Moses or Eleazar the High Priest seeing I am a king’s daughter. To this Zimri had replied: “I am just as high ranking as they are. I will bring you before them in public.” He took Cozbi by her plait and dragged her before Moses, saying: “Ben Amram, is this woman permitted for me to sleep with or not? If you say that she is not permitted for me to sleep with, who gave you permission to sleep with the daughter of Yitro (a Midianite)?” When Moses heard this he could not remember how to answer Zimri. At that point all the people started crying. This is the meaning of: “they were crying at the entrance to the Tent of Testimony.”
    Why precisely did the people cry? Did they really think that Moses, a man who had many times been able to stand up to 600,000 fellow Israelites, such as when he burned the golden calf the people had danced around, was now too weak to hold his own against a single Zimri? G’d prevented Moses from remembering the correct procedure at that time in order to enable Pinchas to reap the reward for his initiative. Concerning this incident Solomon says in Proverbs 30,31: “the greyhound, a male goat, and a king who is senile.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 82 apply this verse to Moses (the senile king) and Pinchas the greyhound, the eager beaver. Seeing that Moses forgot the correct response to Zimri he was compared to a senile old king.
    
    25,7. וירא פינחס, “Pinchas saw, etc.” When he saw a certain deed he remembered the halachah pertaining to it. He said to Moses: “did you not teach us  when you descended from Mount Sinai that if someone has sexual intercourse with a pagan woman one may kill such a person in a fit of religious fervor?” To this Moses replied: “he who reads the letter may deliver it to the addressee.” Upon hearing this,
   ויקם מתוך העדה ויקח רומח בידיו, “he arose from amongst the congregation and took a short sword in his hand.” As a reward for this action he was granted the priestly portions (the foreleg, the cheekbones and the stomach of all animals slaughtered by the Israelites as food compare Chulin 134). [the meaning of this line is that he was accorded the status of a priest, a status he had not possessed previously. All the priests are entitled to these parts of the animal.] He was awarded the foreleg for seizing a sword with his hands, the cheekbones corresponding to “Pinchas stepped forth and intervened” (Psalms 106,30), and he was awarded the stomach corresponding to Numbers 25,8 “and the woman into her stomach.” The performance of this commandment helped Pinchas both in this world and in the hereafter (compare Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 47). In this world Pinchas merited the gifts granted to the priests. Moreover, he lived for many hundreds of years on terrestrial earth. We have proof of this in Judges 11,26 when Yiftach told the Ammonites that Israel had dwelled in Hebron and other towns claimed by the Ammonites already for over 300 years. We also find over a hundred years later that  Pinchas was still alive in Judges 20,28. The prophet states this explicitly.
    As to the benefits Pinchas received in his hereafter as a result of his courageous and purely motivated deed in killing Zimri and Cozbi, he was granted the dimension of peace, a wonderful attribute. He was ushered in to eternal life.
    In the course of his deed, he experienced no fewer than 12 miracles without which he could not have succeeded (based on Tanchuma Balak 21). 1) It is customary for a couple who have engaged in sexual intercourse to separate their bodies from one another afterward. In this instance an angel ensured that Zimri and Cozbi’s bodies were sticking together to enable Pinchas to pierce both with one and the same stroke of the spear. 2) The angel closed their mouths to prevent them from crying out and alerting neighbours who would have attacked Pinchas. 3) The angel directed the spear of Pinchas (who was outside the tent) to aim at precisely the private parts of both Zimri and Cozbi. 4) He miraculously lengthened the metal blade of Pinchas’ spear so that it could reach both the sinners. 5) He raised the lintel of the door to their tent so that the people could all see how these two were strung up on it. 6) He arranged the position of these two in such a way that they were head down and feet up so that everyone could see that they had been killed during the performance of the sexual act. This was to prevent people from arguing that Zimri had entered the tent merely to relieve himself. 7) He lent extra strength to Pinchas’ arm to lift both of them simultaneously so that they would be suspended from the wooden post. 8) He strengthened the wooden post on which they were hung to support the combined weight of the two. 9) He insured that they would not slide off that wooden post. 10) He protected Pinchas so that the blood of his victims did not splash upon him. 11) He enabled Pinchas to hang the two in full view of the people. Halachically speaking, (under normal circumstances), Pinchas, through contact of his spear with the bodies would have become ritually impure. Seeing Pinchas performed his deed with a flat wooden spear, an instrument which is not subject to contracting ritual impurity, he was saved from becoming ritually contaminated in contrast with Numbers 19,22 according to which anyone in contact with a corpse becomes ritually unclean for at least seven days (compare details in Avodah Zarah 37 and Chulin 28).
    It is also possible, based on Tanchuma Balak 21, that G’d miraculously kept both Zimri and Cozbi alive for the few moments it took for Pinchas to let go of the spear after stabbing them. This then would be the twelfth miracle Pinchas experienced in connection with his deed. If we accept the Tanchuma we need not posit that Pinchas’ spear was a wooden tool or that it was flat. The question of Pinchas becoming ritually unclean would not even have arisen.
    After all these miracles had happened to Pinchas and he took the two outside to display them hanging, the entire tribe of Shimon surrounded the tent in a threatening posture wanting to kill Pinchas. At that moment the pestilence began which killed twenty-four thousand  Israelites, all of them members of the tribe of Shimon (Tanchuma Vayechi 13). It is relatively simple to confirm this when we consider the number of men from the tribe of Shimon counted in Numbers 1,17, i.e. 59,300, and the number of men from that same tribe counted in Numbers 26,14, i.e. 22,000. We note that the tribe had lost over 37,000 men of military age.
    When we consider that during the episode of the golden calf only 3,000 Israelites were killed whereas here 24,000 lost their lives this teaches that the sin of idolatry alone was far less catastrophic than the combination of idolatry and sexual licentiousness involving pagan partners displayed on this occasion at Shittim. 
    By displaying jealousy on behalf of G’d who had described Himself as a “jealous G’d,” (Exodus 20,5) Pinchas turned away G’d’s wrath and saved untold thousands from being consumed by the pestilence through having put his life on the line. He had simply been unable to witness this public desecration of the Lord’s name. He totally ignored accepted rules of conduct which required showing respect for his superiors, in this case the prince of the tribe of Shimon and a daughter of the King of Midian. He meant to show the world that the only One who is entitled to honour and respect is the Lord. This is the meaning of Isaiah 43,7: “all who are linked to My name, whom I have created, formed and made for My glory.”
    
   פינחס  בן  אלעזר
    
   מגדל עוז שם ה' בו ירוץ צדיק ונשגב, “The name of the Lord is a tower of strength, the righteous runs towards it and is elevated” (Proverbs 18,10). In this verse Solomon is teaching us a lesson in faith. The plain meaning of the verse is: “a person who puts his trust in the Lord may be compared to someone who is within a formidable tower, serene, unafraid of any potential aggressor.” It is similar to Psalms 118,6: “when the Lord is with me what can a mortal human being possibly do to me.”
    The words: “the righteous runs towards it and is elevated,” refer to his being rescued from troubles (compare Rabbeinu Yonah’s understanding of the word נשגב as being equivalent to נושע). We find that word used in that context in Proverbs 29,25: ובוטח בה' ישוגב, “and he who puts his trust in the Lord will be safeguarded.” In that verse too Solomon refers to man being safeguarded from threatening troubles and enemies. The word בו in the verse above does not refer to the word מגדל, “tower,” but to שם ה' i.e. he  who puts his trust not in the tower but in the name of the Lord. Clearly, a man does not run inside a strong tower, but he runs around proclaiming the name of the Lord and his trust in Him. He who does this will be saved as if he were inside a fortress although he does not appear to be protected by visible man-made shields. Whereas human beings who run are liable to stumble and fall, not so he who runs proclaiming his faith in the Lord. We find this idea expressed in Proverbs 4,12: “when you run you will not stumble.”
    The reason Solomon chose “a tower of strength” as his simile in our heading instead of a high mountain or something similarly impregnable,  is because fortified towers are an essential need for people in trouble, being pursued, etc. We have an example of this in Judges 9,51 “there was a tower of strength inside the city to which they fled.” This is why Solomon chose an example of the kind of man-made structure that ordinary people put their trust in. This is also why David writes in Psalms 20,2: “may the Lord answer you in time of trouble, the name of Yaakov’s G’d keep you safe.” In other words: “G’d is the Tower of strength who will elevate people when they are in trouble and distress.” David used the same verb when he prayed to G’d to save him from the pursuit of king Sha-ul (Psalms 59,2) where he said ממתקוממי תשגבני. He also employed this verb when he faced the giant Goliath. In Samuel I 17,45 David says to Goliath: “you come against me with sword and spear and javelin; but I come against you in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the G’d of the ranks of Israel, etc.” Clearly, the words: “the name of the Lord” are of the essence in that verse. Whereas Solomon used the simile of a fortified tower to describe a feeling of security and therefore applied this simile to the name of the Lord, Isaiah used the simile of a room where a person when he closes the door feels relatively secure. Compare Isaiah 26,20: “Go, My people enter your chambers, and lock your doors behind you.” We find in many verses throughout the Bible that G’d Himself is being compared to a “refuge” (Psalms 90,1) or to a “rock,” (Samuel II 22,2). Our sages have described G’d or “the name of G’d” as מקום, “place,” seeing He comprises all “places” and He is the “place” or “site” of the universe. There is no “place” without Him.
    No human being is called righteous unless he has faith in the Lord (compare Proverbs 28,1: ‘the righteous are confident like a lion’). Our author lists many more verses from Scripture, all reflecting the same theme that faith in the Lord (and in the righteousness of one’s actions) are the source of confidence of the righteous. Pinchas personified such faith. If he merited to have so many miracles performed for him to help him succeed it was because of the faith he had displayed.
    25,11. פינחס בן אלעזר בן אהרן הכהן השיב את חמתי, “Pinchas, son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, deflected My wrath, etc.” Some commentators understand the wordהשיב  here as meaning the same as בשובה ונחת, in Isaiah 30,15: “through calm and serenity.” While G’d displayed His jealousy He had allowed the attribute of Justice free reign, such as Exodus 33,14, והניחותי לך, “I will provide you rest.” 
    I feel, however, that the more likely meaning of the word השיב is simply that the wrath of G’d which was about to advance against the people of Israel was “turned back” by Pinchas completely. One may question this statement seeing that 24,000 Israelites died during the pestilence, so how could Pinchas be credited with having totally prevented G’d’s wrath claiming victims amongst the people? In fact, the very fact that only people from the tribe of Shimon died is the proof that Pinchas succeeded in halting G’d’s wrath claiming victims from the בני ישראל, i.e. the attribute of Justice was active only among that single tribe. This is the meaning of the words: “and I did not completely wipe out the Children of Israel during My jealousy.” Clearly, turning back G’d’s wrath resulted in the continued existence of the Jewish nation. It follows that Pinchas was the source of the Jewish people as a nation enjoying long life, i.e. continued existence from then on until the end of time. As a reward commensurate with his deed he was granted continuous life in that he became in due course Elijah the prophet as we know from Zohar 215 based on Maleachi 2,5: “My covenant was with him, Life (ongoing) and peace.” When the Torah speaks here about Pinchas being granted בריתי, “My covenant,” the meaning is the same as in Maleachi.
   בקנאו את קנאתי, “when he displayed My jealousy.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is that Pinchas acted in G’d’s place when he displayed religious fervour.
    A Midrashic approach: the fact that the word קנאה appears twice in succession proves that the Torah refers to two separate jealousies. The first display of Pinchas being jealous occurred here, the second in the days of Achav when the prophet Elijah on Mount Carmel gave a repeat performance and killed 400 priests of the idol Baal, and he fled to Mount Chorev after that occurrence to escape the wrath of Achav and Izzevel. When he arrived there and G’d asked him why he had come there (Kings I 19,9-10) he answered: “I have worked with zeal for the Lord, the G’d of Hosts for they have abandoned Your covenant with the Children of Israel.” Pinchas was also involved in another act of religious zeal on behalf of G’d during the period known as Pilegesh beGivah in Judges 20,28 and Chronicles I 9,20. 
    According to the view of the sages in Baba Metzia 114 Pinchas and Elijah were identical. The Talmud relates that a scholar by the name of Rabbah bar Avuhah met Elijah in a cemetery where idolaters were buried. He was surprised at this and asked him: “are you not a priest?” (priests are not allowed in cemeteries) Elijah answered that the bodies of Gentiles do not confer ritual impurity if one merely is under the same roof with them without physical contact. He quoted Numbers 19,14 אדם כי ימות באהל וגו', “when someone qualifying for the description אדם dies in a tent, etc., plus Ezekiel 34,31: ואתן צאני צאן מרעיתי אדם
   אתם, “and you My flock, flock that I tend, are אדם, as proof that only Jews qualify for the complimentary description אדם. This also explains why he was allowed to lie down in the form of a tent over the son of the woman from Tzorfat as her son was a Gentile (compare Kings I 17,21). [the text there appears to imply close bodily contact between Elijah and the boy. Rabbi Chavell quotes some halachic sources that even such contact with the body of a dead Gentile is permitted. Ed.] 
    
    25,12. לכן אמור, “therefore say:” this wording serves as an allusion to the blessing of the priests which is introduced by a call to them from a congregant to begin to chant the blessing. [The meaning could be that whereas a priest guilty of killing a human being is prevented thereby from performing this blessing (Berachot 32), Pinchas was allowed to be an exception to this rule.]
   הנני נותן לו את בריתי שלום, “I herewith grant him My covenant ‘peace.’” According to the plain meaning of the text G’d meant that he need not fear the vengeance of members of Zimri’s family who would want to avenge his death. Pinchas’ reward would be that both he and his descendants would be priests.
    A Midrashic approach: the letter ו in the word שלום is broken to teach us that the covenant with the priests is contingent upon the priests being whole in body and mind. A blemished priest may not perform priestly functions in the Temple (Kidushin 66). I have heard that the word שלום may be understood as an acrostic of the words: שלא למות, ‘not to die;” this would reinforce the tradition of our sages that Pinchas became immortal, i.e. that he was identical with the prophet Elijah. In fact, we find Elijah as saying to G’d: (Kings I 19,4) “please take my soul from me for I am no better than my forefathers;” he referred to the forefathers who had died as opposed to him who had remained alive all these many hundreds of years. Seeing that Pinchas (Elijah) had expressed his disgust with life on terrestrial earth he was granted eternal life in the celestial regions and he departed this earth in a storm riding heavenwards (Kings II 2,11).
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: “herewith I grant you My covenant peace.” G’d assured him of the attribute known as ברית which is identical with the concept of כנסת ישראל. This is a variation of the attribute of Justice. We find this attribute mentioned by our sages who stated that Avraham had a daughter (in explaining the words וה' ברך את אברהם בכל, “the Lord had blessed Avraham in all respects,” (Genesis 24,2) see Baba Batra 16). This is why in our verse the wording is והיתה לו ...ברית, meaning that the covenant with this attribute of Justice will be his. G’d assured Pinchas that the peace He promised would be an adjunct to this covenant. It is similar to Leviticus 26,6 where G’d promises that as a consequence of observance of His commandments ונתתי שלום בארץ, “I will grant peace in the land.” [as opposed to peace merely between people. Maybe the author means that the very fact that man has to die, the body to return to earth, is symbolic of a constant state of war between the living and the dead. Ed.]
    All of this implies that Pinchas deserved to be granted eternal life. This is the justification of the verse in Maleachi 25, we quoted earlier that “My covenant was with him, the life and the peace.” “Life” is an outgrowth of the attribute of Mercy. This is reflected in the Torah describing Pinchas as קנא לאלו-היו “he was jealous for the sake of his G’d (in the sense of the attribute of Justice). If I understand our author correctly, when Pinchas observed a joining together of bodies which represented opposing philosophies which had no business to be joined together he tried to restore the state of affairs in which matters which belong together are joined together. In the celestial regions צדק ושלום נשקו, “righteous-ness and peace kissed” (Psalms 85,11), i.e. the emanations of מלכות and the adjoining one ofיסוד  are perceived as a natural fit. When they are close together the universe can continue to exist. In our terrestrial part of the universe the continued existence of this world is also dependent on matters that belong together being joined together, not matters or people who have no business to indulge in physical union. Basically, Pinchas tried to restore the world’s (Jewish) equilibrium by his deed. If he was granted “peace” as the reward for his deed this was precisely a case of the reward fitting the merit attained. “Peace”, after all, is joining together, creating harmony.
    It may be appropriate to understand the very name of אליהו as combining elements of both the attribute of Justice, i.e. א-ל, and the attribute of Mercy i.e. י-ה-ו. The attribute of Mercy and the attribute peace can be viewed as being interchangeable, whereas the attribute of Justice and the attribute ברית, covenant may also be viewed as interchangeable. When we keep these facts in mind we can understand some of Elijah’s actions reported in the Book of Kings. When he called down fire from heaven to kill the captain of fifty soldiers and his men who had been dispatched by King Achaziah to capture him, he activated the part of his personality which represented the attribute of Justice (Kings II 1,8-12); when he resurrected the dead he activated the part of his personality which represented the attribute of Mercy (Kings I 17,22). Interestingly, the numerical value of the name אליהו is 52, i.e. twice the numerical value of the name י-ה-ו-ה. Also Pinchas was the seventh generation after Yaakov the founder of the Jewish nation, just as Chanoch (who left earth heavenward alive) was the seventh generation counting from Adam, the first human being. The number seven symbolises the seventh day of the week, the Sabbath, a day of rest, of harmony, serenity and therefore devoted to life.
    
    25,13. והיתה לו ולזרעו אחריו, “it will be for both him and his descendants after him, etc.” From this wording it appears as if but for Pinchas’ deed his priesthood would not have been permanent and hereditary. However, this seems extremely implausible, seeing that the priesthood was granted to Aaron and his sons on an ongoing hereditary basis. All of Aaron’s sons had already been anointed with the holy oil of anointing so that all their offspring would automatically have been priests.
    However, the fact is that Pinchas had been born prior to the anointing of Aaron and his sons as priests, so that as a grandson he did not automatically qualify under the heading under which Aaron and his sons (exclusive of existing grandsons if any) had  been appointed as priests. As of that point only sons born to Aaron’s children after their being anointed qualified for automatic priesthood status at birth. In view of all this, had Pinchas not performed the deed of killing Zimri under the circumstances described, he would never have become a priest, to say nothing of retaining such status in perpetuity. This is why the Torah had to stress that his elevation to the priesthood was לעולם. This is also why our sages (Zevachim 101) said that Pinchas was not made a priest until after he killed Zimri. [this disposes of the need for special legislation to allow Pinchas to perform the blessing of the people. Ed.] According to Ibn Ezra the meaning of the words that Pinchas was granted priestly status was that the High Priests were regularly descendants of Pinchas. The word אחריו in our verse may refer to Pinchas/Elijah’s disappearance from earth, i.e. his “departure.”
   ברית כהונת עולם, “a covenant of everlasting priesthood.” In this instance the word מלח, “salt,” normally associated with the wordברית  is absent although it appears in 18,19  when Aaron and all his offspring are mentioned seeing they have been assured of two worlds, the terrestrial world when the covenant is effective to provide the priests with their sustenance from “G’d’s” table, i.e. the gifts listed as being given to the priests in Parshat Korach. Secondly, as recorded in 18,20, G’d uses two separate terms describing Himself as bothחלקך  and נחלתך. The former word refers to the priests being G’d’s share in the terrestrial world, the latter word to His being the priest’s share in the hereafter. Seeing that in Korach the subject is both worlds, the word מלח symbolising something enduring is used whereas in connection with Pinchas and his covenant  there is no need to reinforce the promise of G’d that he is assured of an eternal future by adding the word מלח. Pinchas merited his promotion from the attribute of Mercy which, as opposed to the attribute of Justice, does not envisage death, i.e. impermanence. The priesthood and what it stands for is an emanation of the attribute of חסד, an attribute over which death has no control.
   ויכפר על בני ישראל, “he obtained atonement for the Children of Israel.” This verse teaches that he who spills the blood of the wicked is considered as if he had offered a sacrifice. The idea is reflected in Exodus 21,14: “from My altar you shall remove him to die.” The meaning of the verse is that even if the party concerned is a priest involved in performing his priestly duties on the altar, he must be removed and executed (Yuma 85). 
    
    25,14. ושם איש ישראל המוכה, “and the name of the slain Israelite man, etc.” Just as the Torah mentioned the name of the righteous person in order to bestow compliments on him, it now mentions the name of the wicked party to teach that if one brings disgrace upon oneself one simultaneously disgraces one’s family (Tanchuma Pinchas 2).
    
   נשיא בית אב לשמעוני, “prince of a father’s house of the Shimonites.” He was one of five such princes of the tribe of Shimon (Ibn Ezra). Concerning him Solomon said in Kohelet 10,8: “he who breaks down a wall will be bitten by a snake.” The ancestral father, Shimon, had killed the people of Shechem for treating his sister like a whore (Genesis 34,31) and now one of his descendants had himself become guilty of tearing down the wall of chaste sexual mores established and defended by his forebear (Tanchuma Pinchas 2).
    
    25,15. כזבי בת צור, “Cozbi daughter of Tzur.” She was the daughter of a king seeing Tzur was one of the five Midianite kings killed by the Israelites in the punitive expedition (Numbers 31,8). The Midianites harboured so much hatred against the Israelites that one of their kings demeaned his own daughter to the status of a whore in order to lure the Israelites into sin (Tanchuma Pinchas 2).
    
    25,17. צרור את המדינים, “Harass the Midianites.” After the Torah had administered the reward for the righteous, G’d commanded the people to punish the guilty. The reason the punitive campaign was directed only against the Midianites and not against the Moabites was in order to enable Ruth the Moabite, ancestral great-grandmother of David to be born in due course. 
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Pinchas 2: the meaning of “harass the Midianites for they (are preparing to) harass you,” is that when you know that someone harbours aggressive hostile intentions against you pre-empt him and kill him before he can carry out his intention.
    
    25,18. בנכליהם אשר נכלו לכם, “by their trickery they practiced against you.”  This verse is proof that it was the elders of Midian who advised their Moabite partners to trick the Israelites into committing sexual promiscuity with their daughters. The allure of the Moabite women was to be the tool by which to get the Israelites to commit idolatry by prostrating themselves before the Baal-peor.
   ועל דבר כזבי בת נשיא מדין, “and because of the affair of Cozbi daughter of a Midianite prince.” The Torah could have written: “daughter of Tzur” as it had done in verse 15. In this verse the Torah wanted to place the emphasis on the word “Midianite,” seeing that it was the advice of the elders of Midian to send one of their princesses to lure the Israelites to commit harlotry with her.
    
    26,2. שאו את ראש, “take a census.” Our sages (Tanchuma Pinchas 4) explained the reason for this census at this time by means of a parable. A shepherd whose flock had been attacked by wolves which had killed many of his sheep counted the surviving sheep in order to assess his losses. Furthermore, seeing that Moses had counted the people shortly after the Exodus, now that he was close to the end of his career he wanted to prove that he had the same number of people at his command to hand over to his successor.
   לבית אבותם, “according to their ancestral houses.” Tribal membership was based on the father and not on the mother (Rashi).
    
    26,5. חנוך משפחת החנוכי, “Chanoch the clan of the Chanochites.” According to Rashi, the reason for such detailed emphasis on the certainty of the Israelites’ paternity was necessary to counter the sneering comments by the Gentiles who ridiculed the claim that the Egyptians during their control of the Jewish people had not been able to sleep with their wives. The Torah therefore testifies by the manner these descendants are attributed to their respective fathers that there was never a doubt about an Israelite’s paternity, i.e. his being fathered by an Israelite. By appending the two letters of the Lord’s name ה and י respectively to the front and end of the respective names of these people, G’d testified that the people mentioned were sired by Jews. David proclaims this even more clearly when he speaks about the tribes of Israel being שבטי י-ה, “the tribes of G’d” (Psalms 122,4). The extra letters are absent only in the name ימנה of the tribe of Asher as the name as it is without prefix or suffix already features the letters י and ה, respectively (verse 44).
    
    26,10. ותבלע אותם ואת קרח במות העדה באכול האש, “it (the earth) swallowed them and Korach when the congregation died when the fire consumed them;” the verse introduces the name Korach between the words “it swallowed” and the words “when the fire consumed,” in order to teach us that Korach was both swallowed by the earth and burned by the fire. (I already mentioned this in Numbers 16,30).
   ויהיו לנס, “they remained as an example.” Their fate was a warning for the Israelites not to question the institution of the hereditary priesthood  (Rashi). 
    
    26,11.ובני קרח לא מתו , “and Korach’s sons did not die.” Our sages in Megillah 14 explain these words to mean that there was a special place reserved for them in Gehinom where they remained. The site where the swallowing occurred and where judgment of these individuals occurs is known as Gehinom. Alternatively, the sages meant the real purgatory the entrance to which is close to the point where Korach and company were swallowed. (According to Eyruvin 19 there are a total of three such portals to purgatory). We find that sons (or descendants) of Korach sang hymns in the Holy Temple as we know from Psalms 47,1 and 48,1 and others.
    
    26,12. בני שמעון למשפחותם, “the descendants of Shimon according to their families.” They are followed by the tribe of Gad, Yehudah, Issachar, Zevulun, Joseph. When the Torah comes to Ephrayim (one half of the tribe of Joseph) it adds the word אלה, “the following, these.” The same word אלה occurs before the Torah lists the descendants of the tribe of Dan. Why did the Torah add these words only with these two tribes? it is possible that the word אלה is an allusion to idolatry. The fact is that Jerobam, the first king of the Northern Kingdom who erected two golden calves to prevent the people under his rule from making the pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem was guilty of gross idolatry on many counts (compare kings I 12,29). The second of these golden calves was positioned in the territory of the tribe of Dan. The word אלה then is a reminder of the words אלה אלוהיך ישראל spoken by the Jewish people (or some of them) in Exodus 32,4. 
    It is also interesting to note that among the families of these two tribes of the tribe of Ephrayim and Dan we find the names שותלח and שוחם, the first letters in these names are an allusion to the word שור, a simile for the golden calf. Moreover, the letter ש is reminiscent of the attribute of Justice based on what is written in the Sefer Yetzirah 6,1 according to which the letter n represents silence, whereas the letter ש symbolises “calling out, yelling.” In order to demonstrate that the sin of the golden calf had finally been forgiven and all the tribes are included in the שבטי י-ה, tribes of G’d,” all of these tribes deserve that the Shechinah provide a benevolent presence in their midst. On the other hand, the words: לאלה תחלק הארץ, mean that all these who had sinned and died in the desert. [although they were originally slated to each have a share in the land, that share in various forms would now be given to their offspring, the next generation.] In verse 64 the Torah makes clear by again using the word אלה, that none of the people participating in this census had participated in the original census listed at the beginning of the Book of Numbers. Here the word אלה clearly means that these people had not had a share in the sin of the golden calf just as the Levites to whom the word אלה is applied in verse 57 had not had a part in the sin of the golden calf. 
    
    26,51. שש מאות אלף ואלף שבע מאות ושלושים, “six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty.” Remember that both this number and the number 603,550 given in Numbers 1,47 is not the total number of Israelites; their total number was beyond the ability of the enumerators to determine. On both occasions of the census only men over the age of twenty who were potentially soldiers in the army were counted. No doubt the total number of Israelites comprised many sick people, many who were physically weak and not fit to serve in the army, and many old  people all of whom were not included in the count given by the Torah. As a result of all this the total number of the Jewish people was never revealed in Scripture. Ever since the family of Yaakov descended to Egypt they became the recipients of the Divine blessing which resulted in over 600,000 males leaving Egypt, not counting the children. The number reported in Exodus 12,37 remained the same throughout the revelation at Mount Sinai when a renewed blessing was bestowed on the people as per Numbers 1,1. 
    From all the above we learn that when the Torah was given at Mount Sinai the people already knew the precise number of males over 20. During the short ten months until the count in the desert of Sinai their number climbed to one that was beyond counting. The truth is that the number of Jews is beyond determination by means of a census. There has never been a time in Jewish history when the total number of Jews was known. G’d had already foretold Avraham that the number of his descendants would exceed the ability of people to count them (Genesis 15,5). Moses too said to the people shortly before his death (Deut. 1,10) “and here, as of this day, you are as numerous as the stars in heaven,” i.e. beyond counting. Even Bileam, our perennial opponent and sworn enemy, testified that ”the dust of Yaakov has defied the ability to be counted, neither have even a quarter of the Jewish nation been counted” (Numbers 23,10). 
    We find that when David gave instructions (which were only partially carried out) to take a census of Israel’s fighting men that the number Yoav reported as having been counted was 1,3 million people (Samuel II 24,9). If this was the number of active, arms-bearing male Israelites at that time, the total number of Jews must have been several times that number. The verses in Scripture are even more convincing than extrapolations arrived at by our intelligence. Concerning the future, the prophet Isaiah states clearly that at that time the Jewish people will be more numerous than any (or all) the nations of the earth (as per Isaiah 54,1): “for the children of the forlorn wife shall outnumber those of the espoused, says the Lord.” Once the great ingathering of the Jews in exile will be in progress the number of Jews will be seen to be even far greater still. This is the meaning of Isaiah 49,12: “Look these are coming from afar, these from the north and the west and these from the land of Sinnim.” The prophet continues in verse 21 of that chapter: “and you will say to yourself, ‘who bore these for me when I was bereaved and barren, exiled and disdained; by whom then were these raised? I was left all alone and where have these been?’” You will note that the prophet mentioned the word “these”, אלה, three times in each of these verses! This is an allusion to the fact that the Shechinah will return with the exiles at the time of the redemption. This Shechinah which consists of the six extremities of the globe is alluded to by David who used the word שמר, “to guard, to protect” six times in connection with the G’d of Israel protecting His people (Psalm 121).
    
    26,54. לרב תרבה נחלתו, “to the numerous you will increase his (share of the) inheritance.” A tribe which was more populous (than average) was given a larger piece of land (Rashi).
    
    26,55. אך בגורל יחלק את הארץ, “however, only by the lot shall the land be (divided) distributed.” The reason the lot had to determine who received what was that the land was not uniformly good. He who drew a lot allocating to him good quality land did not enjoy a financial advantage as he whose lot allocated to him a less fertile piece of land  was  compensated financially.
    The distribution of the land proceeded according to the following method. Eleazar (High Priest) wore his priestly garments including the breast plate containing the urim vetumim, and the whole people of Israel stood around him (Baba Batra 122). The pieces of wood inscribed with the names of the various tribes as well as the pieces of wood inscribed with the different sections of the land would be placed in front of Eleazar. He would be inspired with Holy Spirit and announce (example): “the tribe of Zevulun has been assigned section such and such including the town of Acco.” When later on, he would withdraw one piece of wood from the box containing the names of the sections of land and one piece of wood containing the names of the tribes, it would be found that what he withdrew matched what he had previously announced. He would repeat the same procedure with all the other tribes except the tribe of Levi for whom no pieces of wood had been prepared. The elders of the tribe would then proceed to divide up their parcel of the land between the heads of the major families of that tribe, the ראשי בית אב. Any tribe who comprised a large number of such families at the time of the Exodus would receive numerous parcels, whereas the tribe which at that time comprised only a small number of families would receive a relatively larger parcel of land. The distribution would be based on the size and number of the families of males of military age at the time of the Exodus seeing that the Torah writes: לשמות מטות אבותם ינחלו, that they “will inherit according to the names of their  fathers’ tribes  they shall inherit.” This includes the adults who left Egypt and excludes proselytes.
    
    26,56. על פי הגורל תחלק נחלתות, “each portion shall be assigned by lot.” Our verse expresses what is stated in Proverbs 18,18: “the lot puts an end to strife, it separates between the mighty.” Solomon comes out in favour of determining distribution of properties, etc., with multiple claimants by lottery as it prevents strife and bad feeling. it is a cause for preventing coveting something belonging to others. If we assume that the other person has gained his property through the casting of lots no one can begrudge it claiming unfairness by human authority. Solomon illustrates this further in Proverbs 16,33: “a lot is cast into the lap, but one’s judgment depends on G’d.”
    26,57. ואלה פקודי הלוי למשפחותם לגרשון, “and these are the enrollments of the Levites according to their clans.  Of Gershon, etc.” the Torah first mentions the oldest of Levi’s sons followed by Livni, Levis’s grandson but omitting Shimi (Exodus 6,17) as he had no sons, or they died during his life time leaving no male offspring (Ibn Ezra).
    
    26,62. ויהיו פקודיהם שלשה ועשרים אלף כל זכר מבן חדש ומעלה, “and the  number of enrolled ones comprising all those from one month and up was 23,000.” I have explained on Numbers 4,49 why the Levites were counted from one month and up.
    
    26,65. כי אם כלב בן יפונה, “except for Calev son of Yefuneh.” The reason the Torah (Hashem) mentioned Calev’s name first is that G’d Himself always mentions his name before that of Joshua (Numbers 13,30) seeing the Torah had reported Calev as being the first one to speak up against the other spies and had displayed more jealousy on behalf of the Lord than had his companion Joshua. Furthermore, G’d had described Calev as עבדי, “My servant,” the highest type of compliment accorded to mortals. Moses, on the other hand, always mentioned Joshua first to indicate that Joshua possessed more wisdom (Ibn Ezra).
    The words: “for not a one had remained except for Calev and Joshua,” which are almost impossible to understand, have been interpreted by our sages in Tanchuma Pinchas 7 as stressing the word איש; of the men of military age none survived; many women did survive. The verse teaches that the decree that the generation of the Exodus had to die in the desert applied only to men, not to women. Our sages in the above-mentioned Tanchuma state that “the men hated the land of Israel, not the women.” It was the men who had demanded to appoint a leader to take the people back to Egypt (Numbers 14,4). The women, by contrast, (the daughters of Tzelofchod) demanded to be given a share in the Holy Land. [We have pointed out already in Genesis 46,7 that there is a clear inference that Yaakov’s womenfolk did not move to Egypt of their own free volition. The women had always displayed greater fondness of the land of Israel. Ed.] Seeing the Jewish women were fond of the land of Israel the Torah wrote the chapter about the claim of the daughters of Tzelofchod at this juncture.
    
    27,1. למשפחות מנשה בן יוסף, “of the family of Menashe, son of Joseph.” The reason the Torah went out of its way to trace the ancestry of these girls all the way back to Joseph was their fondness of the land of Israel, a fondness which had also characterised their ancestor Joseph who had commanded his surviving brothers to take his remains with them to the Holy Land when the time of the redemption from Egypt would arrive (Genesis 50,28).
    Furthermore, this teaches that all the ancestors of the daughters of Tzelofchod were righteous seeing that we have a rule that when the Bible mentions a person to his credit and it mentions his ancestors without reporting anything specific about the deeds of his or her ancestors, both he and his ancestors may be presumed to have been righteous, i.e. a צדיק בן צדיק. If, on the other hand, that person is singled out because of something improper he had done and the Torah also mentions the names of his ancestors without describing them as meritorious, it is clear that not only he but also these ancestors were wicked. The classic example is found in Kings II 25,25: “Yishmael, son of Natanya son of Elishama of royal descent came with ten men and murdered Gedalyah.” You may be certain that not only this Yishmael but also all the forebears of his who are listed were wicked people.
    
    27,3. אבינו מת במדבר, “our father died in the desert but he had not been,” etc.  According to Nachmanides the reason that these girls pointed out that their father’s death had not had any connection with the death of Korach and his rebels was that Moses should not hate them on account of their father having participated in the rebellion against him. They thought that it was only natural that Moses hated Korach more than any other sinners as those people had denied any of Moses’ accomp-lishments. If he were to judge their request he might be influenced by such considerations. He might even pray to G’d not to grant any special favours to the offspring of such a rebel. We find such a sentiment in Psalms 109,12 where David prays to G’d not to show kindness to Haman or his sons on account of any kindness Haman had ever performed for anyone in his life. These girls also hinted that their father had not died as the result of the pestilence which had killed thousands of Israelites but that he had died in the desert in his bed. Thus far Nachmanides’ commentary, described as based on the plain meaning of the text.
   כי בחטאו מת, “rather, he died due to an individual sin committed by him (only).” He was no different from many other people who died on account of individual sins, not connected to some collective misdemeanour. Rabbi Yehudah Ha-Levi points out that the words כי בחטאו מת ובנים לא היו לו, “for he died on account of his sin and he had no sons,” are linked together by the cantillation and imply that the fact that he had no sons was linked to the sin which caused his death.
    
    27,5. ויקרב משה את משפטן לפני ה', “Moses presented their judicial claim to the Lord.” Some commentators feel that the reason that Moses disqualified himself from presiding over the court dealing with the claim of the daughters of Tzelofchod was precisely because they had made a point of stating that their father had not been someone who had personally hated, i.e. opposed Moses. If he were to judge their case he might be accused of being prejudiced in their favour as a result of their having made such a statement. I do not believe that this is plausible at all. If this evaluation were correct Moses did not have to turn to G’d but could have let this case be decided by a tribunal from which he personally had excused himself. The truth of the matter is that the reason why Moses turned to G’d is that he himself  had forgotten the law on the subject. If he did not know, the less learned judges most certainly would not know either. Seeing that the problem was not complicated and could have been resolved by simply using one’s intellect, and even the Gentile courts have solved it satisfactorily, Moses is faulted for not having known the law on this point. He, who had once said: “if a matter is to difficult for you, present it to me for a decision” (Deut. 31,17) was now denied knowledge of a relatively simple point in law, one that even women were able to work out for themselves. This is why Moses had to present the case of these daughters of Tzelofchod to G’d for a decision.
    The reason that the final letter ן is written especially large in the word משפטן, is a hint to a Torah scholar who is an outstanding scholar and who has studied not only Torah but also other disciplines, not to preside over a case in the presence of a scholar who outranks him in wisdom. Rather, if he is asked to preside over a case, he is to present this case to the authority on the subject. We learn this from Moses who did not sit in judgment of a case when he was not certain of the law but presented the case to the Expert, i.e. to Hashem.
    If you accept the premise that Moses did not know the law on this point challenged by the daughters of Tzelofchod, surely we must ask how a person such as Moses who had been described by Hashem as בכל ביתי נאמן הוא, “he is thoroughly at home and trusted in My entire House,” did not know such a simple law as that when there are no sons the daughters have precedence over the brothers of the deceased or his father? This statement surely included the fact that Moses was an expert in all the most difficult laws of the Torah! How could he have failed to know this simple halachah? We must assume that he asked G’d in order to teach the scholars the lesson  that if even he did not presume to preside over legislation which had not been spelled out but had to be arrived at by mere logic, then a scholar of lesser stature than himself must certainly not presume to determine a case on the basis of logic when there is a more  experienced scholar who can decide it on the basis of precedent.
    Still, it is the opinion of our sages in Tanchuma Pinchas 9 that Moses had temporarily forgotten this halachah. In that case we may see in the enlarged letter ן at the end of the word  משפטן a hint that the 50th level of insight had been denied Moses and that  this level is so close to G’d Himself that it may be described as לפני ה' and not be included in the compliment that Moses was so familiar in the “House“ of Hashem. This may be the reason that the Torah added the words לפני ה' after the word משפטן. The Torah meant that just as the 50th level of insight was not attained by Moses so he did not know this particular ruling in the field of inheritance.
    Even though the reason presented by us for Moses not knowing the halachah in question is not the same (lack of deep knowledge) as saying that the reason it was withheld from him was a punishment for what had sounded a little arrogant at the time, both answers could be derived from the words את משפטן לפני ה'.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Pinchas 9. The daughters of Tzelofchod did not approach  Moses, the High Priest and the elders in the first instance, but had first approached judges of lesser stature in order to give them due respect and not make them feel that they had been by-passed. The various levels of judges, i.e. chiefs of fifty, chiefs of a hundred, etc., also displayed their respect for the higher levels by passing the case on, progressively, through the judiciary system. When Moses observed how each layer of the judiciary preserved the honour of the next higher level of their colleagues, he in turn decided to do the same and he paid his respects to the law maker by presenting the case of the daughters of Tzelofchod to G’d Himself for a ruling. This is the only reason we find the Torah reporting that  ויקרב משה את משפטן לפני ה', “Moses presented their litigation before the Lord.” Our sages in Baba Batra 119 state that although ordinarily this halachah should have been recorded as “written” by Moses, the fact that the daughters of Tzelofchod were careful to preserve the dignity of all the people possibly concerned with this legislation is presented as if it had been “written” by them.
    
    27,7. כן בנות צלפחד דוברות, “the daughters of Tzelofchod speak properly;” the word כן here is in essence the same as באמת, truthfully, correctly. Sifri 134 comments: “hail to the people whose words are applauded by G’d.”
   נתן תתן להם אחוזת נחלה , “you shall certainly give them the permanent possession of an heritage.” The repetition of the word נתן means that they were to receive a double share of hereditary portion of land in the land of Israel. One share would be the one that accrued to their father who was one of the men of military age who had taken part in the Exodus. As such he should have shared with the other sons of Chefer. Chefer’s father had himself died in the desert so that the daughters of Tzelofchod inherited their father’s portion of his share in the land also. This is because the daughter of a son takes the place of non-existent brothers and shares with them in the inheritance (compare Baba Batra 115). The summary arrived at there is: “direct biological offspring takes precedence in the laws of inheritance.”
   והעברת את נחלת אביהן להן, “you are to transfer the hereditary share of their father to them.” The meaning is: “what their father would have inherited had he lived will be given to his daughters.” The reason the Torah here chose the word והעברת “you shall transfer, instead of “you shall give as permanent heritage, ונתת,” the term used when discussing male heirs receiving their portion (compare verses 9, 10,11), is related to their marrying out of the tribe. Here when the legal status of a daughter inheriting her father’s landed property is legislated the Torah uses a term implying a more transient inheritance.
    27,8. ואל בני ישראל תדבר לאמור, “and to the Children of Israel, you are to say, etc.” The Israelites were commanded this legislation at the instigation of the women. It is possible to explain the reason for this legislation in terms of the whole legislation of inheritance being the result of man’s mortality, which in turn was caused initially by women, i.e. by Chavah eating from the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge. In other words, women  brought death into the world (Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 2). It was therefore appropriate for the section of laws dealing with inheritance, i.e. transferring remnants of the dead to the living, to have been triggered by women. The reason the daughters of Tzelofchod are the women with whom the recording of this legislation is associated is their love of Eretz Yisrael. The land of Israel is also called  the “hereditary land of G’d” in Joshua 22,19 corresponding to the expression ארץ החיים, “the land of the living” (Psalms 142,6). [In other words, women who have caused death are primary causes of salvaging whatever can be salvaged from death, Ed.] 
   איש כי ימות ובן אין לו והעברתם את נחלתו לבתו, “when a man dies and does not have a son you are to transfer his inheritance to his daughter.” In referring to this wording, our sages in Baba Batra 115 state that if the deceased has a son he has total precedence in all matters of inheritance (does not share with any sisters). By the same token, the daughter of such a son (if she has no brother) precedes any other surviving relative of the deceased in her claim to inheritance from her father down the generations. A surviving daughter of the original owner of the estate in question has a claim to the inheritance from her father only when or after there is no male heir of the original owner even several generations down the line.
    The allusion to this halachah is found in the word אין in the words אין לו being spelled with the letter י; our sages in Baba Batra allow for an alternative reading of that word as עיין לו, “make research concerning the existence of such a male descendant.” The word אין spelled without the letter י in the sense of denial, absence, refusal, is found in Deut. 25,7 מאן יבמי, “my brother-in-law refuses, etc.” (compare Rashbam there). [This example makes the manner in which the sages derive this laws more plausible than at first sight, seeing that in over 800 examples in the Bible the word אין is always spelled with the letter י so that its presence here hardly seems to give rise to any special exegesis. Ed.]
    
    27,9. ואם אין לו בת ונתתם את נחלתו לאחיו, “and if he had no daughter either, you will give his inheritance to his surviving brother.”  Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra understands the word “his brother” to include either a brother by his father or a brother by his mother, all of whom take precedence in their claim over brothers of the deceased father, and, of course, over the brothers of the deceased’s mother. However, our sages in Baba Batra 110 state that the mother is not included in the term משפחה mentioned in verse 11 so that there cannot be a question of brothers of the mother being in line for this inheritance at all. Whereas a son inherits his mother, his mother does not inherit him (if he predeceases her) under any circumstances (Baba  Batra 108).
    A sister inherits her brother if he has neither a surviving father nor brother, just as the daughter inherits when there is no surviving male heir. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Nachalot 1,3). Accordingly, the word לאחיו in our verse includes both brother or sister as the case may be. After the paragraph has informed us that  the son inherits the father, it follows that if the sequence of death of father and son is reversed, the father inherits his son. The Torah did not want to spell this out directly as the fact that a father has to mourn the death of his son is a tragic occurrence. Whereas the Torah delights in mentioning instances of blissful occurrences it shrinks from outright references to tragic occur-rences when avoidable. The principle we derive from all this is that anyone who is entitled to inherit from a certain person can also bequeath to such a person as the family relationship is identical in either direction. Seeing this matter is simple logic, the Torah did not have to spell it out as it wanted to avoid the painful emotional associations involved in contemplating fathers inheriting their children. Alternatively, the fact that the Torah did not bother to spell out this aspect of the legislation is a concealed blessing, i.e. in an Eretz Yisrael in which society follows the Torah-oriented way of life fathers will never have occasion to inherit their sons, i.e. make use in practice of this legislation. (compare Nachmanides).
    
    27,11. ונתתם את נחלתו לשארו הקרוב אליו ממשפחתו, “and you will give his inheritance to the closest (surviving) member of his family.” This verse is the source of the sages in Baba Batra 11 ruling that the husband inherits his wife. The  sages use the letter ל in the word ונתתם and the letter ו in the word לשארו to construct a new word, i.e., לו, which is the basis for assigning the wife’s property to the husband upon her death. The word שארו is understood as “his wife.”
   והיתה לבני ישראל לחקת משפט, “this shall be for the Children of Israel as a statute of Justice.” The term חקת משפט used by the Torah here in connection with the laws governing relative precedence in inheritance is used to show that this will be an eternal statute. Seeing that the Torah wants us to understand that the legislation recorded here does not apply only to the people who were about to enter the land of Israel, the expression חקת משפט was chosen, i.e. it was not a law formulated to govern special circumstances only (compare Nachmanides). Baba Batra 130 derives from the use of the word חוקה in our verse that one cannot bequeath one’s fortune to someone who is not legally designated as a potential heir of the deceased. Neither may one disinherit someone who is potentially entitled to be one’s heir. [the use of the word “bequeath,” etc., always means to make the property in question available after one’s death. [There are no legal restrictions to someone giving away his property to anyone during his life time. Ed.] The aforesaid restriction to disinheriting potential heirs applies in spite of the rule that in matters connected with money one is at liberty to make conditions which are at variance with Torah norms. To quote an example: according to Torah law the husband is obligated to look after the needs of his wife, providing, shelter, food, clothing, medical care, etc. If, prior to betrothing said wife, he made the explicit condition that he would not have to accept this financial burden such a condition is legally valid. When the Torah described the law of inheritance as חקת משפט, this means that a father cannot disinherit his son although the subject matter is money or its equivalent. Even if the father only limits the share of his firstborn son to be equal (instead of double) to that of all his other sons, such a condition is invalid. Man cannot override what the Torah has specifically legislated (Maimonides Hilchot Nachalot 6, 1-2).
   כאשר צוה ה', “as the Lord had commanded.” Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write; “as I have commanded you,” seeing the whole paragraph is G’d’s dictation. However, we have to use this stylistic change as being similar to Exodus 24,1 “and to Moses He had said: ‘ascend to the Lord.’”
    
    27,12. עלה אל הר העברים הזה, “ascend this mountain of Avarim.” The reason this paragraph is appended to the legislation about inheritance is that Moses wanted to know who would inherit his status (Ibn Ezra).
    
    27,13. וראיתה אותה ונאספת אל עמיך גם אתה, “once you have seen it you too will be gathered in to your people.” Why did G’d repeat: “you will see it,” when  He had already told Moses in verse 12 that the purpose of ascending mount Avarim was for Moses to see the land? We need to understand the words וראיתה אותה as a reference to the Eretz Yisrael in the celestial regions which Moses would see as soon as he was gathered in to his people (would die). Perhaps the letter ה at the end of וראיתה is to convey that this “seeing” would be thanks to the power of the attribute ה. The land referred to as the celestial ארץ ישראל is symbolised by the last letter ה in the tetragram, a reference to the attribute כבוד ה' which would do the “gathering in” of Moses. This thought is reinforced by the insertion of the letter י in the word עמיך. Moses, after all, belonged to one people, עמך, not to several. Every time the word עמיך appears in connection with Moses the reason is the same. Examples are; Numbers 27,13, Numbers 31,2, Deut. 32,3.
    
    27,14. הם מי מריבת קדש, “they are the waters of strife at Kadesh.” This verse demonstrates that neither Moses nor Aaron had been guilty of any other sin. the word הם, “they,” means “these only and none other.”
    *
    27,15. וידבר משה אל ה' לאמור “Moses spoke to the Lord, saying.” What reason was there for Moses to use the word לאמור “to say,” when he spoke directly to G’d? To whom was G’d supposed to tell what Moses had been saying? The Torah uses a form of introduction which fits the great stature of Moses, i.e. compliments him. Just as when G’d addressed Moses we normally find that the formula is לאמור, “to say,” the Torah now chose a stylistically similar formula to compare the student to his master, his teacher. This idea is reflected in a Midrash which says: (quoting G’d) “I have spoken to you using both דבור and אמירה, now when you speak to Me it will also be considered as both דבור and אמירה.
    
    27,16. יפקוד ה' אלו-הי הרוחות לכל בשר, “May Hashem, G’d of the spirits of all flesh, appoint, etc.”  “You Who know the spirit of each individual are surely aware of who is appropriate to be appointed as leader for them.”
   אשר יצא לפניהם, “who is to go out ahead of them.” It means: who is to lead them in war. 
   ואשר יבא לפניהם ואשר יוציאם, “and who shall come in before them and who shall take them out.” The emphasis here is on the fact that the leader personally and not some deputy should always be in front. Whereas among the Gentile nations the king or top general generally remains behind the danger zone in the rear, Moses requests that the kind of leader that would be appointed should emulate him when he had faced Sichon and Og in battle at the head of the army. We know hat Moses had been in the front, why else would G’d have reassured him when He said to him not to be afraid of Og (21,34)? We know that Joshua was at the front of the army, as when the angel with his drawn sword in his hand confronted him he asked: “do you belong to us or to our enemies?” (Joshua 5,13) We also find that David was at the head of his army as reported in Samuel I 18,16: “for he would go out and come in at their head.”
    
    27,18. קח לך את יהושע בן נון, “take for yourself Joshua son of Nun.” The word “for you” in this verse means: “the one whom you yourself have already examined minutely, the one whom you know thoroughly.” It is now appropriate that he reap the reward for having been your faithful disciple all these years, never departing from your immediate presence. This is what Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 27,18: “he who stands guard over the fig tree will eventually enjoy its fruit.”
   איש אשר רוח בו, “a man in whom there is spirit.” A reference to Holy Spirit. Our sages in Sifri Pinchas 140 understand this to mean that he has the emotional fortitude to brave all opposition.
   וסמכת את ידך עליו, “you are to lean your hand upon him.” This was to demonstrate to all the Israelites that he will replace you. Our sages in Sifri 140 understand this to mean that Moses was to provide Joshua with an interpreter who would announce all he had to say to the people (while Moses was alive) so the people would not say later that Joshua would never have dared speak up while Moses was still alive.
    
    27,20. ונתת מהודך עליו, “and you will impart some of your stature to him.” This means that Moses was to display some deference to Joshua. According to Baba Batra 75 the important letter in this verse is the letter מ in front of the word הודך, i.e. that Moses was to impart only part of his majesty to Joshua, not all of it. This also reflects the statement by our sages that Joshua compared to Moses much like the moon compares to the sun. Whereas the latter only reflects light received from an outside source the sun generates light. Nonetheless, we must not forget that the sun too received its original input from G’d as we know from Genesis 1,14 where both the sun and the moon are described as מאורות, “luminaries,” as opposed to אורים, “sources of original light.” Moses too had received his initial spiritual input from Hashem.
    
    27,21. ושאל לו במשפט האורים, “He will inquire on his behalf of the Judgment of the Urim.” It is remarkable that the Tumim have not been mentioned here. This appears to prove that the Urim were the principal carriers of the holy names of G’d and that they illuminated the letters on the breastplate of the High Priest from which the latter received the answer to his inquiries from the Lord. The Tumim, apparently only contained the matching letters needed to complete certain words so that the High Priest could make heads or tails of them. Nonetheless, the fact is that the Urim and Tumim always work in tandem. Basically, the two are two sides of the same coin and they reposed inside the folds of the breastplate.
    Our sages in Yuma 83 derive from this verse that whereas a decree which issued forth from the mouth of a prophet is reversible, a decree communicated by means of the Urim and Tumim is not reversible. They base this on the expression משפט used in our verse in connection with the Urim. Just as משפט, judgment, is something which cannot be reversed, so an answer provided by means of the Urim and Tumim cannot be reversed.
    In our verse G’d tells Moses that Joshua will be in his place and that he and all of Israel shall go out (to war) at his command, i.e. as communicated through the High Priest Eleazar. It is an assurance to Moses that the final authority will not depart from his tribe.
   הוא וכל בני ישראל אתו וכל העדה, “he and all the Children of Israel with him and the whole congregation.” Seeing that the “congregation” is part of the term “the Children of Israel,” what is the point of appending this word? It teaches that even Israelites who disagree with Joshua as their new leader are not thereby excluded from the all-encompassing statement “all the Children of Israel.” This means that the dissidents are not free to opt out from the obligations which already devolved upon them as members of “the Children of Israel.”
    Our sages in Yuma 73 understand the words וכל העדה to mean the Sanhedrin (Supreme Court), which acts as the eyes of the עדה, i.e. the “unique, special” people of the congregation. When the Torah commanded that just these people had to be presented before Eleazar the High Priest and before “the entire congregation,” this is proof that the sages in Yuma were correct in their interpretation of the words כל העדה in our verse, i.e. those who represented the entire congregation.
    
    27,23. ויסמוך את ידיו עליו, “he leaned (both) his hands upon him.” Although G’d had commanded Moses that he needs to place “a hand” upon Joshua, Moses put both his hands on him to indicate that he harboured no ill will over handing over his authority to someone else (compare Rashi). According to Sifri 141 the meaning is that he filled Joshua with wisdom as one fills a container right to the top of its capacity. 
    
    28,2. את קרבני לחמי, “My offering, My food for My fires;”  the chapter dealing with the mandatory public sacrifices offered at regular intervals has been introduced here since Moses had already been warned regarding the offerings that the Israelites are to present; now that Moses saw that he was not going to enter the Holy Land together with the people he informed them of all these details (which were not applicable as yet). He commenced with the daily burnt-offering although the details of this offering had already been listed in Exodus 29, 38-41. At that time the reason was to inform us of what sacrifices were being presented during the seven days of inaugural celebrations of the Tabernacle. (compare Rashi). Nachmanides questions this as the Torah had used the expression “for all your generations” already at that point.
    According to the plain meaning of the text: the word קרבני refers to the blood; the word את includes the salt which had to be added to each offering as we know from Leviticus 2,13. The reason we dip bread nowadays in salt before eating it at the beginning of our meal is that the Torah called a sacrificial offering לחם, bread. The word לחמי refers to the fat parts of the sacrificial animal, (or all its flesh as the case might be) which was burned up on the altar. The word לאשי refers to all that is given over to the fire on the altar. The word תשמרו refers to the Israelites standing in attendance during this procedure. The word במועדו, which means “at its appointed time” and seems superfluous seeing that the offering under discussion is presented daily, means that no other sacrifice is to be offered earlier in the day than these daily total-offerings. By the same token, no offering was to be presented after the evening daily burnt-offering. Another meaning of the word במועדו is that the legislation overrides the Sabbath legislation and that even on the Sabbath (Sifri 142) these daily burnt-offerings were offered as usual even if the laws of ritual impurity had to be set aside in order for this offering to be presented (compare Pessachim 76).
    
    28,3. ואמרת להם, “you shall say to them.” This is a warning to the Court (Sifri).
   זה האשה, “this is the fire offering;” seeing the paragraph had commenced with the words: “My offering, קרבני, why did the Torah now call it אשה? The fact is that the word is the explanation of לחמי לאשי, אשר תקריבו לה', for the requirement of Hashem, i.e. it must not be disqualified by inadmissible thoughts during its presentation, פגול. כבשים, “sheep,” no other animals. בני שנה, ”one year old;” i.e. not a day older than one year old but as young as eight days. תמימים, “unblemished.” This is the corollary of Leviticus 22,21: “it shall not be blemished.” The word תמימם is spelled here with the letter י before the final ם missing. This indicates that both these sheep should be identical. [this is halachically not correct, although one view in the Talmud Yuma 62]. There were to be a total of 730 such sheep for the year, assuming the year had 365 days [as opposed to the lunar year which on average has 354 days]. The number 730 is alluded to in the first letters of the words תמימם שנים ליום.
   שנים ליום, “two per day.” The two offerings may be viewed as advocates, pleading the case of the Jewish people before a heavenly tribunal; the site where these two sheep were being slaughtered corresponded to the relative motion of earth to sun during the day, the morning sacrifice at the north-west corner of the courtyard, the afternoon sacrifice at the north-east corner.
   עולה תמיד, “a permanent burnt-offering.” This offering will always function as advocate on behalf of the Jewish people.
   ליום עולה, “for the day a burnt-offering” [this contradicts the cantillation. Ed.] According to Yuma 10 when the dawn rose the lookout in the Temple would call out ברק ברקאי, “the morning-star is shining.” This is the reason why the expression עולה was not mentioned in what appears to be a parallel passage in Exodus chapter 29.
    
    28,4. את הכבש אחד, “One of the lambs,” we would have expected the Torah to write את הכבש האחד, however the omission of the letter ה here is to alert us to the fact that the word אחד has a numerical value of 13 to teach us that 13 priests were involved in this procedure (Yuma 25). This number is also not accidental but is in itself a reminder that the offering was addressed to the אחד, to the One and Only G’d. In Exodus chapter 29,39 the Torah does write: את הכבש האחד, as is grammatically appropriate when speaking of an animal singled out from its flock as superior.
   תעשה בבוקר, “you are to prepare it in the morning.” The numerical value of these two words is the same as לארבע שעות, i.e. during the first four hours of the day.
   בבוקר, “in the morning.” a period from sunrise until the sun has spread its rays across the horizon. The universe was created during the day as we know from Genesis 2,4: “on the day the Lord G’d made earth and heaven.”
    
    28,6. העשויה בהר סיני, “which was instituted at Mount Sinai.” This is a reference to the offerings brought daily during the inaugural procedures of the Tabernacle (Exodus 29). This was a period prior to the attribute of כבוד moving from the top of the mountain to the top of the Tabernacle. The wording here seems to suggest that after their stay around Mount Sinai the Israelites did not continue to offer these burnt-offerings in the desert at all. In Chagigah 6 Rabbi Eleazar understands the words עולת תמיד העשויה בהר סיני as meaning that the relevant procedures were taught at Mount Sinai whereas the offerings were not offered there at all. Rabbi Akiva, however, understood the verse to mean that this procedure was first introduced at Mount Sinai [presumably prior to the building of the Tabernacle, as the Tabernacle was not built till nine months after the sin of the golden calf. A better explanation is that of Tossaphot that the disqualification of the Israelites was the sin of the spies.This leaves other problems. Ed.] and never again interrupted. This poses the problem of a verse in Amos 5,25: “the meat-offerings and gift-offerings which you offered to Me during the forty years in the desert.” Why did the prophet not mention the burnt-offerings offered during that period? The answer given is that during those 40 years the daily-burnt-offering represented only the tribe of Levi who had not been guilty of the sin of the golden calf and who therefore were not out of grace. This teaches that even according to the view of Rabbi Akiva who holds that once introduced this procedure was not abandoned even temporarily, the meaning of the offering was different.
    
    28,7. הסך נסך שכר לה', “to be poured as an intoxicating libation for the Lord.”  Wine at least 40 days old is intoxicating. The word שכר in our verse therefore disqualifies wine which has not aged long enough (Rashi). Nachmanides disagrees with Rashi, seeing that the sages in Baba Batra 97 stated that whereas fresh wine is not to be offered as a libation in the first instance, if it had been used by mistake it is acceptable. It follows that such new wine could not have been excluded by a Biblical verse. What the verse here does exclude is wine which has been watered down to make it less potent. Any wine so watered down is unacceptable for the libation mentioned. We find confirmation of Nachmanides’ view in Sifri 143. The repetition of the words הסך נסך is an allusion to a second kind of libation, the water libation offered on Tabernacles (Taanit 3).
    A Midrashic approach, Tanchuma Pinchas 11. The reason that the passage dealing with the daily communal sacrifices adjoins the one in which Moses asked for his successor to be appointed is to show that G’d told Moses: “before you tell Me what to do for My son (the Israelites) tell them what they have to do for Me.” This is also the meaning of Isaiah 45,11: האותיות שאלוני על בני ועל פעל ידי תצוני, “Will you question Me on the destiny of My children, will you instruct Me about the works of My hands?” The matter can best be illustrated by a parable. A king married a certain lady. The king had a friend who, whenever the king was angry at his wife, interceded on her behalf and calmed him down. When this friend was close to death (seeing he was an elderly man) he asked the king to tell him what he really thought of his wife. The king replied: “before I tell you what I think of my wife, i.e. before you tell me how to treat her, you better find out what she thinks of me and warn her not to insult my dignity.”
   את קרבני לחמי, “My offering, My bread.” The words שנים ליום, mean “two sheep per day, one in the morning and one in the evening,” not both at the same time (verse 4).
    We find that King Solomon consumed far more than that as is spelled out in Kings 5, 2-3: “Solomon’s daily provisions consisted of 30 kors of semolina, 60 kors of ordinary flour; 10 fattened oxen, 20 pasture-fed oxen, 100 sheep and goats, besides deer, gazelles, roebuck and fatted geese.” The author (of Kings) appears to contrast Proverbs 13,25: “a righteous person eats (enough) to satisfy his soul (life-force), whereas the belly of the wicked will always feel in need.” Eliezer, Avraham’s trusted servant is an example of the righteous mentioned by Solomon, seeing that he asked Rivkah to only let him sip a little water from her jug (Genesis 24,17). Esau, on the other hand, demanded from Yaakov that he let him “gulp down the red stuff” (Genesis 25,30).
    We find that in Job 37,23 Elihu tells Job that “Shaddai we cannot attain to Him, He is great in power and Justice,” whereas in Job 36,22 the same Elihu proclaims: “see, G’d is beyond reach in His power; who governs like Him?” [this suggests we can appreciate His greatness. Ed.] How can these two verses be reconciled? When G’d gives to us He gives according to His power; when He asks of us He asks much less than is due Him, demanding only that we give according to our means. To illustrate: the Torah writes in Exodus 26,1 that the coverings for the Tabernacle be made of ten carpet-like strips of cloth; this is an illustration of the verse in Job 37,23, seeing “we cannot attain to Him, providing Him with His needs.” Similarly, when the Torah asks the Jewish people to provide olive oil for the Menorah in the Tabernacle (Exodus 27,20) the request is one well within the power of the Israelites to fulfill. Similarly, the Torah asks the farmer to present merely the first ripe fruit of his orchard to the Lord (Exodus 23,19). On the other hand, when the Bible describes G’d’s largesse to man, such as in Ezekiel 47,12 the wording is: “all kinds of trees for food will grow up on both sides of the river. Their leaves will not wither nor their fruit fall; they will yield new fruit every month; each tree will produce new ‘first-fruit’ every single month.” This is a perfect illustration of the imbalance of what G’d asks of us and what He is prepared to provide for us. The author quotes a few more verses depicting the generous measure of G’d’s largesse.
    A Kabbalistic approach on the words את קרבני לחמי לאשי: every one of these four words reflects the attribute of Justice, seeing the attribute of Justice is speaking. The word את is known as representing the attribute of Justice from Ezekiel 2,2: ואשמע את מדבר אלי, “I heard את speaking to me.” The words קרבני לחמי are both derived from קרב, “battle,” and לוחם, “fighting” as in מלחמה. The word לאשי, is derived from אשה לריח ניחוח. The meaning of these words is that this offering is designed to draw down to “Me” the largesse of the attribute of Hashem. The word תשמרו is a warning that when you the Israelites offer this sacrifice it must be exclusively addressed to Hashem, the attribute of Justice saying that even it  addresses itself to Hashem. When will that occur? When you the Jewish people, offer these two sheep twice daily as a daily burnt-offering. This sacrifice is to be offered twice daily, morning and evening, together with fine flour, etc., and the wine libation  as listed in our paragraph.
    The components of this offering, i.e. meat, bread, and wine are the principal ingredients of our diet. Seeing that the earth which provides these food items either directly or indirectly does so under the influence of the two great luminaries, one of which is active by day and the other at night, it is appropriate that when we offer this sacrifice we do so at times which allude to the activities of sun and moon respectively. After all, their orbits determine morning and evening. They have been given authority to rule our terrestrial universe and everything which grows in it or moves on its surface. Seeing that the domains of sun and moon do not overlap, it would not be appropriate to offer both these animals during the same time of the day. We have already explained that even the slaughtering of these two sheep does not take place in the same corner of the Temple’s courtyard. The Talmud Yuma 62 makes clear that the wording שנים ליום means that that both animals are to face in the same direction but on different sides of the “centre line,” i.e. north-east and north-west respectively.
    The daily morning and evening burnt-offering was an instrument of atonement for the Jewish people, and acted as a shield for the people. The sign that this is so is found in the words of Proverbs 4,9; עתרת תפארת תמגנך, ”a crown of beauty will protect you.” Our sages of the Talmud have incorporated this idea in the benediction recited when welcoming the new moon when we say: שתתחדש עטרת תפארת לעמוסי בטן , “may the crown of glory renew itself for the people burdened (with a destiny since its inception) from the womb.” The offering of this daily communal sacrifice by the Jewish people has been responsible for the continued existence of the world, its sustenance, and the fact that its food-supply is blessed. The source of this blessing resides in the celestial spheres, is transferred to the inner sanctum of the celestial temple to Eden, thence to the garden, thence to the disembodied creatures (angels) and ultimately to our terrestrial universe.
    
    28,9. וביום השבת שני כבשים, “and on the Sabbath day,  two male lambs (additionally).” On the holidays including New Moon and New Year and the day of Atonement a total of seven male sheep were part of the day’s communal additional offerings. These were additional to the daily two lambs. On the Sabbath, however, only two additional male lambs were offered. According to the Talmud Yuma we quoted these definitely had to match each other in their size, appearance and value if possible. The word למצוה, “for performance of the commandment,” used in the Talmud when stipulating this means that this was an a priori requirement, i.e. efforts had to be made to find two such matching animals. In the event it was impossible to find such, the next best match was acceptable.
    The reason that on the Sabbath only two extra male lambs were required for the Mussaph offering is that the Sabbath, by definition, has a dual significance, i.e. the Torah once wrote the word זכור and once the word שמור in the two versions of the Ten Commandments concerning its observance. In other words, the positive and negative aspects of the Sabbath observance carry equal weight  When the Torah speaks of Sabbath observance, G’d refers to this as את שבתותי תשמרו, “observe My Sabbath days,” i.e. each Sabbath has two aspects to it (Leviticus 26,2). Every piece of legislation in connection with the Sabbath appears in pairs, even the amount of manna which fell on Friday (on account of the Sabbath) comprised two omer instead of one. Warnings of penalties are worded as מות ימות, promises of reward for its observance are similarly expressed in dual form, i.e. the hymn recited on the Sabbath is called both מזמור and שיר. Also the reward promised for its observance is described in such terms, i.e. Isaiah 58,13-14: “then you will enjoy the favour of the Lord, I will set you astride the heights of the earth, and let you enjoy the heritage of your father Yaakov.” According to a Midrash based on the wording of the mussaph prayer on Sabbath, G’d explained the reason why He is content with only two extra male sheep on that day as that He does not want to ask us for more than we ourselves enjoy on the Sabbath, i.e. two extra meals.
   ושני עשרונים “and two tenths, etc.” These correspond to the two loaves of bread over which we recite the benediction on the Sabbath meals. The reason that at this point the Torah omits the words והקרבתם or תקריבו, is that while the Israelites were in the desert these mussaph sacrifices were not offered up. The people had not been commanded concerning them until now, at the end of their wanderings in the desert.
    
    28,10. עולת שבת בשבתו, “the Sabbath burnt-offering on its Sabbath.” This means that the procedure is to take place on each Sabbath, as if the Torah had written דבר יום ביומו, “a daily procedure day by day” (Exodus 8,13).
   על עולת התמיד, “in addition to (after) the daily total-offering.”
    28,11. ובראשי חדשיכם, “and on your New Moons, etc.”  The reason the word ובראשי is in the plural instead of ובראש, is to avoid misunderstanding. Had the Torah written the singular ובראש I could have understood this legislation to apply only to the first day of Nissan, a day previously singled out as beginning of the month. This day had been referred to as ראש חדשים in Exodus 12,2. By writing ובראשי חדשים, the Torah made plain that the following mussaph offerings were to be offered on the first of every month. Not only this; every month has two beginnings. In the evening it is recognisable through the appearance of the moon, in the morning through the offering of the requisite sacrifice. The special offering for the New Moon could not be offered at night as no offerings may be offered at night with the exception of the Passover which is offered after the daily evening burnt-offering.
   פרים בני בקר שנים ואיל אחד כבשים בני שנה שבעה תמימים, “two young bulls, one ram, seven male lambs in their first year, unblemished.” Our sages in Bamidbar Rabbah 13,13 explain that the bulls symbolise the patriarch Avraham of whom the Torah wrote: “he ran to the cattle” (Genesis 18,7); the ram symbolises Yitzchak, as it was offered in his place by Avraham (Genesis 22,13). The seven sheep symbolise Yaakov of whom it is written that “he separated the sheep” (Genesis 30,40). The male goat mentioned at the end of the paragraph symbolises the goat the brothers killed and dipped Joseph’s blood therein. It is worthwhile to note that the total number of animals offered on New Moons was 11 as this number corresponds to the 11 hours which the sun is older than the moon. The sun was created (made operational) on the fourth day at  the beginning of the day (night), whereas the moon was made operational 11 hours later. The number 11 also recalls the fact that the solar year is (on average) 11 days longer than the lunar year (12 months), seeing the solar year is 365 days and the lunar year 354 days.
    The reason that the bulls were being offered in respect of Avraham (and Sarah) is because Avraham and Sarah originally were like טומטום ואנדרונינוס, hermaphrodite and epicene (people whose sexual organs were underdeveloped preventing them from bearing or siring children). The ram offered in respect of Yitzchak symbolised the uniqueness of the ram Avraham had slaughtered at the time, of which we learned in Avot 5,6 that it had been designated as such an offering since the days of the creation. The seven sheep offered in respect of Yaakov acknowledge symbolically that his features are engraved on the throne of G’d above the seven heavens (Bereshit Rabbah 68,18). The three tenths ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as a gift-offering for each of the bulls correspond to the three verses in which G’d is described as appearing to Avraham (Genesis 12,7; 17,1; 18,1). The two tenths ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as gift-offering which accompanied the ram offering were in respect of the two verses in the Torah in which G’d is described as appearing to Yitzchak (Genesis 26,2; 26,24). The reason that only one tenth ephah fine flour mixed with oil was brought as gift-offering alongside the seven sheep is that we have only one verse in which G’d is described as appearing (וירא) to Yaakov (Genesis 35,9).  
    The reason that the Torah repeats the word עשרון in connection with the single tenth ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as gift-offering in respect of the seven sheep symbolising Yaakov, is that it alludes to both of Yaakov’s names, יעקב and ישראל. It also alludes to the two blessings he received (from his father), one instead of Esau’s blessing, the other prior to his departure to Charan. He also received 10 blessings when he was called Yaakov when his father gave him the first blessing (compare Genesis 27,28-29 and Genesis 32,30 [where the individual blessings are not enumerated; presumably G’d confirmed Yitzchak’s blessing. Ed.]). Yaakov also used the word עשר twice when he promised to tithe (twice) everything G’d would give him (Genesis 28,23). This applied especially to his son Levi as we pointed out in connection with Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 37 why Levi was considered the tenth son (compare author’s comments on Genesis 28,22). It may be worth considering in this connection that Jeremiah 31,8 quotes G’d as saying: “Ephrayim is My firstborn.” When you count backwards from Ephrayim you will find that Levi is the tenth son. When you count from Levi to Aaron in descending order, i.e. Gershon, Kehat, Merari, Livni, Shimi, Amram, Yitzhar Chevron, Uzziel, Aaron you also have Aaron as the tenth (collective) descendant of Levi named by the Torah (compare Chronicles I 6,1-3). This is also why we find in Chronicles I 23,13: “Aaron was set apart, he and his sons, forever to be consecrated most holy, to make burnt-offerings to the Lord, etc.”
    
    28,14. ונסכיהם חצי ההין, “and their libations, half a hin, etc. A half hin equals 6 login seeing the measure hin comprises 12 login.
   יהיה לפר, “for each bull.” Seeing that the bulls were in respect of Avraham, and he had entertained and served bulls to the unexpected visitors (who turned out to be angels) during the hottest part of the day six hours after sunrise (compare Genesis 18,1-8).
   ושלישית ההין לאיל, “and a third of a hin for the ram, etc.” This was in respect of Yitzchak whose binding occurred four hours after sunrise.
   ורביעית ההין, “and a quarter of a hin  with each sheep.” This corresponds to Yaakov who uttered 18 benedictions. When Yaakov encountered sudden sunset (Genesis 28,11), the Torah uses the expression ויפגע במקום. We have a tradition that the term פגיעה in the Bible always refers to prayer (Berachot 26, based on Jeremiah 7,16 אל תפגע בי, “do not plead with Me.” Yaakov is credited with inventing the daily evening prayer (עמידה) on that occasion.
    It is worth noting that the small quantity of a quarter of a hin wine is used only with a sheep offering, never with a ram or bull offering. There is a mystical dimension to this. I have alluded to this in my commentary on Leviticus 26,42: “I will remember My covenant with Yaakov.”
   זאת עולת חדש בחשדו, “this is the New Moon offering whenever the moon renews itself.” This means that if, for some reason, the day passed without this offering having been presented it cannot be made up for subsequently (Sifri 145).
    
    28,15. ושעיר עזים אחד לחטאת לה', “and one male goat as a sin-offering for Hashem.” According to the plain meaning of the text he word לה' means the same as in Leviticus 16,8: “one male goat as sin-offering for Hashem.”
    Alternatively, the word לה' may mean “in respect of a sin committed against Hashem.” This would be a normal construction in Hebrew where the prefix ל often occurs as not meaning “for” but “against.” Examples are: Genesis 39,9 וחטאתי לאלו-הים and I would commit a sin against G’d.” Or, Genesis 44,32: וחטאתי לאבי, “and I would have committed a sin against my father.”
    According to Chulin 60  (one opinion) the meaning here is the reverse of the usual, G’d commanding the offering on His own behalf, “atoning” for having reduced the moon from its original size. This is one of the mysteries of the Torah.
    A Midrashic approach: The words חטאת לה' refers to the kind of sin unknown to anyone except Hashem. This is the way the Talmud in Shevuot 9 understands the expression. Another explanation offered by Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish there is that G’d offered to atone for having diminished the size of the moon by means of this offering [the important thing to remember is that nowhere else does the sin offering in a mussaph sacrifice conclude with the words לה', a peculiar expression seeing all sacrifices are לה' for Hashem and no other deity or even attribute of G’d. Ed]
    In Chulin 60 we find a lengthy description of what is meant here. Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi raised the point that the Torah appears to contradict itself when it wrote in Genesis 1,16: “G’d made the two large luminaries, the great luminary and the small luminary.” If they both were first described as “large,” how could the verse continue in the same breath describing one as “small” and one as “great?” In answer to this question a dialogue between the moon and G’d is cited. The moon said to G’d: ”how can two kings both wear the same crown?” G’d replied: “reduce yourself in size.” Thereupon the moon countered: “why should I have to reduce myself in size (importance) merely because I asked a legitimate question?” Thereupon G’d said: “O.K. so you shine by day as well as by night.” To this the moon replied: “what good is my light during the day when there is no one to appreciate it?” To this argument G’d replied: “the Jewish people are going to count their days and years according to your orbits.” The moon was not satisfied with this, saying: “they will have to count days in accordance with the seasons, i.e. by relying on solar orbits.” G’d appreciated this argument and reassured the moon by saying: “the righteous will bear names referring to you.” Thus we find Yaakov referred to as יעקב הקטן in Amos 7,2, and Samuel referred to as שמואל הקטן; David is referred to as דוד הקטן in Samuel I 17,14. In spite of all this G’d did not succeed in satisfying the moon. As a last resort, G’d told the Jewish people to offer a male goat as sin-offering on His behalf seeing He had reduced the size of the moon.
    In order to understand this strange-sounding dialogue between G’d and the moon we must appreciate that the word הגדולים in Genesis 1,16 means that originally sun and moon were equal in size and power. The moon was reduced in size and this is why the Torah refers to it as the small luminary in the second half of the verse we quoted. The reason that it was reduced was that it had complained. However, we must not view the moon as displaying egotistical motives, [otherwise why would G’d feel guilty? Ed.] When the moon referred to the inability of two kings wearing the same crown it meant that anything which appeared like power-sharing would reflect negatively on G’d. If two luminaries were to wear the same crown it would appear as if G’d were unable to create two servants each of whom had the ability to generate its own light without relying on an outside force, a companion to assist Him. The nations of the world would be encouraged to say that G’d was unable to supply original light to each of the luminaries as they had to trade “crowns” with one another. The moon’s error was the suggestion that G’d did not know what He had been doing when He created the universe as the moon had found it. One does not second-guess G’d the Creator.
    As a result, the moon had to be “punished.” After the moon had been reduced in size and had felt suitably ashamed for its behaviour, G’d said to it: “go and govern both by day and by night.” He added that the Jewish people would count their months according to its orbit, and that the righteous would bear names associated with the moon. G’d did all this in order to put the moon’s mind at rest, so much so that He accorded the moon honour in assigning an additional male goat to the mussaph offering commemorating this dialogue for all times. This is the real meaning of the enigmatic words by Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi who portrayed G’d as saying: “bring an atonement on My behalf.” G’d’s major concern in all this was that none of His creatures should have complaints about the way in which He had seen fit to create the universe and to assure its proper functioning. No creature should feel disadvantaged by its creator vis-a-vis any other part of the creation.
    It is also possible that the entire episode and the manner it is alluded to in the Torah serves as an encouragement to would be repentant sinners to come forward and change their life styles. They would learn from this episode in the celestial regions that once the guilty party had recognised the error of its ways G’d would go out of His way to compensate such repentant sinners for their having accepted instruction from Him. This also explains why the righteous are actually compared to the sun (compare Judges 5,31: “and the ones who love Him will emerge like the sun in its might”) seeing that they had to suffer various insults just as the sun had to be the victim of the moon’s complaints.
    Rav Yitzchak Alfassi writes in his halachic work at the end of the first chapter of tractate Shevuot that the word עלי in Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish’s parable הביאו כפרה עלי, “bring an atonement on My behalf,” should really be understood as אלי, “to Me,” not “on My behalf.” Most commentators agree with him.
    A rational approach to our verse: the word לה' “for Hashem” had to be written so that the offering would not be understood as being addressed to the moon. The reason that the male goat was used as such an offering altogether was to uproot the still deep-seated tradition that sacrifices had to be offered to the moon at the moon’s renewal each month.
    We do not find the expression חטאת לה' in connection with any other sin-offering presented as part of the mussaph ceremonies on Holidays. The usual expression is simply חטאת, i.e. a sin-offering parts of which were consumed by the priests. Seeing that those sin-offerings were not burned up on the altar the description חטאת לה', “a sin-offering for Hashem,” would have been inappropriate. If, in spite of the fact that this sin-offering was also consumed by the priests the Torah nonetheless chose to describe it as חטאת לה', this was in order to drive home the point that it was not intended to assuage the moon’s feelings in any way. It was to remove any vestige of doubt that this offering as opposed to all the others was addressed to some other deity than Hashem. This is the way that Maimonides understands the wording here (compare Moreh Nevuchim 3,46). If we follow this approach the explanation of the parable quoted by Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi must be understood along the following lines:
     Originally, sun and moon were equal in size, i.e. this is the meaning of “the two great luminaries,” the sun completely facing the moon like a mirror so that the moon felt that its own light was not noticeable. The sun shone by day, the moon by night, but the moon only reflected the light of the sun, did not have light of its own. When the Torah describes the moon subsequently as being the “small” luminary, the meaning is that after the dialogue the moon’s size as perceived from the terrestrial perspective would appear smaller, in particular as it would wane towards the end of each month. [It is evident that there would have been no point even originally in the sun and the moon providing equal amounts of light, one by day and one by night, as who would have known when it is night? Ed.] The basic difference in the moon before and after the dialogue with G’d was that whereas the sun remained in the sky completely unchanged, the moon’s position in the sky was altered so that it appears different; nonetheless, G’d did not change His universe on account of the moon’s complaint. Had He done so, He would have agreed that His universe had been imperfect. The word “crown” used by the moon to describe two kings wearing the same crown, meant that the “light” was the “crown.” The moon argued that seeing it needed to provide light for the terrestrial universe just as did the sun, it should be a source of light of its own just as the sun was such an independent source of light. It did not argue that it wanted to be a light of the same potency as the sun but that the quality of its light, though smaller, should be self-generated and therefore as clear as that of the sun. This, according to Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi, and possibly acknowledged by G’d, was a fair and reasonable request. When G’d said to the Moon: “go and reduce yourself in size,” He meant: “do you think that the light of the sun is self-generated and that therefore it is something to be taken for granted that will endure indefinitely? This is an error on your part. When you will move out of its range you will experience that you will receive even less of its light.” The moon replied that it was unfair that it should be the one to reduce itself further seeing it had made a reasonable statement. To this G’d replied that if He had seen fit to make the moon as a receptacle for light (instead of as a source of light) He had done so for a good reason. There was a need for such reflected light. However, in view of the fact that the moon’s comments had been well-intentioned, G’d’s Children, i.e. the people of Israel, would offer a sin-offering on New Moon throughout the generations (compare Rashba on Shevuot 9).
    Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi had understood that originally both sun and moon had not only been equal in size but also equal in the ability to dispense light they had generated themselves. Afterwards, G’d decided to make changes in that system for the sake of the world and its inhabitants. Had He not done so the world would have experienced daylight around the clock. This would have deprived the inhabitants of the terrestrial universe of the positive aspects of the night as a result of which the universe and its inhabitants could not have endured indefinitely. This is why G’d made changes in the laws of nature as they had been prior to the creation of life on earth. [remember the sun and moon were placed in orbit on the fourth day, whereas the living creatures on the surface of the earth were not created until the fifth day, so that G’d’s change does not mean that He found His handiwork inadequate. Ed.] After all, even prior to this, G’d had made adjustments to the globe when He commanded the oceans to recede in order for the dry land to emerge and to produce vegetation in preparation for animals which would feed on that. This too had not implied that the situation prior to that had been the result of a miscalculation by the Creator. When Solomon (Kohelet 1,15) says that מעוות לא יוכל לתקון, that “that which has been twisted cannot be made straight,” he meant that the number of days which are missing in the lunar calendar annually as a result of the moon being reduced in size will not be replaced. Changes that G’d made in the universe during its development are not reversible after completion of the work of creation. [If G’d made what appear to be changes during the stages of creation this proves that what existed prior to such changes was not twisted, but corresponded to the needs of the universe at that time. Ed.] (compare Kohelet Rabbah 1,16). 
    A kabbalistic approach to the words לחטאת לה'. G’d did say: ”bring an atonement offering עלי, seeing that I reduced the moon in size.” By using the word עלי, G’d did not apologise; He merely meant “because I have found it appropriate for My purposes to reduce the moon in size.” When we understand the word עלי in Shevuot 9 quoted in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish in this fashion, we must understand the entire Midrash of Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi in Chulin 60 as follows: [the key to understanding the following is that in the parable the two kings are not sun and moon but two dfferent emanations, i.e. כבוד and תפארת, presented as similar to moon and sun respectively in their influence on the terrestrial universe. Ed]
    The moon  said to G’d: “is it possible for two kings to wear the same crown?” At this point the attribute בינה pointed out that it was entirely possible for two kings to wear the same crown, i.e. to derive its inspiration from the same source just as did the emanations כבוד and תפארת, both of which derive their input from the same celestial emanations This must be viewed as if the attribute of כבוד said this to the emanation בינה (here equated with G’d as it is a higher emanation). The emanation בינה replied that it was absolutely possible, to wit the emanation  תפארת and כבוד make use of the same conduit, צנור. There is no need for each king to have a conduit of its own to draw down to it from the celestial regions its respective requirements. Nonetheless, the attribute כבוד desired to have its own conduit (“hot line” in our parlance) to the emanation בינה; it was not content to share such a conduit with the emanation תפארת. To this the emanation בינה replied: “go and reduce yourself;” i.e. stop sharing the celestial input via the emanation תפארת which served you thus far. Thereupon the attribute כבוד said: ‘why should I be denied direct celestial input when what I said was perfectly reasonable?” To this בינה  replied: “go ahead and rule by day and by night.” G’d added: Israel will count both its days and its nights by means of you. Moreover, the righteous will have your name associated with them, such as Yaakov “the small,” Samuel “the small one,” etc. (as we pointed out in the earlier version of this Midrash). The word שמך, “your name” in the parable is to be understood as the name of G’d אדנ'י, i.e. the “smaller” name of G’d. The attribute כבוד was not satisfied until G’d said that a sacrifice dedicated to Hashem (the great name) would be offered on each New Moon compensating it for its diminution vis-a-vis the emanation תפארת. This is what is meant by the words  אמר הק'בה in Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi’s parable, i.e. the attribute of Mercy said this. He instructed the Israelites to offer this male goat sin-offering as a sacrifice on behalf of the (sub)emanation כבוד. The purpose of the offering as far as the Jewish people are concerned is to draw down to it the outpourings of the attribute of Mercy which, through the association of the fate of the Jewish people with the emanation כבוד which had forfeited the “hot line” to בינה had been severed. The association with the moon without the sin-offering to the attribute of Hashem on New Moon would otherwise place the Jewish people  under the aegis of the attribute of Justice, as is the moon itself. The entire matter is a part of the mystical dimension of G’d’s relationship with the Jewish people. This is alluded to in the words זאת עולת חדש בחדשו. The attribute in question represented by the offering “rises” i.e. עולה, to become the recipient of G’d’s merciful outpourings.
    At an unspecified time in the future, the light of the moon and the sun will be equal in power and origin just as it was originally when both were described as  גדולים, great. This is what Isaiah 30,26 spoke about when he wrote: ”and the light of the moon shall become like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall become sevenfold.” At such a time, the power of the moon which is the attribute of Justice will become unified with the attribute of Mercy. I have already explained this in connection with my commentary on Exodus 15,3: זה א-לי.
    
    28,16. ובחודש הראשון בארבעה עשר יום לחדש פסח לה', “and in the first month on the fourteenth of the month, a passover for the Lord.” In this verse the words בין הערבים which usually appear in connection with the passover are missing. Also the burnt-offering which has to be brought on the Sabbath during the seven days of Passover is not mentioned; neither does the Torah make any reference to the offering of the first new barley, commonly known as Omer  which is presented on the second day of the Passover and which is mentioned in Leviticus 23,12. Here the Torah phrases the prohibition to perform work on the Holiday as כל מלאכת עבודה, instead of the more all encompassing expression כל מלאכה, “all manner of work,” used in connection with the Sabbath. The difference is that it is permitted to use fire on the festival in connection with preparing food for the same day. Seeing that in Exodus 12,16 where the Torah also speaks of the Passover it does use the expression כל מלאכה to refer to the work-prohibition it had to add the words: “except what is needed to prepare food for every person,” in that verse. 
    
    28,26. וביום הבכורים, “and on the day of the first-fruits;” the Shavuot festival is also known as בכורי קציר חטים, “the first fruit of the wheat harvest,” as on that day two loaves of the first ripe new wheat are presented as an offering (Rashi). We must try and understand why in connection with the mussaph offering on this festival the customary male goat as a sin-offering is not described by the word “sin-offering,” although the Torah does say that its function is לכפר, “to atone.” The simple reason is that on a day when the Jewish people commemorate receiving the Torah, an occasion when they were as innocent as new-born children and had no specific sins to atone for, it is appropriate to commemorate this fact at least by an allusion.
    A kabbalistic approach sees in the wording an allusion to the day in the future when the orbit of the earth as we know it will cease, עצרתו של העולם, and the evil urge will be destroyed at that time and the “stone” i.e. the heart of stone, described by Ezekiel 36,26 as our heart, will be destroyed in exchange for “a heart of flesh,” a heart open to Hashem and His instructions.
    
    28,31. תמימים יהיו לכם ונסכיהם, “they shall be unblemished for you, together with their libations.” This means that the libations must also be unblemished. Our sages in Menachot 87 use this verse to legislate that if in the wine of the libation any kind of flour-like material floats to the surface the wine is unfit for the altar. The reason is that only the choicest product of its respective category of produce or animal is to be presented on the altar. Anything which does not fit these criteria is unwelcome, unfit for use on the altar a priori. (Maimonides HiIchot Issurey Hamizbeach 7, 1-2). If, for instance, someone was obligated to present a burnt-offering on the altar he must not bring a weak or frail, undernourished animal. He must not say that seeing the weak animal is unblemished he has complied with the legislation of the Torah. Concerning such an attitude (saying that as long as it is not blemished it is acceptable) the prophet Maleachi 1,14 said “cursed be the cheat” (Rashi).
    During the period of the Temple the Israelites would import rams from Moav, and sheep with wide backs they would bring from Chevron, and young turtle-doves from the mountain known as הר המלך. They would bring olive oil from Tekoah; all these places mentioned were known to produce the finest of that respective category of animal, bird, or oil.
    We already find that when the Torah mentions the first offering by man, i.e. Kayin and Hevel, that the gift by Hevel is described as consisting of the choicest of its kind (Genesis 4,4). As a result, G’d welcomed his offering while He spurned that of Kayin, who had contented himself with offering produce of an inferior quality (Genesis 4,5). We also have an explicit verse in Deut. 12,11 speaking of כל מבחר נדריכם, “and all the choicest of your vows,” i.e. the choicest animals which you present to G’d to discharge your vows.” It is also written in Numbers 18,32: “when you raise up its best from it.” Even the wood used for kindling on the altar had to be the finest of its kind, was not allowed to contain worms (Maimonides, Hilchot Issurey Hamizbeach  6,2). Timber from buildings which had been demolished was not allowed to be used as wood for the woodpile of the altar. Only “new” wood, i.e. wood not previously used for something else was admissible.  Wood from all kinds of trees was permitted to be used except wood from olive trees or from vineyards. (Maimonides ibid.) This was out of ecological considerations  for the land of Israel.
    Similarly, the olive oil used for burning in the Menorah was of the choicest quality, only finely crushed pure olive oil being permitted; it had to be the kind which was free-flowing from the fruit after it was crushed. This is also why the sages disqualified oil into which a mouse had fallen as being unsuitable for lighting the candelabra in the Synagogue (Shulchan Aruch Yoreh Deyah 104,2).  In this connection the same source says that if the mouse had already disintegrated and there is a minimum of 60 times as much oil as residual animal tissue, such oil may be fit for eating, whereas if the remains of the mouse are identifiable one is to throw out the remains of the mouse and, provided there is 60 times as much oil left thereafter, the oil may be used without restriction. All the above is the practical expression of Maleachi 1,8: ”would you dare offer a blemished  beast to your governor, would he treat you with favour?”
    
    29,13. והקרבתם עולה אשה ריח ניחוח לה' פרים בני בקר שלושה עשר, “You shall offer a burnt-offering, a fire-offering, a sweet-smelling aroma to Hashem; thirteen young bulls;” the total number of bulls to be offered on the festival of Tabernacles was 70. They were offered in a descending order, i.e. 13 on the first day of the Holiday, 12 on the second day, 11 on the third day, etc. The total number served as a reminder of the fact that eventually all the seventy Gentile nations are destined to perish (see Rashi and ancient Midrashim); [the symbolic killing of these animals on the festival which foresees that event as we read in the portions from the prophets on that festival are most appropriate. Ed.] The original seventy nations, the ones enumerated after the Tower of Babel, each have a representative in the celestial regions as alluded to in Daniel 10,13, where the particular representative of the empire of Persia is singled out as well as the representative of the Greek Empire.
    You will observe that in this entire chapter dealing with these bulls being offered as burnt-offerings the customary expression “for Hashem” occurs only in connection with the first day of that festival. The reason for this is that if the Israelites appear to pay some kind of tribute to the 70 representatives of these nations by offering a bull in respect of each one of them this must be understood as something which only has the purpose of unifying all of them under the guidance of Hashem. All of them owe whatever power they appear to possess in history to the One and Only Original Cause, to Hashem.” This is also what our sages had in mind when they said in Sukkah 55: “woe to the nations of the world which are lost and which do not even realise the extent of their loss; as long as there was a Temple in Jerusalem the offerings brought on their behalf by the priests of the Jewish people would atone for them. Nowadays, after they have destroyed the Temple, what instrument of atonement do they have left?”
    This teaches that the seventy bulls which the Israelites offered on the festival of Tabernacles served as atonement for the seventy nations of the world. The offering (collectively speaking) was designed to unify the religiously pluralistic nations under the One and Only Creator at least to the extent that they see in Him the original Cause of the universe. 
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Pinchas 16. When the Torah writes: “you are to present a fire-offering,” this is reminiscent of Psalms 109,4: “they answer my love with accusations and I am all prayer.” This was Israel speaking to G’d about the 70 nations on whose behalf the Jewish priests offered sacrifices on Tabernacles. Instead of these nations appreciating this they heaped scorn upon us, hated and persecuted us.” A further Midrashic exegesis concerning the bulls of the festival (Tanchuma Pinchas 17): “the Torah taught us some good manners in connection with these sacrifices; if a person is entertained as a guest, the host will welcome him and offer him fowl on the first day. If the guest stays another day the host will serve him fish. If the guest still lingers the host will serve him vegetables on the third day of his (unexpected) stay. Eventually, he will serve him only inferior fare until the guest  realises that he has overstayed his welcome.”
    
    29,18. ומנחתם ונסכיהם, “and their respective gift-offerings plus the appropriate libations.” Taanit 2 draws attention to the different versions of the word נסך used by the Torah for these libations on different days. On the second day of the festival the Torah describes the libations as ונסכיהם, on the sixth day they are described as ונסכה, and on the seventh day the word כמשפט “as required” is spelled as כמשפטם. The extra three letters מ-י-ם spell the word מים suggesting that on the Sukkot festival the libations consisted of water in addition to the wine. 
    You must understand the reason why these allusions commenced only with the list of offerings and libations offered on the second day of the festival. The reason is that on the second day of creation the original waters were divided into the “upper” waters and the waters “below” (Genesis 1,6). It is clear therefore that “water” and its activities are appropriately featured on the “second” day. [In order to understand what follows you must know that in times when rain had not materialised at the expected times, efforts were made to intercede with G’d both in the Temple and in all parts of the country. The people chosen to represent their brethren in such prayers and fasts were known as אנשי מעמד. Ed.]. Our sages (Taanit 27) have explained that the אנשי המעמד, used to fast on Mondays (second day) in supplication for rain to materialise seeing that on that day of the week G’d dealt with the waters. They also fasted on Fridays, the day on which man had been created, seeing man cannot survive without water. The Torah had told us that as long as man was not yet on earth there had not been any rain, only mist rose from the earth (Genesis 2,6). When the Torah reports once more on the creation of man in the verse following (Genesis 2,7), this is an allusion that as of that time rain became necessary and materialised. If the last letter ם appears during the mussaph offerings of the seventh day of the festival Tabernacles this is because the seventh day symbolises completion of G’d’s universe.
    In Rosh Hashanah 16 the sages quote G’d as having said: “present libations of water for Me on the Sukkot festival in order that the rains you will receive will prove beneficial.” As a result of such instructions these libations of water were presented on the altar on every single day of the festival. This procedure is known as הלכה של משה מסיני, a decree going back to Sinai when Moses received the Torah. It is not spelled out in the written Torah. The procedure took place during the offering of the daily morning burnt-offering at the same time as the wine-libation was presented. It took place on the south west corner of the altar on the upper half of the altar. The entire amount of water descended to the hole known a “shittin.” The priests would take a bottle made of gold containing three login of water; the bottle was filled from the well known as מי שילוח. When the bearers would arrive at the Temple gate they would blow tekiah teruah tekiah. The priest would ascend the ramp to the altar and turn left after he had arriived at the top and pour the water out of the bottle into a bowl provided for the purpose. There were two such silver bowls. The one on the western side would be filled with the water, the one on the eastern side would be filled with the wine for the libation. Both bowls had two small holes just like the bottom of the nose. The hole in the vessel containing the water was thinner than that in the vessel containing the wine (as water is apt to flow more quickly than wine) so that both libations would arrive at their ultimate destination, the shittin, simultaneously. The priest about to pour the water would be told to raise his hand, seeing it had happened once that a priest poured the water on his feet and the people present pelted him with their citrons believing that he had done so for heretical reasons. [the Sadducees rejected the whole procedure as not written in the Torah. Ed.]
    Our sages in Sukkah 51 said that anyone who had not witnessed the joy with which this whole procedure of the preparation for the water-libation was celebrated has no idea what true joy is all about. The whole procedure was known as בית השואבה, based on Isaiah 12,3: “you will draw water amidst great joy.” The drawing of the requisite water took place on each of the seven nights (except Sabbath) of the festival for the needs of the daily burnt-offering.
    
    29,35. ביום השמיני עצרת תהיה לכם, “On the eighth day shall be a solemn assembly for you.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word עצרת means: “to be prevented from performing one’s regular work” (compare Chagigah 18).
    The Talmud Sukkah 48 states that this was a separate festival distinguished by seven features. It required a separate drawing of lots for who should present the offerings. It qualifies for a separate benediction sanctifying the day; the duty to perform the pilgrimage to Jerusalem applied to it, i.e. anyone who had not come for Sukkot due to whatever reason was obligated to come now if he could.  A special mussaph offering was dedicated to this day (as we read in the following verse). The Levites sang a special hymn saluting that festival. It is mentioned in our prayers as a separate festival. One does not dwell in the Sukkah on that day. If someone had buried a close relative on the eve of that day, its arrival cancels (most of) the remainder of the shloshim, the mandatory thirty days during which the mourner may not shave, etc. The day before, i.e. the one on which the dead was buried, is considered as equivalent to the mandatory seven days of intensive mourning. The festival of Sukkot itself is considered as equivalent  to a further seven days, and the eighth day being a separate festival is also considered as seven days so that at the conclusion of this day 21 of the thirty days of extended mourning are considered as having passed. The mourner needs to abstain from shaving only nine more days (compare Moed Katan 20).
    Our sages in Sukkah 47 draw attention to the wording פר, bull, in our verse as compared to the seven days previously on which a number of פרים were offered each day. They also draw attention to the word וביום which introduces the second to seventh day of Sukkot, whereas here the Torah merely writes ביום, without the connecting letter ו which would have linked this day conceptually to the ones preceding it. The significance of all this is that whereas on each of the seven days of the festival of Sukkot bulls (pl.) had been offered as a part of the mussaph offering, on this day only a single bull representing the Jewish people was offered. The missing letter ו at the beginning of the words ביום השמיני makes clear that this day had a significance all its own, is a separate festival.
    A Midrashic approach: the words ביום השמיני עצרת may be understood as “on the eighth day a ‘detention.’” G’d is supposed to have asked the Israelites to remain in Jerusalem an additional day as He wants to enjoy their company for another day. It is similar to a king who had entertained honoured guests for a whole week and who finds it difficult to part from them at the end of that period. He asks them to remain with him for an extra day.
    In the Talmud Sukkah 55 Abbaye states that whereas the 70 bulls presented on the altar during the seven preceding days were in respect of the seventy nations of the world, the single bull offered on the eighth day was in respect of the unique people, the Jewish people. The commandment by G’d to the Jewish people to offer this single bull on the eighth day is comparable to a king who had told all his servants to prepare a meal for him. At the end of that meal he said to his most intimate friend: “make for me a small dinner so that I can enjoy your presence on an intimate basis.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The word עצרת is a term describing the כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept known as “Israel.” The reason that this term is an apt description is that (in colloquial parlance: ‘this people is where the buck stops.’) In other words, were it not for the concept represented by the Jewish people the whole universe would lack meaning and purpose. It is also an expression denoting מלכות, authority, dominion, such as in Samuel I 9,17 זה יעצור בעמי, “this one will rule over My people” (G’d speaking). The word occurs in that meaning also in Rosh Hashanah 16 meaning “crown-prince,” i.e. the prince who will  assume the authority of the king. For the above-mentioned reasons Shemini Atzeret is a festival all by itself. We may see reflected in this day the practice that among the four species of plants with which we praise the Lord on the festival of Sukkot it is the etrog which represents the Jewish people and which is held separately, not being bound up with the other species. The Shemini Atzeret festival is perceived as the festival of the giving of the Torah which the Talmud always refers to as עצרת, meaning the festival of Shavuot, the recurrence of the calendar date on which the Torah was received. We find that the name עצרת is also applied by the Torah to the seventh day of Passover (Deut. 16,8) although that day is an integral part of the festival. In other words, the term appears in connection with all three pilgrimage holidays. What does all this mean? Just as the word שבת is applied by the Torah to the various festivals on various occasions to show that the כנסת ישראל is the “bride” of the Sabbath, [and that without this “bride” the entire legislation would be devoid of meaning, Ed.] so the word עצרת when used in connection with the festivals conveys the idea that the Jewish people, spiritually speaking, are the purpose of all these festivals. In kabbalistic terms, they are the יסוד [borrowed from the emanation by that name] “foundation,” without which the entire legislation of the festivals would lack meaning.
    David gave expression to this feeling when he composed the hymn of the Sabbath commencing with the words מזמור שיר ליום השבת, “a song to the Sabbath Day.” Naturally, he did not mean to address the “day,” [in fact this might have been idolatrous, Ed.] but he addressed the spiritual concept of כנסת ישראל which represents this emanation יסוד. When David similarly exalted למנצח על השמינית (Psalms 12,1) he referred to similar thoughts, i.e. calling כנסת ישראל as the concept which has not been upheld by its representatives on earth.
    It pays to consider the way G’d phrased the introduction to this special festival by saying עצרת תהיה לכם, similar to להיות לכם לאלו-הים, “in order to be your G’d.” The other festivals in this chapter were introduced as being לה', “for Hashem;” this one is being introduced as being “for you,” i.e. for the Jewish people. On the other hand, in Leviticus 23,36  the same day is described as עצרת היא, instead of as עצרת תהיה לכם. What is the difference? The explanation is that the words עצרת היא should be understood as עצרת של היא, not “it is a detention,” or some such, but it is the detention of היא, the word היא referring to the Sabbath, the companion of the “festival,” i.e. the Jewish people. The Sabbath is featured in a similar manner when the Torah wrote concerning it in Exodus 31,13: אות היא ביני וביניכם, “it is a sign between Me and between you.” When you consider this you will appreciate why the sages in the above-quoted Midrash referred to the meal on the eighth day as a “small” meal. It was an allusion to the letter ה in the word בהבראם, in Genesis 2,4 (compare author’s comments on this, our translation pages page 76. One must remember that the various letters in the word היא appear at different times in smaller than usual script to make these points) as well as the small letter י in the word תשי in Deut. 32,18, and the small letter א in the word ויקרא in Leviticus 1,1. This is the mystical dimension of Berachot 48 that “nine adults plus one minor (usually understood as under-aged individual) may be combined to form a quorum for the sake of making a מנין enabling congregational prayer or use of the word אלוקינו when reciting grace after meals.” [this view is not halachically accepted. Ed.] This is also the mystical dimension of the verse quoting David (in Psalms 37,25) which we recite near the conclusion of the grace after meals prayer נער הייתי גם זקנתי, “I used to be a minor, though in the interval I have come of age and become old,” a verse recited by the שר של העולם, the angel Mattatron who runs the universe on behalf of the Lord. The prophet Isaiah refers to the period of the first Temple as such a “minor” (i.e. peopled by spiritually immature Jews) when he said (Isaiah 28,10) זעיר שם, זעיר שם, “now a little here, now a little there.” (compare Yevamot 16 on the verse in Psalms 37,25).
    
    29,39. אלה תעשו לה' במועדיכם לבד מנדריכם ונדבותיכם, “these (offerings) you are to present for Hashem on your appointed festivals apart from your vows and free-will offerings, etc.” Actually, the Torah should have written: “your burnt-offerings and your peace-offerings” first, seeing these are offerings consisting of meat before switching to offerings which consist of meal-offerings and libations, instead of mentioning the most important offerings, i.e. the total (burnt) offerings only after the vows and free-will offerings. After all, our sages in Yuma 34 are specific about the burnt-offering always preceding other offerings and being the first offering presented on the altar each morning. The Torah concluded its list with the peace-offerings as the purpose of these offerings is להשלים המדות, “to strive to perfect one’s character traits” (compare author’s comments on Genesis 46,1). Moreover, it is the custom for the Torah whenever it enumerates a number of different offerings to conclude with the “peace-offerings.” Furthermore the greatest and concluding blessing of the priests is the blessing of peace, i.e. שלום. This then is the reason why here too the “peace-offerings” are mentioned last.
    Just as the tetragram had been associated with these offerings at the beginning of the chapter, the Torah also concludes with mentioning the fact that these offerings are addressed to Hashem. The Torah wishes to underline that all the offerings must always be addressed to this attribute and none other. The reason that the seventy bulls are mentioned between the beginning and the end of our chapter is to remind us that although they were offered on behalf of the seventy nations who are under the immediate care of their celestial representatives, the offerings were all addressed to the attribute Hashem, not to any underlings, angels, etc. The blessings which humanity enjoys from celestial sources are due to the seventy bulls offered to Hashem on behalf of the nations by the priests in the Holy Temple in Jerusalem. Each “force” in the terrestrial world must recognise that there is a “force” above it, until eventually the highest “force” Hashem is reached. This is the meaning of Kohelet 5,7: “for there is One higher than high Who watches and there are high ones above them.”
    
   ראשי  המטות
    
    
    
    
    
    
   ירא את ה' בני ומלך, עם שונים אל תתערב, “Fear the Lord my son and the king, do not associate with those who keep changing” (Proverbs 24,21). In this verse Solomon warns man to fear the Lord, Hashem, first and foremost, and to fear the mortal king only as someone subordinate to Hashem. He applies the same term יראה, “fear, awe,” as applicable to man’s relations with higher authority be it celestial or terrestrial. The message is: “just as you must fear the Lord Who is everywhere at all times and you must abstain from sin because you know you are being watched although you cannot see the One Who watches you, so you must be in awe of the terrestrial king even when he is not present seeing he can decree death upon you even when he personally has not seen you sin.” It is simply not possible for a mortal king to be in all parts of his domain all the time. Instead of taking advantage of his temporary absence to violate his laws you must engrave in your heart the appropriate degree of awe and fear to help you not to transgress his laws. Simply remember that this is the way you relate to the supreme authority whom you cannot see but whose eye is upon you all the time.
    “Do not associate with the ones who keep changing” This is a warning not to display more fear for the visible terrestrial king (because he is visible) than for the invisible celestial king in the event the decrees of the celestial king and those of the terrestrial king are in conflict with one another. There are many people who are concerned first and foremost with what they perceive to be the danger from the local authority. They fear for their lives perceiving the power of terrestrial authority to be immediate and that of G’d to be relatively remote. Solomon warns against such perceptions and conduct based on such faulty perceptions. Seeing that G’d is not only the ultimate authority of the private citizen but also that of the terrestrial king it would be foolish to be more afraid of mortal kings than of immortal G’d. The reason that Solomon interposed the word בני, “my son,” between the word Hashem and the word king, is to emphasise the difference between the two although he had told you first to relate with “fear” to both of them. If not for this consideration, Solomon should have written: בני ירא את ה' ומלך, as he does in other similar instances when the verse commences with the word בני. The difference between G’d and a mortal king is as great as the difference between day and night.
    The basic message of our verse is that fear of the terrestrial authority in the guise of a king is something absolutely necessary as otherwise earth would be in a state of chaos, anarchy. This is also why our sages (Avot 3,2) have instructed us to pray for the well being of the government (any government) as without such a government, i.e. legally appointed authority, the world would revert to tohu vavohu and people would tear each other apart as a daily occurrence.
    Nonetheless, the even more important kind of fear without which the terrestrial universe would not endure is the fear vis-a-vis Hashem, the ultimate authority in the universe. The lives of all earthly kings are in His hands and terrestrial power is only delegated power. In order to remind us of all this, Solomon said in Kohelet 8,2: “I counsel you: ‘obey the king’s command and that in the manner of an oath to G’d.’” 
    Concerning the whole subject of how to relate to imposed authority Solomon means that he views it as important to obey the king’s laws because a king is someone who perceives himself as duty bound to observe the KING’S command. When the terrestrial king fails to honour his king’s laws, i.e. no longer views himself as bound by G’d’s laws, his subjects’ obligation to obey him is no longer valid. Sinaitic law which we accepted by means of a solemn oath precedes and therefore overrides legislation by any terrestrial king. 
    The Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah 33,6) understands the verse we quoted from Kohelet as follows: “I am obligated to obey the decrees of the Gentile nations who rule over me (Israel in the Diaspora) as far as their imposing taxes, head-duties, etc., is concerned. However, על דברת שבועת אלו-הים, concerning a matter which is an obligation by oath vis-a-vis G’d, I am not required to obey the king’s laws.” This is why we find that Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah said to Nevuchadnezzar (Daniel 3,16) “behold we are not concerned about this matter; behold there is a G’d Whom we worship- He is able to save us.” The verse had commenced with: “Shadrach, Mishach, and Abed nego” (the Chaldaen names of Chanayah, Mishael and Azaryah) answered the king: O Nevuchadnezzar, we are not concerned, etc.” Why would the three men have been described first as answering the “king”, when in the same breath they address him by his title, i.e. as Nevuchadnezzar? Surely either one of these descriptions is enough! The fact is that they meant: “you are indeed the king over us concerning matters of taxes, etc.” But when you presume to command us to worship idols you are overstepping your authority seeing we cannot violate an oath we have taken hundreds of years before you ever were king, i.e. the oath we took at Mount Sinai.” This is the meaning of ועל דברת שבועת אלו-הים in the verse from Proverbs which we quoted at the outset.
    
    It is a well known fact that the whole subject matter of an oath is related to fear of and reverence for the Lord. Man is not supposed to utter the name of the Lord even in an oath which testifies to the truth, much less so in an oath in which he perjures himself by using the name of the Lord. It happened once (Bamidbar Rabbah 22,1) during the reign of King Yannai, that this king who had ten thousand towns under his control lost them all (they were destroyed) due to an oath which was true. How was this possible? A person would say to his friend: “I swear by G’d that I will go to a certain place and eat such and such.” The people in these towns were in the habit of confirming all their intentions by using such a formula involving the name of the Lord.  Although these people all lived up to the undertakings they had made, their towns were ruined as they should not have involved the name of the Lord unnecessarily. If this is what happens to people to swear truthfully, we can imagine what must be in store for people who swear falsely. The story teaches how very careful we must be not to render a needless oath. There is no sin as great as that of swearing falsely or merely using the name of the Lord in an unnecessary oath. Seeing that the Torah describes man’s nature as evil from birth (Genesis 8,21) and as a result he tends to be angry a lot, his anger often causes him to swear oaths about what he will not do. The Torah, in its customary manner of providing the remedy before the disease has struck, here introduces the legislation of oaths and vows  and how such can be annulled by either one expert or three ordinary adults.
    
    30,2. וידבר משה אל ראשי המטות לבני ישראל לאמור: זה הדבר אשר צוה ה', “Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of the Children of Israel to say: ‘this is the thing that Lord has said.’” According to the plain meaning of the text the words לבני ישראל mean that the leaders of the tribes are to convey this legislation to the Children of Israel.
    However, our sages in Nedarim 78 explained that the dual wording “the heads of the tribes”, followed by “the Children of Israel,” implies that either a single expert or a quorum of three ordinary men are authorised to annul vows under certain conditions. The reason this portion has been recorded immediately after the chapter dealing with the mussaph offerings on the festivals is that at the conclusion of that chapter (verse 39) the Torah had mentioned the vows that are generally brought as gifts to the Lord on most of these festivals when the owner of the animals vowed is in Jerusalem on his pilgrimage. This is also the reason why in our verse the Torah adds אשר צוה ה', “which the Lord has commanded;” the Torah reminds us that apart from vows which are made in honour of Hashem there are also others of a more profane nature; one must fulfill all one’s undertakings regardless whether this is an undertaking (vow) made to G’d or to man. Another reason for these additional words “which the Lord has commanded,” is that just as sanctifying the Holidays requires calendar expertise so dissolving a vow also requires expertise if it is performed by a single individual.
    
    30,3. איש כי ידור נדר לה', “when a man vows a vow unto the Lord;” according to the plain meaning of these words the expression “a vow unto the Lord,” does not mean that the person making such a vow or swearing such an oath had to use the name of the Lord when making his undertaking, but it means that even if he merely says “I vow to do a certain thing,” or “I vow not to do a certain thing,” such statements are binding and anyone violating them is committing a major sin unless said vow or oath had been legally annulled or dissolved. In order to make this point plain, the Torah did not write in connection with swearing an oath: או השבע שבועה לה', but merely או השבע שבועה, deliberately refraining from bringing the name “Hashem” into the example described. If you were to ask why the word  לה'is written in connection with נדר at all, the reason is to teach that if one makes a vow concerning matters which belong to G’d anyway, that legally speaking such a vow is valid and failing to fulfill it is a sin. For example: if someone were to declare that “eating  unleavened bread on the night of the Passover is forbidden for me by reason of this vow,” although he is in no position to cancel G’d’s commandments and we might have thought that his words had no legal standing at all, the Torah reminds you that it has. Unless such a person will have such a vow annulled he is punishable if he honours it. This is also why our sages say on that same folio in Nedarim that the words נדר לה' teach that regardless of whether such a vow involves a commandment or something merely permitted but not mandatory, it is legally valid. 
    The difference between a “vow” and an “oath” may be understood as follows: An oath involving a Biblical commandment is legally completely ineffective (though use of the Lord’s name in it is a cardinal sin regardless). If someone swears not to honour a certain law of the Torah, say that he swears not to lay phylacteries, he will receive 39 lashes in respect of a useless oath. The legal difference between these two similar sounding undertakings is that in an undertaking known as “vow,” the person undertaking it puts a certain object (in our example unleavened bread) out of bounds for himself. This is legally possible. In the example of the oath not to lay phylacteries, he does not place an object out of bounds but he places himself out of bounds concerning such objects. Seeing that as a Jew his obligation to lay phylacteries has preceded his present oath, i.e. his person has been predestined to lay phylacteries by a covenant dating back to Sinai, he cannot now arbitrarily cancel that covenant.
    Maimonides Hilchot Nedarim 3,7 points out that the difference between vows on the one hand and oaths on the other is reflected in the wording of the Torah in Leviticus 5,4 where the Torah writes: נפש כי תשבע לבטא בשפתים להרע או להיטיב, “a person who swears an oath with the lips to either deny himself something or to indulge in something, etc.” Maimonides understands the word להרע as referring to the person himself, i.e. intransitively [quite extraordinary grammatically, Ed.], whereas the expression להיטיב is also understood intransitively i.e. that he wants to indulge himself and confirms his intention by means of a vow. In the first instance, a suitable example would be that he plans to deny himself food or drink on a certain day, or he wishes to indulge in certain foods or drink on that day i.e. something which he is at liberty to do, but is not obliged to do. 
    When the Torah discusses a vow rather than an oath, the wording is ככל היוצא מפיו יעשה he must act in accordance with everything that has come out of his mouth (verse 3 in our chapter here). In other words, the vow is valid regardless of whether it pertained to something mandatory or to something only permissible but not mandatory. This also explains the choice of the word איש with which the Torah describes the person initiating the vow, whereas in Leviticus such a person is describes as נפש “a person,“ i.e. it is immaterial if he is a grown up or a minor. When, in our situation, the person who made the vow is a male 12 years and over or a female 11 years and over they were examined as to whether they understand what is implied by their making such a vow. If they are shown to be mentally mature, their vows are valid, if not, their vows are not valid. If either of them has reached biological maturity, usually 13 years of age in the case of a boy and 12 years of age in the case of a girl, their vows are valid without mental examination. The same applies if such biological minors made over property to the Temple treasury (Maimonides Hilchot Nedarim 11,1). If they can be seen to know the full impact of what they are doing they need only be 12 or 11 years old respectively to be legally liable for their words. This ruling is known as halachah leMoshe miSinai, i.e. as Sinaitic in origin, not spelled out in detail in the written Torah, and the logic for this distinction not having being revealed to us.
    In the Talmud Temurah 2, the basis for this ruling is attributed to Leviticus 27,2 where the Torah writes איש כי יפליא נדר, וג'. The apparently superfluous and unusual word יפליא is regarded as the basis for a biological minor being held liable for vows he pronounced under the circumstances discussed earlier.
    Seeing that, as we explained, the vow is applicable equally to matters which are permissible and matters which are mandatory, when a person vowed not to eat on the Sabbath (by declaring the food as out of bounds to him on that day) he will have to fast as penance for having violated the commandment to “enjoy” the Sabbath, i.e. by means of eating more frequently and better quality food on it than on weekdays. The same does not apply when the same person used the formula of an oath to deny himself food on the Sabbath, as, seeing such an oath would be legally invalid, keeping it has no consequences regarding atoning for his conduct by fasting afterwards as a sign of penance. If someone vowed that food is out of bounds to him on a weekday he does not have to fast as penance if he observed his vow as there is no commandment to eat on those days. If he vowed that food is out of bounds for him on Chanukah or New Moon, days which have the status of a holiday by rabbinical decree only, he needs to fast for having violated the proper observance of such a day, seeing that his vow was valid and as a result he violated a rabbinical decree. Some halachic authorities hold that in the examples quoted last the person who made the vow may defer observing it until after the New Moon, (assuming he had specified a certain day of the week for his vow, being unaware at that time that that day would coincide with New Moon). There are opinions that the status of New Moon as a quasi holiday is Biblical rather than rabbinical and therefore the same rule applies as if he had vowed that food is out of bounds for him on the Sabbath. [regarding the validity of vows when they conflict with Sabbath legislation, for instance, some authorities hold that this is restricted only to vows whose fulfillment involves passivity, such as abstaining from food on the Sabbath, not when fulfillment involves an activity which violates the Sabbath (Radbaz 5 on Maimonides Nedarim 3,9).
    This is reflected in Taanit 12 that if a person vows to fast (place food outside his domain) every Monday and Thursday of the year and it happens that on one or more of these days there occurs a festival listed in the Megillat Taanit as such, if he made the vow before the Rabbis instituted this festival his vow overrides it. If the Rabbis had decreed such a festival prior to his having made his private vow, the rabbinical decree overrides, i.e. automatically invalidates the vow of the private individual. Although this ruling appears to contradict what we said previously regarding Biblical laws which certainly preceded any vow made by an individual, the reason for the ruling in Taanit is that the sages saw the need to reinforce their decrees and to lend it weight precisely because people might say that such laws are “only” rabbinical and carry less authority. (Maimonides concurs in Hilchot Nedarim 3,9)
    Some authorities understand the expression ידחה in the Talmud which we translated as “postponing applicability of one’s vow,” to mean that such a person should consult with a scholar or Bet Din to have his vow set aside altogether seeing he had based it on a mistaken premise (Nachmanides end of chapter 9 of Nedarim).
    If a person employed the formula usually used to pronounce an oath in order to make a vow, or vice versa, the sages in the Jerusalem Talmud are divided in their opinions as to the respective validity of such undertakings when they conflict with other existing commitments which this person is bound by. The sages there rule that the most stringent interpretation of either oath or vow is applied in such cases simultaneously.
    Let us turn to a practical example of what we just said: If someone utters an oath or vow concerning something he was obligated to either do or refrain from doing (as the case may be) he is treated as if he had sworn an oath to cancel a decree from the Torah as being applicable to him. As a result he is subject to the penalty of receiving 39 lashes. This penalty is applied even if the prohibition violated was only rabbinical such as drinking wine which was left uncovered so that a Gentile may have touched it while no Jew was watching. Another example would be if someone had vowed to eat the product of a grapevine to which another species of fruit had been grafted in the Diaspora by Gentiles (compare Maimonides Hilchot Maachalot Assurot 10,8). A third example is eating a mixture of fowl and milk, something forbidden “only” by rabbinical decree (Maimonides Hilchot Maachalot Assurot 9,4).
    Consider further  that it is forbidden to climb a tree on New Year’s Day to fulfill the commandment of blowing the shofar when the only shofar available is located on such tree. The Rabbis forbade climbing trees on Sabbaths or Holidays (Rosh Hashanah 32). This poses the problem of fulfillment of a Biblical commandment which preceded a rabbinical decree not being possible without violating such rabbinical decree. This brings us to our verse above. When we read in verse 3 of our chapter here about someone who “swears an oath to establish a prohibition upon himself, that he shall not desecrate his word,” our sages in Sifri 153 state  that this refers to something which was permitted to the individual swearing the oath prior to his swearing this oath. If he had sworn an oath intending to permit something for himself which was forbidden to him by Jewish law, the oath most certainly is invalid and the Torah’s warning not to desecrate his personal word does not apply.
    If someone overhears a second person swearing an oath or making a vow or inviting bystanders to join him and he wishes same to apply to himself also, he only has to say אמן in answer to what he heard the first party say. If the party who said אמן violates said oath or vow he is as guilty as if he himself had formulated it in the first place. Not only that, but even if the person formulating the vow or oath was a minor or a Gentile, the word אמן by the Jew who overheard him obligates him to fulfill the terms of such a vow or oath (Maimonides Hilchot Shevuot 2, 1-2). The above does not only apply to the word אמן, but to other words having a similar meaning such as the word כן, “yes., or if he said: “this oath obligates me.” If the part formulating the oath had not used the tetragram as the deity he swears by but one of the better known substitutes of the tetragram such as “the one who is known as bestowing grace,” or: “the One who is merciful,” and certainly other names of G’d such as elohim, adonay, etc., the oath is valid. Even if the party formulating the oath had merely said: “cursed be anyone who does such and such a thing,” this is considered a form of oath and expressing agreement with the party who said this makes one a party to such a curse. In other words, extreme caution is advised so as to avoid being implicated and obligated by an oath or vow initiated by a third party.
    If someone intended that certain foods or drinks should be forbidden for him as if he had uttered an oath concerning them, this has no legal implication as long as he had not uttered the relevant words. This is why he Torah, when introducing the subject of oaths in Leviticus 5,4 uses the expression לבטא בשפתים “to give expression with one’s lips.” Resolutions which are made only with the heart are not legally binding. The same rule applies if someone unconsciously verbalises an oath he had no intention of swearing. Seeing it does not reflect what was in his heart it has no legal validity An example would be that a person wanted to vow not to accept invitations to eat at the house of a certain person called Reuven. When he verbalised this vow he said “Shimon” instead of “Reuven.” Seeing this was a slip of the tongue, his vow is disregarded. Similarly, when someone meant to deny himself wheat bread on oath but mentioned barley by mistake he is allowed to eat both kinds of bread seeing the oath is not valid as what he said did not correspond to what he had in mind. 
    What applies to oaths also applies to vows, i.e. heart and mouth must be in tandem. However, this rule does not apply if one had said אמן confirming someone else’s vow or oath. If that third party comes to a judge claiming he had made a slip of the tongue and what he said was not what he meant, the person who said אמן cannot be absolved from his oath as what he had said אמן to had corresponded to what he thought he said אמן to. If he violates the oath he heard the other party utter he will receive 39 lashes though the original party is not liable to punishment for violating it.
    If someone who has uttered a legally valid vow wishes to retract as he had second thoughts he may do so only during the few moments it takes to say the words שלום עליך רבי, “welcome to you my teacher.” If, during this period of time, he says “this is not an oath,” or words to that effect but brief, his oath is completely invalidated as it is the same as if he had erred in the formula of the oath when he uttered it. Maimonides confirms this in Hilchot Shevuot chapter 2.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Mattot 1. On the words: איש כי ידור נדר לה' the Midrash quotes G’d as saying to the Israelites: ‘be careful before making a vow not to violate it, as if someone violates a vow he will eventually violate his oaths also.’ If that were to happen he is as if he had denied G’d and all aspects of the Jewish religion and there is no forgiveness for this as the Torah has told us in Exodus 20,7 that G’d will not completely exonerate anyone who has used His name in vain. We have another verse on this subject in Jeremiah 4,2: “and swear ‘as the Lord lives;’” G’d said to the people: “do not think that it is permissible to utter such a kind of oath as the prophet quotes.” There is a general prohibition of swearing an oath involving the name of G’d unless the people doing so possess the following characteristics: described in Deut. 10,20 as: “you shall revere the Lord your G’d to serve Him and to cling to Him--and to swear in His name.” Only when you have fulfilled the conditions set out in the first half of this verse are you allowed to swear an oath using the name of the Lord.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word ידור in the line איש כי ידור נדר is related to דירה, “dwelling.” The word לה' means that the vow is directed to the Lord Who is the דירתו של עולם, “the dwelling of the universe,” the G’d Who created His world and the seven celestial regions emanating from there. Anyone fulfilling his vows is as if he thereby confirms his belief in this dwelling of the Lord in those regions, whereas anyone defaulting on his vows is as if he denied such beliefs. The former is assured that his soul will return to that dwelling, whereas the ones failing to honour their vows will be removed from those domains permanently The word נדר alludes to a certain thing and its opposite, i.e. the establishment of a dwelling or the uprooting of it. [according to Rabbi Chavell the dagesh in the letter ד permits it to be read as if the word were ינדור, derived from בינה. If one employs one’s בינה one establishes a claim to a permanent dwelling in the celestial spheres for oneself, i.e. within these seven celestial regions. If one fails to so one achieves the reverse.]
    The same is true of people who honour their oaths or violate them. If they honour them they enter the domain of these seven celestial dwellings; if not, they forfeit that entitlement. The word שבועה is a clear allusion to these seven regions.
    It is well to note how Moses phrased this legislation when he commenced with זה הדבר אשר צוה ה'. He continues with איש כי ידור נדר לה', instead of merely saying איש כי ידור נדר אליו, repeating the word לה' unnecessarily. Moses had to repeat that word to allude to the power of the vow which is greater, i.e. above that of the שבועה, oath, a word limited to “seven” as it is derived from the word שבעה, seven, and subject to its limitations. Seeing that the vow possesses such a superior power it applies even to mandatory commandments and when one pronounces such a vow  the wording of which overrides such a commandment  this is not as if one had not said anything at all as is the case when one pronounces an oath the wording of which overrides such a commandment. The whole Torah legislation, i.e. the מצות, are products of the regions within these seven celestial regions They represent the seven different types of voices (sounds) the Israelites heard during the giving of the Torah as we explained in our commentary on Exodus 20,1. [compare our translation pages 1071-1073. Ed.] This also accounts for the fact that the preposition used by the Torah for the word שבועה, oath, is invariably the preposition ב, such as אשר נשבעת להם בך, (Exodus 32,13); בי נשבעתי (Genesis 22,16) or ובשמו תשבע (Deut. 6,13). נשבע ה' בימינו (Isaiah 62,8) “The Lord swore by His right hand,” Seeing that we learned in Nazir 3 that if someone says ימין [i.e. “by my right”] this is a form of oath, the idea of “swearing an oath” is associated with the party declaring it is a partner of the concept of the seven, שבעה, celestial regions and what they represent.
    The word נדר, vow, on the other hand, is always associated with the preposition ל, pointing at something above the object or party referred to by the one making the vow. We have Psalms 132,2 נדר לאביר יעקב, or here איש כי ידור נדר לה', or in Psalms 24,1: לה' הארץ ומלואה. When you appreciate what we have just pointed out you will understand the meaning of Sifri Mattot 153 that whereas when someone renders an oath he swears by the person of the king, when he vows a vow he swears by the life of the king. The essence of the king is his life, in the case of the Lord, His eternal life. The Sifri there points to Elisha saying to Elijah “by the life of the Lord and the life of your soul, I will not abandon you,” as an indication that the expression בחיי is the ultimate statement of this sort (Kings II 2,7).
   לא יחל דברו, “he must not desecrate his word.” The word is derived from חול, not to profane his word. Our sages explain this wording to mean that whereas the person who made the vow must not “profane,” it, others (three laymen or an expert) may do so (Chagigah 10). The annulment of a vow is possible if the person regrets what he vowed because he had not realised its full implications. He tells the court that had he known at the time he made the vow what he knows at that moment he would never have made the vow in the first place (compare Maimonides Hilchot Shevuot  6,5). Having said this the lay judges or the expert will release him from his vow. The legal basis for this is that the vow is presumed to have been erroneous from the start and hence never valid.
    A person is not permitted to cancel his own oath, his own vow, or even the vow of his wife on his own (without recourse to such a tribunal). The reason the husband cannot release his wife from her vows is that legally she is considered as part of him, i.e. אשתו כגופו. The inability of the husband to cancel his wife’s vow applies only when the husband was acting as the solitary expert. A husband is allowed to be part of a quorum of three people who listen to the wife state that had she known what her vow entailed she would never have made the vow in the first place. No one, even a “so-called” expert, may annul a vow single-handedly if there is a scholar of greater reputation available locally. Neither may a scholar take such a decision in the presence of his teacher (even if he has surpassed the teacher in knowledge), unless his teacher has specifically given him permission to do so (Maimondes Hilchot Shevuot 6,3).
   ככל היוצא מפיו יעשה, “in accordance with whatever has come out of his mouth he shall do.” Nedarim 3 queries the need for this sentence seeing the Torah had already written that the person concerned must not profane his word. Answer: the Torah here teaches that a formula for vows which does not correspond exactly to the standard formula, i.e. “I vow to do such and such” is nonetheless binding on the party announcing an undertaking. The same applies to oaths. The Talmud elaborates; “if someone in the habit of mispronouncing a certain word due to a hare-lip  lived in a town where they pronounce the word שבועה as מומתא and similar situations, then not only is the word מומתא accepted as binding for him, but even the normal distortion of that word which one could expect from a person with a speech defect is also binding upon him. 
    The general rule is that in determining the validity of a vow or oath we are guided by the intention of the one making it not by the standard phonetic formula. All of this we derive from the additional words ככל היוצא מפיו יעשה. What matters is that he had resolved in his heart to do the thing he vowed, or to fail to do the thing he forbade himself on oath. This is so even if the name of the Lord or a substitute had not been uttered. If the person concerned violated his undertaking he is guilty of perjury. All of this is in order to lend additional weight to the seriousness of the sin of perjury, not honouring one’s undertaking.
    Nonetheless, there is a difference between not honouring an oath in which the name of the Lord had not been mentioned in that the guilty party does not receive 39 lashes and does not have to bring the sacrifice stipulated by the Torah for his sin (Maimonides Hilchot Shevuot 2,4).
    Our sages in Chagigah 10 state that the whole legislation of annulling an oath or vow is “suspended in thin air,” i.e. is not anchored in definitive language in the written Torah. It is all based on our oral tradition This is the reason that the rabbis accepted the principle that both oath and vow are subject to retroactive annulment if the party concerned expresses regret. The reason that the Torah (oral) provided an escape hatch not found in the written Torah is that there are circumstances in life when a person is under severe emotional strain as a result of which he says things which he normally would not have said. The oral Torah makes allowance for this; the written Torah does not, as if it had the incidence of carelessly uttered oaths and vows would multiply. Not only that, if the party was aware that such vows could be annulled, he would add a rider while making a vow due to his anger that the procedure of annulling a vow should not apply to his vow. If he were to do this it would be impossible to release him from his foolish utterance unless he had first expressed regret at having added such a rider to his vow. Only after the scholar had released him from the rider he had added, would he then be able to turn to the same or some other scholar explaining that he was also sorry he had made the actual vow seeing he had not been aware of all that this entailed at the time he made the vow. 
    The exception to all this is if the vow was made in public. Maimonides Hilchot Shevuot 6,8 states that anyone swearing an oath in public can never be absolved from his oath. The definition of “in public” is in the presence of three people. This definition of the word רבים as “public,” is derived from the legislation of the זבה, a woman afflicted with involuntary vaginal discharge of blood. The Torah in Leviticus 15,25 speaks of this condition continuing for ימים רבים, “many days.” Seeing that the word ימים always means a minimum of two days, the additional word רבים is taken to mean three days or more (in the third chapter of Shevuot 29). 
    The Talmud quotes Moses as telling the Israelites: “know that I do not make you undertake an oath merely on my own behalf but also on behalf of G’d.” The Talmud asks why Moses had to say this? Why did he not merely say that they undertook this oath in his own presence? The answer given there is that he meant in the presence of G’d, His celestial tribunal, and himself. This was considered a public oath. Moses warned the Israelites that such a public oath could never be retracted. The only reason that Moses had to be part of this procedure was that he acted as the agent of the Jewish people vis-a-vis heaven.
    When the sages said that if someone swears a public oath such an oath can never be abolished this is so only when the annulment is not requested in order for the party bound by the oath to perform a commandment which he could not perform unless he had been released from his oath. This applies particularly to a commandment from which the community of the whole benefits, such as the writing of a Torah scroll. If the party bound by an oath not to write a Torah scroll was the foremost scribe in his town, it is possible to release him from such an oath (according to the view of Rabbeinu Tam in Gittin 36, Tossaphot). Maimonides in Hilchot Shevuot 6,8-9 agrees with this. He phrases this as follows: “if one swears an oath in public or vows a vow in public such undertakings can never be annulled except for the performance of a commandment. How does this work in practice?” Say, a person had sworn publicly not to accept any benefit from a certain third party forever, and a situation arose when the people of his city needed a Mohel  to perform the rites of circumcision for the child of the third party involved in that oath, the procedure outlined earlier for releasing someone from his oath may be invoked. The person who was under oath not to act as Mohel may perform the task, receive his payment even from the people concerning whom he had sworn not to accept any benefits. Alternatively, if the one who swore the oath was a ritual slaughterer at a time when he was not the only one in his town, and the other ritual slaughterer, שוחט, had become incapacitated so that the whole town would not have any meat unless the first שוחט was released from his oath, he can be released according to the standard formula we described. He is then also allowed to accept payment for the services he rendered. It would be an unnecessary harshness to release the party for the performance of only this particular commandment. 
    Rashi does not agree that the only commandment which would cause this person to be able to be released from his oath is a commandment which no one else in that town could fulfill except him. Rashi believes that the expression in the Talmud על דעת רבים, which we translated as “in public,” does not mean that but means that he did so with the consent of the people who were witness to such an oath. Seeing that the people at large would not agree to someone committing himself on oath to a lifestyle that interferes with mitzvah-performance, they may be viewed as having disagreed concerning matters involving the performance of commandments by the person swearing the oath. As a result of their attitude the person qualifies to have his oath dissolved for the sake of performing any commandment. (compare Rashi Makkot 16). Nachmanides agrees with Rashi that even an oath contracted in public is subject to annulment for the sake of any commandment being performed thereby.
    
    30,4. ואשה כי תדור, “and if a woman makes a vow, etc.”  A female of twelve years and over is called אשה, “a woman.” Her vows and oaths are legally valid. If she is between 11 and 12 years of age she is presumed to be a minor though she is examined if she understands the implication of a vow or an oath. If she does, she is subject to the same rules as a male between the ages of 12 and thirteen. If she is less than eleven years old she is a minor in all respects of the law. Her pronouncements have no legal standing whatever. If a female is over 12 years of age or a male over 13 years of age their vows or oaths are legally binding even if they did not know to whom [i.e. that this involves an undertaking vis-a vis G’d. Ed.] they made such commitments (Maimonides Hilchot Nedarim 11,1-3).
    This entire paragraph reveals many important laws concerning vows and oaths in very few words. The legal status of women concerning vows may be divided into four categories: 1) A נערה, girl between the age of 12-12 years and six months; 2) An ארוסה, a girl betrothed but not yet having moved in with her husband. 3) A married woman (after חופה); 4) A widow. When a נערה has a father she remains under his legal control and her father can invalidate her vows on the day he hears about them but not later. The logic behind this is that she would have attached a mental rider to her vow that her father would approve of it. If she finds that she was mistaken and her father objected upon hearing of it, her vow was never valid in the first place. The same logic does not apply to vows undertaken by a male of corresponding age. Just as the father is legally empowered to sell the services of his daughter to a stranger, an entitlement which does not extend to selling the services of his son, so the father is also legally entitled to countermand vows made by a daughter not yet fully of age.
    When such a נערה has attained the age of 12 years and six months she is considered adult in all legal respects and no longer under her father’s legal control (Niddah 47). She is fully responsible for all her vows and oaths, the same as a widowed woman or a divorcee. The words of verse 10: כל אשר אסרה על נפשה יקום עליה, “everything she has prohibited upon herself- shall remain upon her,” apply to such a 12 and a half year old single girl. If, while under the age limit, she made a vow and her father annulled it on the day he heard of it, it is as invalid as if it had never been uttered. When the Torah adds the words וה' יסלח לה, that “the Lord will forgive her,” the sages reasoned that these words are applicable when the girl who had made the vow is in need of forgiveness, such as when she violated her vow being unaware that her father had already canceled it (Niddah 47). Obviously, if someone commits what he or she perceives to be a violation of G’d’s law they are in need of forgiveness even if technically, for reasons unknown to them they did not commit a sin.
    As to the woman who has been betrothed. The Torah speaks here about a woman who prior to her betrothal made a vow or swore an oath and who enters the first stage of her marriage with such vows still valid. The Torah, by employing the words, ואם היו תהיה לאיש indicates that the girl (under 12 and a half years old) has not yet completely left her father’s domain and also has not yet come under the domain of her husband concerning his interest in the matter. Her father and husband-to-be must both annul her vows in order for such an annulment to be legally valid. This is what we learned in Nedarim 66 seeing that we presume that when she made the vow she mentally resolved that it would be with the approval of both her father and her husband-to-be. Both her father and her husband-to-be have to hear it on the same day in order for both of them together to be able to annul it. The Talmud adds, that if the fiance of the betrothed girl dies before she reaches the age of maturity and she had moved into her husband’s home (after חופה), she reverts to her father’s domain and he can cancel her vows as if she had made them before she was married. If her father died prior to her having become fully married, (חופה), her husband cannot annul her vows until after she is fully married to him (Maimonides Hilchot Nedarim 11,10).
    
    30,8. ושמע אישה...והחריש לה, “and her husband hears of it (her vow) and remains silent concerning it;” the word אישה in this verse means הארוס שלה, her husband-to-be, fiance who gave her קידושין).
    30,9. ואם ביום שמוע אישה אותה ...וה' יסלח לה, “and if on the day her husband hears about it ..he revokes it, etc.” the verse speaks about a situation when the father of the girl has already made use of his right to annul her vow. Under such circumstances her husband has the right to complete the annulment commenced in part by her father. This is why the Torah first wrote the additional words בנעוריה בית אביה, “while she was not of age and in her father’s house.” If the (wife) in question had made vows (in her father’s house while he was alive) prior to her becoming betrothed to her husband, her husband cannot revoke them. This is the meaning of Nedarim 72 that the husband cannot revoke vows made by his wife before she became betrothed to him, seeing that the principle that she automatically presumes her husband’s consent to such a vow would not have applied while she did not even know who her husband was going to be. 
    This assumption that vows are made on the understanding that both father and husband do not object is the only reason why a vow, i.e. an undertaking of  Biblical force can be revoked by a husband invoking only rabbinical force. The example we have in mind is a twelve-year old who is fatherless but mature enough to understand the meaning of her vows who has been given in marriage to her husband by her mother.
    The situation of a widowed woman we mentioned as category 4 above refers only to a woman who became a widow after having been fully married (חופה), i.e. after having lived with her husband. Her status, as well as that of a divorcee, is that she had no longer been under the authority of her father at all. Seeing that the authority of her father had  ceased completely after she had received חופה, the final stage of becoming married, her father will not again have any authority over her regardless of her age. This also proves that the institution of חופה is Biblical in its legal force, and that once there had been חופה, if her husband is a priest he must defile himself at her burial, is entitled to inherit her, and is exclusively entitled to revoke her vows [inasmuch as they affect him. Ed.] 
    
    30,14. כל נדר וכל שבועת אסר לענות נפש, “any vow or oath which results in a personal affliction, etc.” Here the Torah teaches that the fact that  the Torah has granted the husband of a woman the right to interfere with her vows and to annul them is not a carte blanche applicable to any type of vow. The husband’s authority applies only when such a vow results in personal pain or discomfort also involving him in his marital status. If his wife were to vow not to wash or bathe herself, keeping such a vow would clearly interfere with their marital life; as a result of such considerations the Torah permitted her husband a veto power over such vows. It goes without saying that the husband can veto any vow of his wife which would interfere directly with their family life together. The husband’s authority extends to his wife’s vowing not to use eye-shadow or even certain products for sale in  specific stores. We derive all this from the words בין איש לאשתו “between man and his wife,” in verse 17. The reason the husband has the right to interfere in vows concerning either ענוי נפש, self-affliction, and matters directly involving inter-marital relations is that his wife (any wife) is subservient to her husband in two areas; he is entitled to demand that his wife appear attractive to him and not take measures which result in her becoming physically repugnant to her husband. Our sages in Ketuvot 62 understood this concept as derived form Genesis 3,20 “for she (Chavah) is the mother of all living beings,” as meaning that the wife’s purpose in life is to enhance the quality of life of her husband not the reverse. 
    In matters of their sexual relations there is no need for additional proof that the wife is subservient to the needs of her husband as denial by the wife of the husband’s legitimate rights whether with a vow or without a vow means that she endangers her marriage and would forfeit her כתובה upon being divorced for cause. In matters which have no bearing on the successful relations between husband and wife the husband has no authority to interfere with his wife’s vows.
    
    30,15. מיום אל יום, “from one day to the next.” This verse makes it clear that revoking a vow must occur during the same day, the day being considered the same period as during the six days of creation. The day commences with nightfall and extends for 24 hours until the next evening. It is not a period of 24 hours commencing at the moment when the husband hears about his wife’s vow. If the woman made a vow in the morning of any day the husband upon hearing of it has only till nightfall of the same day to oppose and revoke it. This is the reason the sages permitted the husband to revoke vows made by his wife on the Sabbath if these vows were not directly related to the Sabbath (Nedarim 77). This, in spite of the fact that revoking a vow is similar to pronouncing judgment, something that is forbidden on the Sabbath. If the husband were not allowed to revoke such vows his wife could always make vows on the Sabbath and thus undermine her husband’s authority to cancel her vows. This relaxation of the rules of the Sabbath applies only to a husband revoking the vow of is wife. If she needs the services of a judge, expert or quorum of three laymen to release her from a foolish vow, she will have to wait until after the Sabbath as outsiders who are not affected by her vows are not given leeway to use their authority in releasing someone from a vow on the Sabbath. If the woman’s vow involved matters pertaining to the Sabbath on which she made the vow, the expert has the right to use his authority to release her from such a vow even on the Sabbath. An example of such a vow would be one which would have prevented her from eating on the Sabbath in question. The time frame we discussed applies both to the father and to the husband as the case may be, starting from the time they heard of the vow in question. If a husband or father canceled the woman’s vow later than the time the Torah permitted and the wife or daughter ignores her vow relying on her father or husband having revoked it, he is held liable for violating her vow. This is why the Torah writes here: ”if he will revoke them (the vows) after his having heard” (in contrast with verse 13 where the wording is “on the day he hears about it”), he will bear her iniquity.” This verse gives rise to a general rule in halachah: “he who through his actions causes his fellow to become guilty of a trespass will personally bear the penalties which result for his fellow from his action” (Sifri Mattot 156, quoted by Rashi). Nachmaides, in justifying this ruling, writes that the woman in question is considered as either having sinned unwittingly or as having been deceived altogether and not having sinned at all by violating her vow. The verse we quoted is understood by Nachmanides as applying to a husband who, when he heard of the vow did not object, and when he eventually voiced his objection claimed that it was within the time frame permitted by the Torah.
    Accordingly, the verse teaches a) the husband bears the guilt and penalty as if he had made the vow and violated it. b) she is free from all guilt pertaining to her vow. If his wife was aware of the fact that her husband did not revoke her vow in time, seeing she knew the law, she is held liable for acting on the basis of such an objection. Her husband, while not liable for her vow, is nonetheless liable for having caused such a guilt to come into existence. He had squandered an opportunity to protest his wife’s vow in time and had neglected to do so, thus becoming indirectly responsible for her violating her vow.
    Although  the Torah writes this legislation using the husband as the example and therefore guilty party (although the same legislation applies to her father as long as he has the authority over her), it may be that in most such situations the father, out of his love for his daughter, would immediately voice his objection thus protecting his daughter against becoming guilty of profaning her vow. A husband who may be angry at his wife for making such a vow in the first place, may be less considerate in protecting his wife against trespassing, wanting her to become guilty of a guilt-offering. (Thus far Nachmanides)
    
    30,17. בין איש לאשתו, בין אב לבתו, “between man and his wife, between father and his daughter.” Our sages in Sifri Mattot 156 drew a comparison between husband and father. Just as the husband is only permitted to revoke those vows of his wife  which either directly affect their marital relations or which represent an affliction upon his wife threatening to make her repulsive to her husband’s eyes, so the father also may only cancel vows of his daughter if they are either an affliction for his daughter undermining her health, or otherwise disturb the normal relationship between father and daughter. If, for instance, the daughter had vowed not to provide the services for her father which a daughter is expected to perform for him, the father is entitled to declare such a vow as null and void. This is also spelled out specifically in the Jerusalem Talmud Nedarim 11,1. Nachmanides, in his volume on the laws of vows, agrees with the Jerusalem Talmud.
    Maimonides does not base his rulings on vows on the Jerusalem Talmud and rules that the father has an unrestricted right to cancel vows made by his daughter prior to her reaching the age of 12 and a half years. (Maimonides Hilchot Nedarim 12,1). He follows the plain text of the verse which does not speak of any restrictions. When the scholars from Luneil challenged Maimonides’ ruling pointing to the Sifri we quoted as their source, Maimonides told them that the author of the Sifri unless otherwise noted is Rabbi Shimon, and that we do not generally rule according to his opinion when it conflicts with the opinion of other scholars.
    Concerning the subject of the efficiency and therefore desirability of making vows altogether, Maimonides writes in Hilchot Nedarim 5,23: “if someone engages in the practice of making vows to help him build his character, resist temptation, etc., then such a practice is praiseworthy. Example: if someone used to indulge in excessive consumption of wine and strong drink and he imposes upon himself a vow to abstain from drinking wine for an extended period in order to help him overcome his desire to imbibe this is a good idea. Similarly, if someone pursued illegal gains, i.e. payment for services not rendered, and the like, and he repents and wants to reinforce his resolution to desist from this in the future, he may make a vow not to accept gratuitous benefits from certain people, or even from all persons. There are other similar situations when the making of a vow is basically desirable. The principal criterion governing the desirability of a vow is if it helps the person making it to better serve his Creator.
    Pursuing this line of thought, our sages in Avot 3,13 have said נדרים סיג לפרישות, “vows are a fence for abstinence.” Maimonides quotes several verses from the Bible in support of such an attitude, such as Psalms 119,106: “I have firmly sworn to keep Your just rules.” (Clearly, even David had to reinforce his resolutions with an oath). We know that Yaakov made a vow from Genesis 28,20. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 70,1 said that the reason that Yaakov added the word לאמור, “to say,” before spelling out the details of his vow was to tell his descendants that when they would find themselves in a situation similar to that of the patriarch Yaakov, they too should resort to making vows. In Numbers 21,2 we find that the Israelites accepted their patriarch Yaakov’s advice and vowed to destroy the Canaanites and their belongings if only the Lord would make them victorious over their attackers, the Canaanites. 
    
    31,2. נקום נקמת בני ישראל מאת המדינים, אחר תאסף לעמיך, “take vengeance for the Children of Israel from the Midianites; after that you will be gathered in to your people.” G’d told Moses that He did not reconsider His oath that Moses and Aaron would not lead the people into the Holy Land because they had failed to sanctify  His name, etc. The above consideration is the reason why the Torah wrote this paragraph in conjunction with that describing that the privately made vows and oaths of individuals are subject to annulment. 
   אחר תאסף, “after (that) you will be gathered in, etc.” Some commentators, such as Nachmanides, see in this a promise that Moses will live to see and enjoy the revenge on his enemies. Tanchuma Mattot 3 points out that whereas the Torah (G’d) speaks of a vengeance for Moses, Moses in turn speaks about a vengeance for G’d when he tells the Israelites the purpose of the punitive campaign against Midian in verse 3. Moses is quoted (by the Midrash) as saying to G’d: “O Lord if we had been uncircumcised, or even circumcised but worshipping idols, the Midianites would not have hated us. Why then do they hate us? Because of the Torah and the commandments which You have given to us. Therefore it is Your vengeance.” This is the reason why the Torah quotes Moses as telling the people that they should mobilise 1000 men each from each tribe for this expedition. The concept behind all this is that anyone who attacks the Jewish people actually aims at the G’d of the Jewish people and uses the Jewish people as G’d’s alter-ego.
   מאת המדינים, “from the Midianites.” Why single out the Midianites? Did not the Moabites initiate the whole scheme of cursing the Jewish people and, when that failed, the seduction by their women as we know from Numbers 22,7 and 25,1? The fact is that whatever the Moabites did was prompted by a genuine fear of the Israelites as reported in the Torah in detail in Numbers 22,3. After all, although G’d had told the Jewish people not to harass and make war against the Moabites, this did not preclude them from robbing their belongings, etc. The Midianites, however, had gotten involved in an argument which did not concern them at all. The Jewish people had no designs on their country and posed no threat to them.
    
    31,3. החלצו מאתכם, “mobilise from amongst yourselves, etc.” It is as if Moses had said: “gird your pioneers, your vanguard, (with their swords).” The words used here reflect an eagerness on the part of Moses to discharge his part in this commandment although G’d had told him that its fulfillment would bring about his death shortly thereafter. Tanchuma Mattot 4 points out the contrast between Moses and Joshua in this matter. When Joshua faced 31 Canaanite kings he said to himself: “if I slay them I will die shortly thereafter just as Moses died shortly after the Midianites were defeated.” What did Joshua do? He commenced with attacking one of the Canaanite kings and then delayed following up on his success as we know from Joshua 11,18: “Joshua was engaged for many years in battling all these kings.” When G’d observed this He told him: “because you did this in order to prolong your life I will deduct 10 years from the life span I had allocated to you originally. You should have lived to 120 years as did your teacher Moses. Now you will live to be only 110 years.” This is the meaning of Proverbs 19,21: “many designs are in a man’s mind, but it is the Lord’s plan that is accomplished.“
    
    31,5. וימסרו מאלפי ישראל, “they were handed over from amongst the thousands of Israelites, etc.” Our sages in Sifri Mattot 157 comment on this that these men had not volunteered but had been drafted against their will due to their love of Moses; they knew that Moses’ death would result from their waging this war and they did not want to contribute to Moses’ death.
    
    31,6. אותם ואת פינחס, “they together with Pinchas.” The wording suggests that Pinchas by himself was equal to all of the twelve thousand men in moral/spiritual stature. Why did Pinchas go instead of his father the High Priest Eleazar? G’d had said: “the one who commenced by assuaging My anger and slew the first Midianite (Cosbi) shall complete the task” (Tanchuma Mattot 3). Moses, who had spent many years in Midian which had served as his refuge from Pharaoh after he had slain the Egyptian did not join the campaign so as not to give people an opportunity to say that “he threw stones into the well from which he used to drink.”
   וכלי הקודש, “and the holy vessels, etc.” This is a reference to the Holy Ark and the golden headband of the High Priest. (Sotah 43). Tanchuma Mattot 5 relates that the Midianites employed all kinds of charms in conjunction with Bileam and that the kings were riding in the air when they saw this war. Moses had told the soldiers that if they noticed that the kings of the Midianites would employ such means against them they should show the ציץ, and the Midianites would immediately fall to the ground. This is the reason that the Torah writes (in verse 8) ואת מלכי מדין הרגו על חלליהם, “and they killed the kings of the Midianites “on, above” with their slain ones.” The Torah means that these kings dropped out of the air on top of the slain Midianites whereupon the Israelites killed them. We find something similar in Joshua 13,22: “together with the others that they slew, the Israelites put Bileam son of Beor, the magician, to the sword.”
   וחצוצרות התרועה בידו, “and the trumpets for blowing teruah in his hand (Pinchas’s).” Whenever the Israelites journeyed they had the trumpets with them. The same applied when they made ready to enter somewhere or to go to war.
    
    31,7. ויהרגו כל זכר, “they killed every male,” i.e. the adults. The male children were part of the loot as per verse 9.
    
    31,8. ואת צור, “and Tzur;” the father of Cozbi חמשת מלכי מדין, “the five kings of Midian.” The reason the Torah wrote the word חמשת מלכי מדין as if mentioning their names did not already tell us that there five such kings, is to tell us that all five were of one mind concerning their hostility against Israel. The construct form חמשת reflected this. The reason that Bileam was there was that he had detoured on his way home, (a long way off from Aram) in order to collect his reward for having been the cause of the 24,000 men of Shimon killed by the plague, Bileam had mocked the Israelites saying: “if you could not go to war against Midian when there were 600,000 of you, how can you now expect to defeat them with only 12,000 men?” He had tried to undermine their self-confidence. (compare Tanchuma Mattot 3) [the challenge by Bileam reported here is not found in Tanchuma. Ed.]
    
    31,11. ואת כל המלקוח באדם ובבהמה, “and all the captives, humans and animals.” Whenever the Torah does not mention the words שבי and מלקוח separately, the former refers to human captives, the latter to animals captured. When only the expression מלקוח is used it includes both humans and animals. (Rashi and Ibn Ezra).
    
    31,12. ויביאו אל משה, “they brought them to Moses.” The Torah compliments the 12,000 men none of whom touched the loot without first having obtained permission to do so. This is what Solomon referred to in Song of Songs 6,6 when he said (concerning the Jewish people) ”your teeth are like a flock of young lambs.” He meant that even the soldiers, i.e. the teeth of the Jewish people are as disciplined as a flock of ewes. They are all righteous (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 4,5).
    
    31,14. ויקצוף משה על פקודי החיל, “Moses became angry at the commanders of the troops.” The word פקודי is the same as in Isaiah 24,21 יפקוד ה', “G’d will punish,” as distinct from other meanings of this word, such as “counting.”
   שרי האלפים ושרי המאות, “the chiefs of thousands and the chiefs of hundreds.” A total of 132 men. The verse teaches that misconduct by the common people is always blamed on their leaders, the ones who have the authority and power to stop such misconduct by the people and who fail to do so (Sifri on our verse).
    
    31,17. וכל אשה יודעת איש למשכב זכר הרגו, “and every woman fit to know a man by lying with a male, you shall kill.” After Moses had started by saying: “kill every male minor, he now added separately: “kill the women, etc.” There is a reason that he had to use the word: “kill” twice. If the Torah had only written: “kill every male minor,” I would have thought that the second half of the verse i.e. “all the female minors who have not slept with a man you may let live,” included even females who were old enough to sleep with men but had not done so. In order to avoid such misunderstanding the Torah inserted the word הרגו at the end of verse 17 to separate these two categories of female minors. On the other hand, if the Torah had only written verse 18, the meaning of the instruction would have been: ועתה כל זכר בטף וכל אשה יודעת איש למשכב זכר וגו', “and now every male minor and every female minor old enough to lie with a male, etc.” would have meant that males above the age of nine years (when they are perceived as capable of intercourse) had to be killed. This is why these instructions had to be worded the way they were to avoid misunderstanding. Male children, even if infants, had to be killed (Sifri). 
    You may well ask how the Israelites could determine which child fitted which criterion? We are told in Yevamot 60 that each child walked past the High Priest wearing his golden headband whereupon the faces of the girls who had had sexual experience turned green. This is the reason we were taught that a disease called דרקון is an indication that the afflicted person was an idolater. According to some, examination by walking by the ציץ was effective only for Gentiles, whereas Jewish girls would be seated on a wine casket if one wanted to determine their virginity. If a certain odour would be emitted this was considered proof that the girl in question was not a virgin. Rav Kahane derived the inadmissibility of the ציץ test for Jewish girls from Exodus 28,38 where the Torah describes the function of the golden headband as “it shall be on his forehead (High Priest) always, to bring them favour before Hashem.” The function of the ציץ did not include incriminating Jewish girls. Rav Ashi added that the word להם in that verse extends the beneficial function of said golden headband to Israelites only.
    
    31,19. ואתם חנו מחוץ למחנה, “as for you, encamp outside the camp, etc.” The returning soldiers were forbidden to enter the courtyard of the Tabernacle in their present condition out of regard for the Shechinah which was present there.
   כל הורג נפש, “anyone who had killed a person, etc.” it was presumed that he had touched the slain person with his weapon, seeing that the sword confers the same degree of ritual impurity as the corpse itself. The verse therefore excludes people who had killed by shooting arrows and had not subsequently touched the corpse  (Sifri Chukat 127).
   תתחטאו, “purify yourselves!” By means of the ash of the red cow mixed with the water designated for the procedure. Although Gentiles (their corpses) do not confer ritual impurity on a Jew when both are in the same covered airspace at the same time, contact with the corpse of a Gentile does transfer such impurity.
   אתם ושביכם, “you and your captives.” When the captives would become proselytes and they become ritually impure they require purification rites including being sprinkled with the ash of the red cow. 
    31,20. וכל מעשה עזים, “and everything made of goat’s hair.”  This also includes all vessels made from the hooves or the horns or the bones of the animals. All had to stay outside the camp until  they had become purified.
    
    31,22. אך את הזהב, “However, the gold, etc.” Although these vessels had in the meantime undergone purification from the ritual impurity contracted through contact with a corpse or derivative of a corpse, they had to undergo another purification by reason of having been owned by idolaters which confers a different type of impurity upon them. They had to undergo immersion in a ritual bath or more. These vessels had absorbed residue from foods forbidden to Jews, i.e. animals which had not died by ritual slaughter or had not been fit to eat for Jews even if slaughtered ritually. Rashi explains that the word אך at the beginning of the verse teaches that these vessels had to be thoroughly cleaned prior to immersion in a ritual bath so as to remove rust over the areas in which forbidden foods might have penetrated.
    
    31,23. כל דבר אשר יבא באש תעבירו באש, “any item which is normally used on (in) the fire you shall make pass through the fire.” The purification process must match the manner in which it is normally used. Iron spits used for roasting meat for instance, would have to be made red hot in fire in order to be ritually purified.
   אך במי נדה יתחטא, “but also it has to be purified by the water of the sprinkling.” In this instance all these captured items, regardless of the manner of their use had to undergo this procedure of being sprinkled with water and ash from the red cow as the Torah writes in Numbers 19,13 that if this water and ash had not been sprinkled on such person or item they remain impure. From the combination of these verses we derive the requirement that even new utensils, unless manufactured by Jews, have to undergo ritual immersion before being fit to use as food or in connection with food (Avodah Zarah 75). The extra word וטהר in our verse is the allusion to this requirement.
   וכל אשר לא יבא באש תעבירו במים, “Any utensil not used in or on the fire, you must pass through the water.” This refers to metal utensils which did not absorb any forbidden materials in their normal use, i.e. they are used cold. It suffices to pass them through water to make them fit for use by Jews.
    Our sages (Avodah Zarah 67) added that the utensils of the Midianites forbidden for immediate use were only those which had been in use during the previous 24 hours by their owners. The reason is that during that period the residue contained in the walls of such pots enhances whatever you cook in them. Once they have been out of use for over 24 hours the contribution made to whatever the Jew cooks in them at that time will be detrimental to the taste of the dish, so that the Jew derives no benefit from  what is forbidden. The entire prohibition of such residue inside the walls of the pots is based on the word כל, “all, any,” in Deut. 14,21 לא תאכלו כל נבלה, “you must not eat anything which pertains to a carcass (which was not ritually slaughtered before death).” This teaches that not only the substance is forbidden by Biblical decree but also the taste of it is equally forbidden. However, if one ate something in which the forbidden part consisted of insubstantial taste the person doing so is not liable to the penalty of 39 lashes.
    If the utensil previously owned by the Gentile had not been used for 24 hours, it is  permissible by Biblical law to be used as is, although there is rabbinic prohibition. We know that it is permitted by the Torah as the Torah itself writes that such carcasses described as נבלה may be given to resident strangers to eat (Deut. 14,21). From this we derive the principle that a נבלה permitted for a resident stranger (one who accepted the 7 Noachide laws) to eat is still called נבלה by the Torah, whereas one that is not suitable for his consumption is not described as such. When the forbidden material is still identifiable, substantive, but is the residue of something cooked more than 24 hours previously, it is also not forbidden by Biblical injunction as it is foul-tasting. The rabbinic prohibition however, extends indefinitely, the reason being that if the Rabbis had not “fenced in Torah law,” people would eat from such utensils even before the 24 hours had elapsed since they were last used by a Gentile for his ritually forbidden food. The Rabbis based their approach on the assumption that when a Jew gets hold of such vessels owned previously by Gentiles they are most unlikely to have been used for ritually forbidden food during the 24 hour preceding this.
    Seeing that this is so the only vessels subject to the legislation in our chapter were the ones which had definitely still been in use during the previous 24 hours. This brings us to the problem of why the Torah had held back with telling us of this legislation until now and had not revealed it after the wars against Sichon and Og (Numbers chapters 21-22) when the Israelites had also collected a great deal of loot which surely included cooking utensils (compare Deut. 2,35). The reason is that the war fought  against Sichon and Og was fought on soil which G’d had designated as land of the Jewish people. Seeing this was so they were permitted to make full use of all the loot including matters totally forbidden under normal Torah law. The Torah itself recalls that the Jewish people would inherit in the land of Canaan, “houses full of everything that is good, i.e. desirable,” (Deut. 6,11). Our sages elaborated on this in Chulin 17 saying that even dried pork was allowed for the warriors at that time to be eaten as booty. Midian was not, however, a territory allocated to the Jewish people, and therefore the rules which applied to lands that were conquered at G’d’s command did not apply. 
    This is why in the case of the Midianites the Torah even forbade the victors to make use of the vessels of their adversaries until after they had been purified. This is also why in this instance the Torah stresses the fact that the warriors had (practically) all become ritually impure through contact with their (now) dead enemies, whereas not a word of this had been mentioned after the Israelites had killed the Emorites under Sichon and Og and taken over their lands. When Jews become involved in a situation which on an individual basis results in each one of them becoming ritually defiled, this law is set aside when the occasion which necessitated this impurity was one of conquering their own land at the behest of G’d.
    You will also observe that the spoils of war which were salvaged from the punitive expedition against Midian were also shared out to the Levites and the priests although the priests and the Levites have been described as being “G’d’s share” and not inheriting any part of the land of the Canaanites, etc., (Numbers 18,20). Seeing that the loot from the campaign against the Midianites had nothing to do with a war of conquest fought against the Canaanites, the Levites and priests were not excluded from sharing. The loot was the proceeds of a war avenging G’d’s vengeance, something everybody was equally involved in. When it came to the war against the Canaanites, not only were the priests and Levites not allowed to capture any, their brethren from the other tribes were even prohibited from giving them some of that loot voluntarily (compare Numbers 18,20).
    
    31,24. ואחר תבאו אל המחנה, “and after (these procedures) you may enter the camp.” The reference is to the camp of the Shechinah. After all, a person who has “only” contracted ritual impurity through contact with a corpse does not have to leave any other parts of the camp.
    
    31,26. שא את ראש המלקוח השבי, “count the total of the spoils of beast and humans.” The word מלקוח is a reference to the animals, the word שבי is a reference to the human prisoners. The two words fit together just as the words שמש ירח, “sun (and) moon,” without the conjunctive letter ו; (compare Chabakuk 3,11).
    
    31,27. וחצית את המלקוח, “and divide in half the spoils of beasts and humans.” In this verse the word מלקוח includes humans as well as beasts. G’d commanded that the loot be divided between the soldiers who had captured it and the people who had remained behind. Also, the captors were to give a tithe to the Levites of 1/50th of the loot, seeing that 1/50th of Israel’s fighting men had taken part in this campaign. The priests, i.e. Eleazar received תרומה i.e. one tenth of the amount the people gave to the Levites. The 12,000 fighting men shared the one half of the spoils, the people on the home front shared the other half between them.
    
    31,32. ויהי המלקוח יתר הבז, “after deducting the inert objects captured and the amounts the soldiers had consumed, the remainder of the animal loot amounted to, etc.” the reason the Torah gives us all these numbers is to enable us to picture the vastness of this victory, an amount of loot not paralleled elsewhere. The Torah mentions the מכס, tribute or tithe, given to the Levites separately as even this was a substantial amount. Our author understands the word מכס as being similar to חלק, share.
    
    31,48. ויקרבו אל משה הפקודים, “the officers approached Moses, etc.” The word  הפקודים here is the same as הפקידים, “the commanders.”
    
    31,49.  עבדיך נשאו את ראש אנשי המלחמה אשר בידינו ולא  נפקד ממנו איש, “your servants have counted the heads of the warriors entrusted to us and not a single man is missing.” This was a remarkable miracle. In fact, it may be described as one of the greatest miracles amongst all the miracles which were performed for the Jewish people ever. When we consider the number of prisoners taken we can imagine how many adult males there must have been participating in this war. The Israelites killed each one of them without sustaining a single casualty. The reason why this miracle occurred was that every one of these 12,000 soldiers was a righteous individual who felt morally superior enough to take part in this punitive expedition. This is what our sages had in mind (Shabbat 64) when they said that the words ולא נפקד מהם איש mean that not one of them was guilty of a sin that would be held against him [the word being used as in Exodus 20,5. Ed.] When Moses heard this, he asked: ”if this is so why do you want to offer this sacrifice of gold, etc.?” They answered: ”we want to atone for lewd thoughts which we may have entertained.”
    
    31,50. ונקרב את קרבן ה', “we have offered the sacrifice to the Lord.” This verse proves that when one vows to bring a sacrifice either in thought or word this already constitutes a sacrifice, i.e. that the money set aside with which to buy the animal  is already sanctified (Yuma 63). 
   אצעדה, “anklet;” an ornament worn on the foot, the organ one makes steps with (צעדים). צמיד, “bracelet;” an ornament worn on the arm. We have encountered the word when Eliezer put two such bracelets on Rivkah’s hands (Genesis 24,22). טבעת, “a ring;” for the finger; עגיל, “a ring worn in the ear.” וכומז, “a clasp;” something  known as chastity belt in the middle ages.
    
    31,51. ויקח משה ואלעזר הכהן את הזהב מאתם כל כלי מעשה, “Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, all items which had been fashioned into a complete article.” The Torah stresses that the offering did not contain broken items. They brought it to the Tabernacle to convert into  כלי שרת, utensils to be used in the sacrificial rituals.
    
    32,1. ומקנה רב היה לבני ראובן ולבני גד, “and the tribes of Reuven and Gad possessed large amounts of livestock.” The tribe who was a descendant of Leah is mentioned first although the tribe of Gad was the instigator of this request (Ibn Ezra).
    
    32,2. ויבואו בני גד ובני ראובן, “the members of the tribe of Gad and Reuven came, etc.” The Gadites came up with the idea of remaining on the far bank of the Jordan. They were personally much braver than the members of Reuven as we know from Moses’ blessing in Deut. 33,20: וטרף זרוע אף קדקוד, “tearing off arm and even head.” They were not afraid that by choosing to remain physically distant from the main body of the people on the far side of the Jordan they would be isolated and easy prey for the surrounding nations.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Mattot 5: when material wealth is received from heaven it is liable to endure; if its source is not heavenly it is unlikely to endure. There were two truly wealthy people in the world, one was an Israelite, i.e. Korach, the other was Haman. Both of them not only lost their wealth but they perished ignominiously seeing that their material wealth had not been a gift from heaven. They had acquired it by tearing it away from others.
    You will also find that the wealth possessed by the members of the tribes Gad and Reuven caused them to become inordinately fond of it. As a result they lived (loosely speaking) in what we call חוצה לארץ, outside the essential part of Eretz Yisrael. They separated from the main body of the people on account of their possessions and wound up being the first to be exiled because of their sins (compare Chronicles I 5,26).
    When we read in Psalms 75,7: “for what lifts a man comes not from the east or the west or the wilderness הרים,  for it is G’d Who gives judgment, He brings down one man, He lifts up another.” The psalmist referred to the fate of the two and a half tribes Reuven, Gad, and half of Menashe (compare Tanchuma Mattot 6). The words ולא ממדבר הרים, normally translated as “and not from a wilderness of mountains,” are somewhat misleading. Whereas it is true that everywhere else in the Holy Bible the word הרים means “mountains,” in this instance it means “elevation.” (socially, financially). When G’d wanted to enrich the members of these tribes He gave them what had belonged to the Midianites. Thereby He fulfilled what is written in Psalms 75,7. 
    Why were the herds and flocks of these two tribes called נכסים by the author of the Midrash? Because it is in the nature of such belongings to be hidden (disappear) from one owner and becoming revealed to the other owner. Channah alluded to this when she said in Samuel I 2,7: ה' מוריש ומעשיר, משפיל ומרומם, “the Lord makes poor and makes rich; He casts down, He also lifts high.” When G’d displays His anger at one people, another is liable to benefit from that. This is the reason our chapter is introduced  most unusually with the conjunctive letter ו. Instead of the words ומקנה רב היה, וגו', I would have expected something like לבני ראובן וגד היה מקנה רב. The letter ו as the introduction to the whole chapter draws our attention to the fact that the reason these tribes had so many possessions was only because they had captured them from the Midianites, i.e. that G’d had deprived the Midianites of their possessions. 
    When Kohelet 10,2 speaks of “the heart of the wise being on the right whereas the heart of the foolish is on the left,” he had in mind people like the members of the tribes of Gad and Reuven who made things of secondary significance such as the livestock their primary concern, i.e. they confused that which is essential with that which is merely auxiliary. They demonstrated this when they mentioned their livestock before referring to their children (verse 16). G’d told them that people who considered their personal wealth as more important than their children would find that their wealth was not blessed. This is what Solomon taught us in Proverbs 20,21: “an inheritance gained hastily (sudden riches) at the outset will not be blessed in the end.” This is also the meaning of Proverbs 23,4: “do not tire yourself out trying to become rich; desist out of a feeling of insight.” The truly wealthy individual is he who is content with what G’d has seen fit to provide for him as we know from Psalms 128,2: “when you consume the fruit of the labours of your hands you will be happy and feel content.”
    
    32,3. עטרות ודיבון. These districts had been part of the lands of Sichon, the king of the Emorites. Some of the nine locations mentioned here used to be centers of idolatry such as Nevo and Baal Meon. We find that at least Nevo is mentioned in that context in Isaiah 46,1 when he describes these idols as collapsing. In Onkelos’ translation of this verse we find that he uses the word בית repeatedly. Presumably, this refers to the temples to these deities which had stood in those locations. Our sages in Shabbat 115 also refer to places where idolatry was practiced with the prefix בי, i.e. “house of.”
    When the members of the tribe of Reuven rebuilt these towns they also renamed them to remove their stigma. This is the meaning of מוסבות שם in verse 38, i.e. the Torah tells us that these places had acquired new names. The names of the idolatry which had been practiced there should not be remembered.
    When our sages said in Berachot 8 that each one of us should endeavour to complete reviewing the Torah portion read each week together with the congregation by reading the Hebrew text twice and the Targum once, even “Attarot and Divon,” they meant that it is in order to mention the original names of these locations. But for this statement by the sages we might have reasoned that seeing the Targum is only a translation of these names which we had already read twice in Hebrew it would be inappropriate to repeat the names of these centers of idolatry a third time in Aramaic.
    You should realise that there is also a mystical dimension  connected to the rebuilding of these towns and renaming them. Whereas our verse, as is customary, is explicit regarding events on terrestrial earth, it also contains allusions pertaining to what occurs in the celestial spheres in which we also have “structures” parallel to those on earth.
    We are dealing here with nine names (Attarot, Divon, Yaazer, Nimrah, Cheshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nevo and Beon) which correspond to the nine times we find the word ויאמר אלו-הים in the report of the creation in Genesis chapter 1. The tenth (equivalent) of the word ויאמר is not mentioned as it is the word בראשית, and at a time when there was no matter to be addressed yet it would have sounded peculiar to issue instructions to אין, something non-existent. [this is a reference to the statement in Avot 5,1 that the world was created by means of ten directives, the assumption being that each directive was introduced by the word ויאמר. Rashi there comments that the tenth (missing) ויאמר is actually represented by the very word בראשית. Ed.]
    Our verse here draws our attention to the nine directives with which the world was created after the initial raw material had come into existence, and divides it into three stages as represented by our mussaph prayer on Rosh Hashanah when we have three separate groups of benedictions called מלכיות, זכרונות, שופרות. The mystical dimension of the Mishnah in Rosh Hashanah 32 describing that three groups of shofar blasts must be blown on that day, is linked to the statement of our sages to read the weekly Torah portion three times. We must appreciate that just as repeating something three times, such as the blowing of the shofar or the reading of the Torah portion, each time deepens our understanding of it, so that even such names as Attarot and Divon which when we read them the first time make no impression upon us are going to give rise to more profound analysis if we repeat them again and again. 
    Seeing that the entire Torah from Bereshit to Vezot Habracha is a continuous document, indivisible, these names simply must have a significance over and beyond their sound. It is up to us to decipher the deeper meaning. There is no qualitative difference between reading about the leaders of the tribes of Esau, the names of the towns captured from Sichon, or the Ten Commandments. All of the Torah is of equal degree of sanctity. All of it stems from the same source. Its “waters” originate from the Temple (Ezekiel 47,12), and all have been given to us from the same shepherd. 
    [I believe the reason the author is at such pains to provide a meaning for these place names over and above merely giving us this information is that he wants to pre-empt anyone asking why the Torah did not simply write that these two tribes claimed lands in Gilead and Yaazer especially suitable for grazing without giving us a list of these names which we should read for the next several thousand years every week when these places had even be renamed. How would we know where these locations are if we did not know their original names? On the other hand, if the names listed are the original names why would we have to remember all these sites of idolatry? Ed.] 
    The meanings of the words עטרות ודיבון, etc. are as follows: the location עטרות, is spelled in the verse it occurs next, (34) without the letter ו, i.e. it is an allusion to עטרת, a crown. The word דיבון refers to the river which originates in Gan Eden which never ceases to flow. The word is written with the conjunctive letter ו at the beginning, although all the other locations mentioned have not been linked by the letter ו. The numerical value of the word ודיבון is 72, an allusion to the 72-lettered name of G’d. A never ceasing river reminds us of Psalms 78,20: הכה צור ויזובו מים, “He struck the rock and waters flowed.” The name of the place יעזר is a reference to the emanation הוד of which we know from Psalms 145,5 הדר כבוד הודך. The emanation הוד is the “lowest” on the left side of the diagram of emanations, a side representative of the negative spiritual influences of Satan. Because of this, man, i.e. Israel is in need of divine assistance to overcome its influence. The location described by the name נמרה symbolises the emanation נצח, the one opposite הוד on the right side of the diagram we referred to. The word may be perceived as an acrostic of the line ימין ה' רוממה In Psalms 118,16. The two emanations הוד, נצח are perceived as the two “thighs,” supports of the universe, in the diagram of the emanations which I referred to. We have an allusion to this in Psalms 16,11 נעימות בימינך נצח. The location described as חשבון is an allusion to our patriarch Yaakov, of whom it is written in Psalms 16,11: ישראל אשר בו אתפאר, a reference to the tetragram, i.e. the word חשבון  has a numerical value of שם כ'ו, ‘the name equal to 26” [numerical value of י-ה-ו-ה]. The location described as אלעלה is an allusion to the patriarch Yitzchak who has been described variously as עולה תמימה, “an unblemished burnt-offering.” We could therefore read the word אלעלה as עלה לאל by slightly re-arranging the sequence of the letters. Since the Torah wanted to hint at his outstanding characteristic גבורה, a manifestation of the attribute of Justice, (the last letter ה in the tetragram), the name אלעלה concludes with the letter ה in the list of these nine locations. This becomes clearer when you compare the name in verse 37 as אלעלא with the letter א at the end instead of the letter ה. We have another instance where Yitzchak’s outstanding characteristic is alluded to by a change in the spelling of his name in Psalms 105,9 where the letter צ in יצחק is replaced by the letter ש, an allusion to the fact that he is a “great fire.” 
    The location described as שבם is a reference to Avraham; it may be understood as an acrostic of אברהם סבא, “grandfather Avraham, i.e. the originator of Judaism.” The location described as נבו alludes to the emanation בינה, whereas the location described as בעון is an allusion to the emanation חכמה. When you reverse the sequence of the letters in that word you get נובע. We find this word connected to wisdom, חכמה in Proverbs 18,4 נחל נבע מקור חכמה, “the source of wisdom is a flowing stream.” The word is also connected to מעון, מעונה (when the letters are reversed) “regions in the upper celestial heavens, origin of wisdom.” This is why this place is referred to as מעון in verse 38, i.e. ואת בעל מעון. At any rate, I believe we have demonstrated that the names of these locations all relate to important concepts although at first glance they may appear as irrelevant.
    The reason the Torah considered it imperative to mention the names of all of these locations is that they were all part of the territories of Sichon and Og and their significance in terms of idolatry far outshone their local importance as they represented important idolatrous doctrines, doctrines completely opposed to Judaism and Monotheism. Their significance in their time paralleled the importance of the idolatry practiced of the generation of the Tower, the people of which arrogated to themselves the power to uproot G’d in the heavens from His throne. Those people who had phrased their ideology in the innocent sounding slogan “let us make a name for ourselves,” (compare Genesis 11,4 and the commentary of our author there) were the (ideological) descendants of Kayin who had been described earlier in antediluvian times (Genesis 4,17) as בונה עיד constantly engaged in building a city (or cities). The fact that the tribes of Reuven and Gad were well aware of the historical and theological significance of these locations under Sichon and Og prompted them to rename them and thus to eradicate the ideology they had stood for in former times. It was their sincere intention to convert all these places into centres where the Lord would be worshipped instead.
    This is why they prefaced their request to Moses with the words: “if it pleases you let this land be given to your servants as an heritage;” they meant: “seeing the whole purpose of the Children of Israel crossing the Jordan and disinheriting the Canaanites is to establish a civilisation bent on serving the Lord, this is something that we can also do right here.” Their implied point was that if the land captured from Sichon and Og were to remain unpopulated and all the twelve tribes were to live only on the west bank of the Jordan, the vacuum would be filled by other people bent on acquiring grazing land and these people would perpetuate idolatry in that region. It was therefore much better to allow them, who had a surfeit of livestock, to take over these lands instead and to practice Judaism in that region.
    
    32,12. בלתי כלב בן יפונה הקנזי, “except for Calev, son of Yephuneh the Kenizite.”  Our sages (Sotah 11) derive from here that Calev was a stepson of Kenaz for whom the mother of Calev had born Othniel.
    
    32,27.כאשר אדוני דובר , “as my lord speaks.” In verse 31 the formulation is “as the Lord (Hashem) has spoken to your servants so we shall do.” It is clear from these two verses that the Torah wants to equate the authority of Moses with the authority of the Lord. Moses was the kind of instrument for Holy Spirit which functioned around the clock; one was not to think that during certain hours of the day Moses was not on G’d’s “wavelength,’ and that his pronouncements during such times did not have the same validity as when he was inspired. He was always inspired. This is also what our sages (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 27) pointed out in connection with Exodus 33,7: “so it was whenever someone
 sought Hashem he would go out (outside the camp where Moses had pitched his personal tent) etc.” The Torah does not write that the individual in question went out to seek out Moses but that he went out to seek Hashem. This proves that the people equated what Moses would tell them with what they expected to be told by G’d. The “glue” is called by the substance it is glued to. In other words, seeing that Moses was as if “glued” to Hashem, he himself is sometimes described as if he were Hashem. Our author quotes a number of verses illustrating this in his commentary on Exodus 33,7.
    
    32,32. נחנו נעבור חלוצים לפני ה', “we will cross (the Jordan) as vanguard before the Lord.” Actually, the Torah should have written אנחנו instead of נחנו. However, seeing that the members of the tribe of Gad always appear as physically strong and self-reliant, and they had the audacity of describing themselves as a vanguard מלפני ה' “in front of the Lord,” the Torah decided to put them in their place by omitting the letter א from the word אנחנו as if teaching that they needed to downgrade their reliance on ego. The word נחנו appears in the guise of understating ego when Moses and Aaron play down their part in orchestrating the Exodus in Exodus 16,7. This interpretation is tenable as the plain meaning of the words.
    However, we have a tradition that the Torah deliberately wanted to commence this verse with the letter נ just as we find Jeremiah commencing Lamentations 3,42 with the words נחנו פשענו ומרינו, “we have rebelled and transgressed.” In Lamen-tations the need for the verse to commence with the letter נ is dictated by the prophet wanting to maintain the alphabetical sequence of each verse, i.e. each verse commences with the following letter of the alphabet. In our paragraph the need for the verse to commence with the letter נ is dictated by the fact that there are a total of 11 verses in scripture which commence and conclude with the letter נ. It is a well known fact that the tetragram originates in these eleven verses and that it contains 13 letters. If one mentions these verses together with the holy name of G’d which emerges from them one has no reason to be afraid as the great name of the Lord is an antidote against fear itself. [Rabbi Chavell points out that the eleven verses are listed in the Siddur Otzar Hatefillot page 866 [my edition Ed.] after the songs to be recited at the conclusion of the Sabbath. ] The members of the tribe of Gad were not afraid to dwell on the east bank of the Jordan river surrounded by the Gentile nations without natural barriers as they possessed two types of weapons. 1) the physical strength of their bodies; 2) the merit of having been in the vanguard before the Lord during the years in which the Israelites defeated the kings of the Canaanites. The expression חלוצים לפני ה' includes reference to both of these “weapons.” This is why they said (32,32) ואתנו אחוזת נחלתנו, “the heritage of our forefathers is with us.” They meant that in spite of their settling relatively far from the main body of the nation they had reason not to be afraid. Commenting on Joshua 6,13 והחלוץ עובר לפניהם, our sages in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 4,6 explain that that verse refers to the two and a half tribes Reuven, Gad, and half of Menasheh who lived up to their commitment seeing they were full of confidence both in the merit of their mitzvah-performance and their physiques. Our sages have also described the words in Deut. 33,20 וטרף זרוע as a reference to the merit of the phylacteries they wore on the arm, and the word אף קדקד as a reference to the phylacteries they wore on their heads.
    
    32,42. ויקרא לה נבח בשמו, “He called it (the district) Novach just like himself.” The letter ה in the word לה is “weak,” i.e. without the customary dagesh. Ruth Rabbah 5,5 claims that the reason is that this name did not endure, i.e. the word is almost equivalent to having been spelled לא, “not.” We find other examples of the same defective spelling in Zecharyah 5,11: לבנות לה בית בארץ שנער, “to build a house for her (it) in the land of Shinar.” The subject there is the prophet being shown a measuring device known as eyfah which the angel transported away and the prophet wanted to know its significance. The prophet is informed that those who remain in Babylonia although the Temple was being reconstructed in Jerusalem would not have much of a future, as there is no future for untruth. The missing dagesh in the word לה in that verse alludes to the transience of people who decided to remain in a kingdom built on lies. Solomon expressed himself similarly when speaking about lies in Proverbs 12,19: “truthful lips will be established forever; but a lying tongue endures only for a moment.” They will soon be tested and found to be lies. This is why man must love truth and hate lies. This is also what Zecharyah 8,19 said: “love truth and peace!” 
    
   אלה  מסעי
    
    
   ראשית חכמה קנה חכמה ובכל קניניך קנה בינה, “The beginning of wisdom is: ‘acquire wisdom!’ With all your acquisitions acquire insight” (Proverbs 4,7). In this verse Solomon taught the people that the first kind of wisdom they are to acquire is the wisdom dispensed by the Torah. This is the meaning of ראשית חכמה in the verse we quoted. Once a person has acquired this wisdom he also needs to acquire insight, discernment, in order for him to understand the connection between different phenomena. Wisdom is always totally incomplete unless accompanied by a measure of such ability to discern relationships. Seeing that the attribute (or emanation) בינה insight, discernment, is so crucial, Solomon advises a person to spend his entire fortune in his search to acquire בינה. The words: “with all your acquisitions acquire insight,” mean that “even if you have to spend all your money in order to acquire this attribute, do so, for true wealth is בינה, not money.”
    Wisdom is also portrayed as shouting (to its owner) (Proverbs 8,18) “riches and honour belong to me, enduring wealth and success.”
    Solomon was forced to inform us here that the first and foremost requirement for his נפש, personality, is the acquisition of Torah knowledge before learning any other disciplines. If he were to acquire other kinds of knowledge first, these are apt to turn his heart away from true wisdom and implant in his mind worthless ideas. However, if a person studies Torah first and makes it the mainstay of his outlook in life he is then permitted to study other disciplines, sciences, etc., seeing that if he has built a sound base of Torah knowledge for himself he is not liable to be corrupted by the philosophically negative elements which are part of other disciplines. Torah knowledge will always remain “floating” on top just as does purified silver.
    This is also what David had in mind when he described G’d’s words as pure, i.e. just “like refined silver purged in an earthen crucible, refined sevenfold,” not containing any dross (Psalms 12,7). The meaning of that verse in Psalms is that although all disciplines (wisdom) are comparable to silver [when compared to ignorance, Ed.], Torah wisdom is like silver which has been refined seven times over. All other wisdom contains elements comparable to dross, impurities, which have a tendency to invalidate that wisdom. Our Torah, by contrast, will not lead man to sustain losses either in money or through misleading him philosophically.
    When Solomon demands that Torah must be the first subject studied, he means that unless one learns about the meaning and purpose of miracles one may fall victim to the theory that nature preceded the Lawgiver chronologically, that the universe was not created by Hashem. The reason that in Hebrew nature is known as טבע is that if one delves into the study of nature before having studied Torah such study is liable to swallow a person, he will “sink into a morass,” just as people who are drowned by the sea, טובעו, were drowned, because they had not learned to swim first.
    A person who has studied Torah and early Jewish history summarised in the Torah knows that in addition to “nature” and natural laws, the Creator Who is totally free has demonstrated on many occasions that He is the master of what we call “laws of nature” by temporarily suspending these so-called eternal laws and thus demonstrating that it must have been He who had created and formulated them in the first place.
    Scientists, i.e. people who study nature, believe only the evidence of their eyes. When they read about the miracles which the Torah records they assume that the desert through which the Israelites marched must have been a very benign strip of land, capable of producing crops, etc., etc. They totally deny what the Torah describes as “this great and terrible wilderness inhabited by fierce serpents, etc., etc., through which the Lord your G’d has led you” (Deut. 8,15). The point made by the Torah is precisely hat the deserts through which the Israelites marched was even more hostile to human habitat than regular deserts. This is why the Torah stresses beyond doubt “it was not a place where one could sow or expect to plant fruit-bearing trees such as figs, pomegranates, etc.” There were no wells. The prophet Jeremiah testifies that even by his time, 1000 years later, that region had not been one in which people set foot voluntarily. The experience of the Jewish people therefore was by itself so miraculous that unless we study it before we study general subjects we would not appreciate the greatness of G’d and His works.
    This explains why the Torah took pains in our portion to list so many details of the places where the Israelites stopped in their trek through this inhospitable country. That information contained many valuable lessons both for the nations of that period and for us the descendants of the generation which experienced the Exodus and the wanderings through the desert on the way to the Holy Land. 
    
    33,1. אלה מסעי בני ישראל אשר יצאו מארץ מצרים לצבאותם ביד משה ואהרן, “These are the journeys of the Children of Israel, who went forth from Egypt according to their hosts, under the leadership of Moses and Aaron.”  
    33,2. למסעיהם על פי ה', “according to their journeys at the command of Hashem.” The Torah states: 1) the journeys themselves were all at the command of G’d; 2) Moses recorded them all at the express command of G’d. The purpose of these records was what we discussed already in our introduction. There was an additional purpose, namely to demonstrate the many acts of loving kindness performed by Hashem, who, though He had decreed that they were to travel through the desert (although alternate routes were available) did not subject them to the discomforts associated with travel through such inhospitable country. Moreover, by having listed all the places where the Israelites camped, we realise that the people did not move around in the desert constantly, like someone escaping from a pursuer, but that during the entire 40 years (counting from the crossing of the sea until the death of Moses) there were actually fewer than 40 stops, so that they usually could stay put in a camp for more than a year at a time. 
    A careful analysis shows that 14 of the total of 42 stops were made during the first year of their journeying. Eight more stops are recorded after the death of Aaron which occurred in the 40th year, so that during the 38 years after the sin of the spies until the death of Aaron there were only 20 stops. According to our tradition the “many years” which the Israelites are reported as having remained stationary in Kadesh (Deut. 1,15) were equivalent to the total of the years they journeyed from there, i.e. 19 years. This effectively reduces the period of wanderings or journeying to 19 years during which they broke camp 19 times. There was clearly no human planning at work in the strategy governing these journeys, why else would the Torah describe that sometimes the people would stay in one place for only a single night (Numbers 9,21)? The people never knew for how long the cloud would remain stationary signaling that they were to remain in their present location. All their journeys were determined by G’d’s strategy, not their own or that of Moses.
    We may illustrate the matter by means of a parable. A king had a sick child. He took that child from one place to another to find a cure for him. After the father returned from these exhausting trips and the child had been cured, he would remind himself and the child of what happened at each location that he and his sick child had stopped on the way. He would remind his son: ”here we were freezing cold;” “here we were resting comfortably,” “here you suffered from a headache,” etc., etc.
    There is a third purpose in the Torah recording all these details which appear irrelevant to us the reader of these lines three millennia afterwards. Every journey was triggered by certain events or certain tendencies displayed by the people at that location. This is the reason the Torah does not merely give us the number of the way stations but names each one of them. [clearly most of these places being in the middle of the desert had not been named before and only were so named after the Israelites had stopped there to commemorate this. Ed.] If the reason that G’d decided to move the people from one location to another was because they had conducted themselves properly, then the name of the location at which they arrived next reflected this, such as ויחנו בהר שפר (verse 23). If the reason G’d made them break camp was because the people had misbehaved, the place where they encamped reflected this, such as ויחנו בחרדה, a name reflecting fear, disquiet. When the name of the place suggests something pleasant, positive, it means that the move had been orchestrated by the attribute of Mercy, whereas if the name of the place suggests a negative connotation this reflects the fact that the attribute of Justice had orchestrated that particular journey.
    Concerning this matter the sages in the Jerusalem Talmud said that when the Israelites had been complaining about their fate, the watchmen surrounding the camp would tremble all night long. This teaches that the different attributes of G’d were very much in evidence, and that the moods of the people kept on changing. This is what Solomon spoke of in Song of Songs 3,8: “to protect him from the fear during the nights.” He meant that the Israelites were afraid of the attribute of Justice. Still another purpose of the Torah providing us with all these details about the Israelites’ journeying is that it contains allusions to the future. All the predictions of our prophets concerning the redemption of the future clearly indicate that this redemption will largely reflect earlier redemptions. The more we know about the redemption from Egypt, etc., the better we can picture how the redemption of the future will develop. Just as when the Israelites departed from Egypt they marched into the desert, so in the final redemption many Jews would also march into the desert on their way to their home and this is what the prophet Ezekiel 20,34-35 spoke about when he quoted G’d as saying: “I shall take you out from the nations, and gather you from the lands into which you were scattered....and I will bring you to the wilderness of the nations.” In our verse there is an allusion to this as the word מוצאיהם, “the place from which they set out,” is repeated. Ezekiel speaks of the final redemption and means that in the interval between the Israelites leaving lands in which they sojourned as exiles, the Lord will guide them and provide for them as He had done after the Exodus from Egypt.
    The apparently redundant repetition of the words ואלה מסעיהם למוצאיהם are an allusion to the way the redemption of the future will materialise. Seeing the paragraph had commenced with אלה מסעי, the Torah employs the same syntax when alluding to the journeys in the future. The conjunctive letter ו at the beginning of the words ואלה מסעיהם למוצאיהם indicates that these words refer to journeys in the future.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Massey 3: Why were all these journeys spelled out in the Torah? It was a reward for these parts of the earth which willingly accepted the people of Israel on their soil. This region, though it had always been barren, etc., will flourish in the future after the final redemption of the Jewish people as we know from Isaiah 35,1-2: “the arid desert shall be glad, the wilderness shall rejoice and shall blossom like a rose. It shall blossom abundantly, it shall also exult and shout. It shall receive the glory of Lebanon, the splendour of Carmel and Sharon. They shall behold the glory of the Lord, the splendour of our G’d.””
    If the desert will receive so much reward for merely tolerating the Jewish people on its surface, how much more will he be rewarded who welcomes Torah scholars into his home. You find that whereas on the one hand some deserts will be transformed into habitable regions, there are regions which were always habitable and will be made into desolate, arid land. This is the meaning of Maleachi 1,3: “I have hated Esau; I have made his hills a desolation, his territory a home for beasts of the desert.” Isaiah 41,18 says specifically that the desert will become a pool of water. You know that nowadays there are no trees to be found in the desert. In the future trees will grow there. We have this on the authority of Isaiah 41,19: “I will plant cedars in the wilderness, acacias and myrtles and oleasters; I will set cypresses in the desert, box trees and elms as well.” Whereas nowadays people are fearful to travel through these regions, in due course “I will make a path through the wilderness, rivers in the desert” (Isaiah 43,19).
    
    33,3. ממחרת הפסח, on the day following the Passover-offering. The reference is not to the festival but to the day on which the lamb was slaughtered in anticipation of the Exodus. This occurred on the afternoon of the 14th of Nissan; the Israelites left Egypt on the morning of the 15th.
    
    33,4. ובאלוהיהם עשה ה' שפטים, “and the Lord had inflicted punishments on their deities.” G’d had kept His promise made in Exodus 12,12 “and on all the gods of Egypt I will inflict judgments.” How did these judgments or punishments become manifest? If the images were made of silver or gold they would simply melt; if they were made of wood, the wood would rot; if they were made of stone, the stone would crack in many places. The word שפטים also includes that these idols would be found by their worshippers in embarrassing positions as described in Samuel I 5,4: “Dagon was again lying prone on the ground in front of the Ark of the Lord. The head and both hands were cut off.” (the Philistines had taken the Holy Ark captive from the Israelites).
    
    33,7. וישב על פי החירות. The word וישב in the singular is the same here as  וישובו, “they turned back.” Alternatively, the word may refer to the cloud traveling above the people. This would account for the singular וישב.
    
    33,8. ויסעו מפני החירות ויעברו בתוך הים המדברה, “they journeyed away from Pi Hachirot and they crossed the sea into the desert.” The Torah repeats that the people journeyed from Eylim and encamped by the Sea of Reeds to teach us that they returned to the side of the sea they had already passed previously.
    
    33,11. ויסעו מים סוף ויחנו במדבר סין, “They journeyed from the Sea of Reeds and encamped in the desert of Sin.” The desert mentioned here was not the desert of Sinai seeing the Torah goes on to write in verse 15 that when the people journeyed away from Refidim they encamped in the desert of Sinai.” The desert known as “Sin” is situated between Eylim and Sinai, just as reported in Exodus 16,1
    
    33,16. ויחנו בקברות התאוה, “they camped at a place otherwise known as Kadesh Barnea.” The name mentioned here was in commemoration of the people who died because they overindulged their craving for meat.
    
    33,32. ויחנו בחר הגדגד, “they encamped in Char Hagidgad.” The word חר is not to e confused with הר. 
    
    33,37. ויסעו מקדש, “the journeyed from Kadesh.” This was the name of a town.
    
    33,38. בחדש החמישי באחד לחודש, “in the fifth month on the first of the month.” This was the New Moon on which Aaron died. On the ninth of that month (many hundreds of years later) the Temple was burned and the Torah with it. On the 7th of the month of Adar following Moses died, as is reported in Joshua that the Children of Israel crossed the river Jordan on the tenth of the first month (Nissan). You may deduct the three days that the people prepared food for the crossing and 30 days during which the people mourned their leader and you will find that Moses must have died on the 7th of Adar (compare Joshua 4,19 and 1,11).
    33,40. וישמע הכנעני מלך ערד, “the Canaanite, i.e. the King of Aarad heard.” This verse follows mention of Aaron’s death  to teach that when the Canaanite noticed that Aaron had died and that the protective cloud-cover over the camp of the Israelites had disappeared, they assumed that it was now permissible to attack this nation.
    
    33,49. ויחנו על הירדן מבית הישימות עד אבל השטים בערבות מואב, “they made camp by the river Jordan, from Bet Yeshimot until the plains of Shittim in the wilderness of Moav. The Torah describes the length of the camp, i.e. 12 “mils” (13,5 km.) We have the personal testimony of Rabbi Bar bar Chanah who was shown this site (Eyruvin 55). This is when G’d gave the direct order to disinherit (exterminate) the people residing in the land of Canaan at that time, as the people had now come very close to carry out this directive by crossing the river.
    
    33,53. והורשתם את הארץ, “you shall drive out the land.” The meaning is to drive out the inhabitants of the land. Once you have done this, you will be able to settle in it. If you fail to drive out the present inhabitants you will not be able to stay in the land for long.
    
    34,2. כי אתם באים אל ארץ כנען, “for when you come to the land of Canaan, etc.” The grammatical construction of the letter ה in front of the word ארץ is similar to Chronicles II 15,8.
   זאת הארץ אשר תפול לכם בנחלה, ארץ כנען לגבולותיה; “this is the land which will fall to you as an inheritance; the land of Canaan according to its boundaries.” The reason that the Torah refers to the distribution of the land as נפילה, something that “falls,” is that the lots by means of which the shares were allocated “dropped, fell,” on the ground.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Massey 4: The word תפול teaches that G’d first deposed the respective celestial representatives of these Canaanite nations; He made fall from heaven these erstwhile celestial representatives and bound them, demonstrating to Moses that they had lost their power.
    
    34,3. והיה לכם פאת נגב ממדבר צן על ידי אדום, “Your southernmost point shall be from the edge of the Wilderness of  Tzin, at the side of Edom.” The word על יד means the same as אצל, “next to.” We also find this expression in Numbers 13,9. The purpose of this whole list is to tell the Israelites the part of the country they were obligated to conquer. Rashi comments that this is extremely important as there are many commandments in the Torah which are applicable only within the boundaries delineated by the Torah in this chapter. It was critical therefore to know these details precisely.
    
    34,5. נחלה מצרים, “to the stream of Egypt.” This means: “to the river dividing Egypt from Palestine,” and not to the river Nile.
    
    34,6. הים הגדול, “the Mediterranean,” known in the author’s time as “the Spanish Sea.” וגבול¸”and the western boundary.” The sea itself is the boundary. (Ibn Ezra).
    
    34,10. והתאויתם, the word is the same as והתויתם, “draw a line for yourselves for” (תו). Compare Ezekiel 9,4 “draw a line for yourself.” The southern boundary of the land of Israel consists of three countries: a small section of Egypt, the whole land of Edom, the whole land of Moav.” Rashi says so explicitly. [I presume that the reason the author quotes Rashi on this as his authority is that the definition “south” rather than “east” for the land of Moav, sounds peculiar, at least. Ed.]
    
    34,11. ומחה על כתף ים כנרת, the word is similar to ימחאו כף, “clapping with one’s hands,” (Psalms 98,8) i.e. an expression of closeness of two objects, touching.
    
    34,15. שני המטות וחצי המטה לקחו נחלתם מעבר לירדן קדמה מזרחה, “and the two and a half tribes took their inheritance on the far side of the river Jordan in a south-easterly direction.” This whole detail is repeated here to describe the exact area of their inheritance. 
    
    34,17. אלה שמות האנשים אשר ינחלו לכם את הארץ, “these are the names of the men who will take possession of the land for you (on your behalf)”. We have translated this in accordance with Rashi, i.e. that each tribal head acted  as the trustee of his tribe. He in turn would distribute the parcel according to the number of families and the number of male members in his tribe. He would personally select these parcels and whatever he did was considered as if their legal representative had done it. The reason that the Torah names Eleazar the High Priest first, although he did not share out anything, is that Joshua was subject to his authority as he could not initiate a war without first obtaining Eleazar’s approval. The Torah here mentions ten of the tribes and their respective princes, omitting the tribes of Reuven and Gad as these tribes had already taken possession of their inheritance. It starts the list of the tribal heads with Yehudah as Yehudah‘s lot was determined first. Why did the Torah repeat the word נשיא when speaking of the prince of the tribe of Gad, Buki ben Yagli and the princes of the tribes listed after him? Perhaps the reason is that Calev was so well known that there was no need to add his title. He had already been described by that title when the Torah described all the twelve spies in Numbers 13,2 as נשיא. Seeing that the prince of the tribe of Shimon, Zimri, was also well known in the negative sense of the word, a name may not have been mentioned as no replacement had yet been appointed to take the place of the slain Zimri. The title “prince” may have been withheld from the tribe of Binyamin in view of later developments involving the tribe in a civil war as a result of that tribe’s unwillingness to hand over a criminal (Judges, chapter 20,13). We find in Tanchuma Behaalotcha 12 that Elydad ben Kisslon, here mentioned as the prince of Binyamin was identical with Eldad, the colleague of Meydod, both of whom had prophesied as reported in Numbers 11,26. Seeing the man was already known as a prophet there was no need to add another (inferior) title to his name.
    
    35,2. צו את בני ישראל ונתנו ללוים מנחלת אחוזתם ערים לשבת ומגרש לערים סביבותיהם, “instruct the Children of Israel to allocate (give) to the Levites from the heritage of their possessions, cities for dwelling and an open space around their cities.” The expression מגרש describes an empty space outside the city for decorative purposes extending around the walls of a city 1,000 cubits all around that city. This area must not be used to build houses on, nor must it be used to plant trees or perform any agricultural activities. It is reserved for use by the livestock of the Levites and their free-roaming animals.
    
    35,5. ומדותם מחוץ לעיר אלפים באמה, “you shall measure outside the city ...approx 2,000 cubits (in each direction).” The meaning is that the Levites were to be given a belt of  approx. two thousand cubits of land, the inner half of which has already been described in verse 2. The outer 1,000 cubits could be used to plant vineyards, etc. (compare Rashi).
    
    35,6. ועליהם תתנו ארבעים ושתים עיר, “In addition to them (the 6 cities designated for involuntary manslaughterers to take refuge)  you will add another 42 cities for the Levites).” This would make a total of 48 cities in which the Levites would dwell. Three of the cities of refuge were to be situated in the territories of the two and a half tribes on the east bank of the Jordan, the remaining three in Eretz Yisrael proper.
    
    35,11. והקריתם לכם ערים, ערי מקלט, “you shall designate cities for yourselves, cities of refuge.” The expression והקריתם is derived from קריה, city.
   ונס שמה רוצח מכה נפש בשגגה, “and to such a city a murderer who killed a person unintentionally shall flee.”  Such a person is not guilty of the death penalty seeing he did not intend to kill his victim. This law demonstrates that the heart of the person is the prime driving force of man’s activities. This principle applies to the performance of all the commandments as well as to the commission of any sins. Exile is the penalty decreed here seeing that the man’s heart was not associated with his action. The death penalty never applies unless body and heart had committed the sin in question in tandem, in agreement with each other. The body contributes the relevant movement, the heart the relevant intention. Seeing in the example mentioned there was no such co-ordination between body and mind, the guilty party only has to be exiled.
    By the same token, if a person performed a commandment, in accordance  with all its details but his heart was not involved, i.e. he did not mean to perform a commandment by doing what he did, he will not receive a reward for his deed (compare Nazir 23). This is what David meant when he said in Psalms 119,48: “I raise my palms toward Your commandments which I love, etc.” The “raising of hands” which David speaks of is the intention harboured by  his heart. We find these two words side by side in Lamentations 3,41: “let us raise our hearts with our palms.” 
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Massey 12: “the words: ‘he who kills a person inadvertently,’ emphasise the fact that the deed was inadvertent not accompanied by malice.” If a person who had killed intentionally were to claim that his deed had been committed inadvertently the city of refuge does not afford him any refuge even if he had already reached it. He would be removed even from the Holy Altar in the Temple and convicted. We know this from Exodus 21,14: ”if someone kills a person deliberately, using subterfuge, you shall even remove him from My Altar to apply the death penalty to him.” We find that this is precisely what happened to Yoav, David’s commander-in-chief, who held on to the corners of the Altar in order to escape prosecution for murder (Kings I 2,28). He was forcefully removed and executed by Benayahu. On the other hand, we find that the law to exile an involuntary murderer dates back already to the very beginning of human history when David exclaimed in Psalms 25,6: “O Lord be mindful of Your compassion and Your faithfulness; they are as old as time.” 
    According to the Midrash we quoted David said to G’d: ”Your compassion and faithfulness extend to the inadvertent killer of a human being for whom You have prepared a city of refuge seeing that such killer who did not kill intentionally is not guilty of death. This compassion of Yours dates back to the time You created man.” Although Adam brought death into the world, You did not kill him but You only exiled him as we know from Genesis 3,23: “He exiled him from Gan Eden.” We also have a verse describing this as an expulsion (verse 24 immediately following). [I suppose the Midrash bases itself on the repetition of the reference to Adam being expelled. Ed.]
    
    35,12. למקלט מגואל, “as a refuge from the avenger.” The reference is to a family member of the slain person who would act as his avenger.
    
    35,13. שש ערי מקלט תהיינה לכם, “you shall have six cities of refuge.”  We learn from this verse that although Moses already set aside three of these cities (on the east bank) while he was still alive, they did not begin to function as cities of refuge until the other three cities were so designated after the conquest of the land of Canaan. Even though nine and a half tribes resided on the west bank of the Jordan as compared to two and a half tribes on the east bank, both sides had the same number of cities of refuge. This indicates that the relative incidence of murder in the territory of the two and a half tribes was statistically far higher than that in Eretz Yisrael proper. Gilead had a bad reputation in this regard as we know from Hoseah 6,8 :”Gilead is a city of evildoers, tracked up with blood.” The provision of three cities of refuge for that part of the land of Israel reflects the goodness of the Lord as we read in Psalms 25,8: “Good and upright is the Lord; therefore He shows the sinners the way.” If G’d is so compassionate towards involuntary murderers, showing them a path how to escape from their predicament, how much more compassionate must He be towards genuinely righteous people!
    Nachmanides provides two separate reasons  why the Torah provided relatively more cities of refuge for a territory with such a  small population as the east bank of the Jordan. One reason cited is that it was in honour of Moses who had set these towns aside already during his life time when there really had not been any need to do so. The second reason is purely functional. Seeing that the territory in which the two and a half tribes settled, i.e. the territory formerly under the control of Sichon and Og was so much larger than that of the nine and a half tribes on the west bank, had the allocation been proportionate to the relative population, the average distance a potential killer would have had to travel to escape the avenger would have been so much greater that his chances of actually reaching a safe location would have been unrealistically small. Hence, the same number of such cities was allocated by the Torah to that region as was allocated to a region which had been ruled over by no fewer than 31 kings.
    
    35,16. ואם בכלי ברזל הכהו וימות רוצח הוא, “If he had struck him with an iron implement and he died, he is a murderer.” The Torah legislated that if someone killed with a stone or a wooden implement the court will examine if the force used was sufficient to result in death under normal circumstances, i.e. if the victim were healthy. We know this from verse 17: “If he struck him with a hand-sized stone which is sufficiently large to cause death, or with a wooden implement.” These words mean that the court must weigh the relative strength of the blow according to the physique of who administered it and according to the implement employed to strike the victim with. When the blow was struck with an iron tool or weapon, the Torah does not apply such criteria but assumes that anyone who strikes a blow with such an instrument has murderous intentions. Iron instruments, even if as small as a needle are capable of causing death. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Rotzeach  Nefesh 3,1; 3,2, etc.)
    If the killer pushed the victim so that he fell off the roof of a building and died, this is a situation covered by the words in verse 20: “if he pushed him out of hatred or hurled him from an ambush so that he died,” the killer is automatically assumed to have had murderous intent. If less lethal instruments caused the death of the victim the court has to assess if the blows inflicted were prompted by hostility. This is why the Torah wrote: “or he struck him in enmity with his hand.”
    
    35,22. ואם בפתע בלא איבה, “But if with suddenness, without enmity,” The word “suddenly” means that it was caused by an accident. The victim was close by the killer and he did not have a chance to be warned.
    
    35,23. ויפל עליו, “he caused it to fall upon him.” This verse caused our sages (Makkot 7) to determine that if someone kills unintentionally by dropping something he must go to the city of refuge.
    
    35,25. וישב בה עד מות הכהן הגדול, “and he will stay there until the death of the High Priest.” Our sages in Makkot 11 linked the duration of the stay of such an inadvertent killer to the death of the High Priest to the fact that the High Priest is the means of atonement for the people; it had been up to him to beseech G’d for mercy and he had failed to do so (adequately) or the tragedy of this killing would not have occurred. In this manner he shares the guilt of any murder which occurs during his tenure of the office of High Priest.
    Furthermore, the death of the High Priest serves as a measure of consolation and comfort for the relatives of the slain person who will no longer bear a grudge concerning that killing. The Sifri on our verse also writes that seeing that the High Priest is the cause for the Presence of the Shechinah to dwell in Israel, i.e. the cause that lengthens the lives of the people, the killer had caused the opposite i.e. he caused the Shechinah to depart [by reducing the average life span of the people through killing someone prematurely, Ed.]. It is not appropriate therefore that the killer present himself in the vicinity of the High Priest. Hence he had to remain confined to the city of refuge.
   אשר משח אותו, “whom one had anointed.” The subject המושח is missing in this verse. It  is one of numerous verses where this occurs. Our sages in Makkot 11 derive from this missing word that if a High Priest died during the period that the court had to decide if the killer was an intentional killer or not, and a new High Priest was appointed prior to the end of the trial, the killer has to remain in the city of refuge until the death of the second High Priest. The reason that although the second High Priest was not even in office yet is still associated with this killer is that the new appointee should have prayed that the court would find the killer as innocent of wrongdoing instead of convicting him of manslaughter through negligence. [I believe the underlying linkage is that the killer confined in the city of refuge prays for the demise of the High Priest so that he can go home. Ed.]
    
    35,29. והיו אלה לכם לחקת עולם משפט לדורותיכם בכל מושבותיכם, “and these shall be for you a decree of justice for your generations in all your dwellings.” This verse teaches that as long as Jews reside in Eretz Yisrael and they have a Sanhedrin which functions, a Sanhedrin can function outside Eretz Yisrael. This is how Rashi explains this verse. Nowadays that there is no Sanhedrin in Eretz Yisrael, no Sanhedrin (its authority) is competent in the Diaspora either.  
    The meaning of the verse according to the plain text is that  even in these times there should be a judiciary wherever Jews reside, competent to rule on matters of financial disputes, compensation for injuries inflicted, etc., etc.; any infringement of laws for which the penalty prescribed by the Torah is 39 lashes such a court is competent to rule on. This is why the Torah writes the words לדורותיכם בכל מושבותיכם. However, in the absence of a Sanhedrin in Eretz Yisrael we are not entitled to rule on capital offenses [even if the host country were to give us such authority. Ed.] We derive this from Sanhedrin 52 based on Deut. 17,9: ובאת אל הכהנים הלוים ואל השופט...ועשית על פי הדבר אשר יגידו לך מן המקום ההוא, “you will come to the priests, the Levites, and the judge...who will tell you from that place”. When there is a High Priest capital cases may be tried, when there is no High Priest such authority does not exist. We also learned this in the Mechilta (page 126) “how do we know that capital cases may be judged only when the Temple is standing? The Torah writes (Exodus 21,14) “from My Altar you shall take him to die.” When there is a Temple and an altar you may decree a death penalty; when there is no altar we have no authority to decree death by human hands. (compare also Nachmanides).
    
    35,31. ולא תקחו כופר לנפש רוצח, “and you must not accept a ransom payment in exchange of the life of the murderer.” The Torah tells us here that no amount of money is adequate to atone for the death of a Jew; hence a ransom payment is out of the question. The guilt of murdering someone is the greatest sin between man and his fellow man. Solomon told us in Proverbs 28,17: “a man burdened with blood guilt will flee to a pit; let no one help him.” We may learn a lesson from Achav, King of Israel. When the prophet makes comparisons between the levels of guilt of different kings we are told in Kings I 21,25 concerning a very evil king, “there was never one like Achav who committed himself to doing what was displeasing to the Lord, at the instigation of his wife Izzevel.” When Achav’s sins were measured and his merits were weighed against them, the decisive sin held against him was that he had framed Navot and had him executed. This is why we read in Kings I 22,21: “the spirit (of the deceased Navot) came forward before the Lord and said: “I will entice him.” “How?, the Lord asked him.” And he replied: “I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.” Then He (G’d) said: “you will entice and you will prevail. Go out and do it.” compare Sanhedrin 102).The story is an illustration that although Achav had not even killed with his own hands and could have pointed to the court which convicted Navot as guilty as responsible for his death, G’d considered the deed as his. How much more severely must someone be viewed who killed with his own hands.
    
    35,33. ולא תחניפו את הארץ, “you must not  bring guilt upon the land.” The word חנף means to commit evil secretly.
   ולא תטמא את הארץ, “so that the land will not be defiled.” The letter ת in the word תטמא is a feminine form third person. The verb is in a passive form. The Torah means that we must not allow the חנופה, the secretly committed sins, to contaminate the Holy Land. Alternatively, the letter ת is masculine, second person  active future tense and means: “each one of you is charged with not defiling the land.” The reason why such a sin would be grave is because “I the Lord dwell in it amongst the Children of Israel.”
    
    36,1. ויקרבו ראשי האבות למשפחת בני גלעד בן מכיר בן מנשה, “the heads of the families of the sons of Gilead son of Machir, son of Menasheh approached;” this paragraph too is a continuation of the paragraphs dealing with the distribution of the cities to the Levites, land taken from the heritage of the ordinary Israelites. The term ראשי האבות refers to the princes. (compare Ibn Ezra).
    
    36,4. ואם יהיה היובל לבני ישראל, “and when the Jubilee year will arrive for the Children of Israel, etc.” These people argued that if the daughters of Tzelofchod were to marry someone outside their tribe, the heritage they had been given would then pass over to their husbands and as a result would never revert to their tribe even in the Jubilee year. The result would be an increase of ancestral land of some other tribe at the expense of the tribe of Menashe. The legal reason was that inherited property is not subject to the Yovel  legislation.
    
    36,7. ולא תסב נחלה לבני ישראל ממטה אל מטה אחר, “so that ancestral property will not make the rounds from tribe to another tribe.” This commandment was valid only for the generation of the Israelites entering the land of Canaan at that time (Baba Batra 120). At that time the twelve tribes of the Israelites on terrestrial earth corresponded to their exact counterparts in the celestial spheres (Zohar Bamidbar 118). If one tribe would have sold part of its ancestral territory to another, the result would have been an imbalance of the forces representing the tribes in the celestial regions. Once the people had settled in Eretz Yisrael which is the terrestrial counterpart of the sum total of all these celestial forces of the tribes, this did not matter anymore. 
    
    36,8. וכל בת יורשת נחלה ממטות בני ישראל, “and any daughter inheriting ancestral land, etc.”  A girl whose father did not have a son who could inherit the land. This is why the Torah had to write a second time (verse 9) “so that the inheritance shall not make the rounds, etc.” (Ibn Ezra).
    As a result of this verse it became a custom in Israel that if a girl who had inherited ancestral land married out of her tribe to describe her as a זונה, “a harlot.” She would therefore be deprived of the inheritance from her father. (compare David Kimchi on Judges 11,1) This is the meaning of the words in Judges 11,1 that Yiftach the Gileadi was the son of a woman known as זונה, harlot. [i.e. it is not a reference to her sexual mores. Ed.] The prophet is merely telling us that his mother had belonged to a different tribe than his father. Yonathan ben Uzziel also translates the word  זונה  in Judges 11,1 in the same way as does Kimchi. [not in our editions.]
    Perhaps the meaning of the word לא תסב נחלה refers to persons, not landed property, and this would account for the Torah writing the same words twice. [it would be an oblique reference to the transmigration of the souls. If injustice would occur through the incorrect handling of ancestral property, certain souls thus deprived might have to be placed inside other bodies to right the wrong during another cycle of life on earth. Ed.]
    This may also account for the use of the word ידבקו, “they shall cleave” (verse 9), seeing that this is a term applicable to both souls and bodies but not to land. The first time (verse 7) the Torah writes the word it refers to the body, the second time to the soul.
    
    36,11. מחלה, תרצה,  “Machlah, Tirtzah;” earlier  the Torah mentioned the names of these girls in the chronological order of their births, whereas here the Torah mentions them in the order of their getting married. When the Torah describes their husbands as “sons of their uncles,” this does not mean that the husbands were all brothers of one another (Ibn Ezra).
    
    36,13. אלה המצות והמשפטים, These are the commandments and the ordinances, etc.” the third Book of the Torah, the Book of Vayikra, known as Torat Kohanim concluded with the words “these are the מצות, commandments which G’d commanded Moses.” The fourth Book, the Book of Bamidbar, is also concluded (sealed) with similar words except that the Torah added the word והמשפטים, “and the ordinances (social laws).” The reason is that it contains the laws of inheritance, the legislation about murder, all laws governing the way people interact with one another.
    It is up to us to understand why in Bechukotai the Torah describes the laws as being commanded את משה, whereas in our verse here the Torah describes them as being commanded by G’d ביד משה, “through”, or “by means of” Moses. The reason is that after the first covenant  which the Children of Israel received and accepted at Mount Sinai the King (G’d) canceled it when they traded the invisible eternal G’d for the image of an ox, i.e. the golden calf. Their erstwhile glory turned to a source of destruction; when Moses observed the letters on the Tablets flying away he threw the Tablets on the ground.
    Now, however, when the second covenant was made with the next generation in the wilderness of Moav, this covenant between G’d and the people was permanent. All the mountains moved, the hills were shaking (Isaiah 54,10). Every rock was uprooted from its place (Job 14,18). This covenant  will never be annulled, the strong bond of love between G’d and His people will not be torn asunder. The words of this covenant were accepted by an oath and a curse (in case we should renege, (Sotah 37). Keeping all this in mind, the Torah wrote as its concluding words: “these are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to conclude with the Jewish people in the land of Moav in addition to the covenant He made with them at Chorev.”
    
