
    1 , 1 . .בראשית According to the plain meaning of the text, i.e. what is known as the פשט the meaning of the word בראשית is: "at the beginning." If, nonetheless, the Torah did not write the word בראשונה  “at the beginning,” an unmistakable expression, this is because the expression  בראשיתincludes so many more and exalted meanings than does the word .בראשונה
    According to the view of Rashi, grammatically speaking the  word  בראשית is a possessive form, as it is every time it appears in the Torah. It signals that on the first day G'd created only the light. The meaning of the full verse then is: "at the beginning of the creation of heaven and earth there was Tohu  Vavohu, chaos. G'd said: 'let there be light.'" Everything else developed from that point on including the creation of heaven and earth. The word בראשית here is comparable to the verse in Hoseah, 1,1. תחלת דבר ה' בהושע ויאמר ה' אל הושע, וגו'" “When G'd began to speak to Hoseah, G'd said to Hoseah, etc." Rashi's opinion was that if the Torah had wanted to tell us that heaven and earth had been created  on the first day, the Torah should have written.בראשונה 
    The fact is however, that the word is not a possessive form at all but an independent word and it is equivalent to the Torah having written בראשונה. Proof of this is found in the tone-sign tipcha on the word which separates it from the word which follows it.
    The paragraph tells us that heaven and earth with all their derivatives were created on the first day, all of them without there having preceded them any physical matter at all. This fact is attested to by the word ברא which describes the creation of "something out of nothing." This, at any rate, is the opinion of Rabbi Nechemyah who is quoted to this effect in Midrash Tanchuma at the beginning of our portion. On the other hand, Rabbi Yehudah, who disagrees with him, claims that the universe was created during six days. He bases himself on the repeated directives of the Torah that something new should emerge and the Torah's reporting that indeed it did, using the words ויהי כן to inform us that G'd's instructions had been carried out. Rabbi Nechemyah claims that the proof that the whole universe was created already on the first day are the words (1,24) תוצא הארץ “let the earth bring forth." The wording "bring forth" indicates that G'd referred to matters which had already been in existence ready to emerge but had not yet seen the light of day until commanded to do so by G'd. The matter can be compared to a farmer who sows six grains of corn at the same time only to find that they take root at different times instead of all sprouting forth simultaneously. The six days of creation described by the Torah report the sequence in which G'd's creative activity became manifest. This is what the Psalmist had in mind (Psalms 33,9) כי הוא אמר ויהי i.e. “for He had given a directive and then it materialised." David taught us that G'd's directive and its execution as visible fact occurs simultaneously.
    Afterwards, (the creation of heaven and earth) He gave these various directives introduced by the Torah with the words ויאמר אלוקים and G'd's work became manifest, was converted from being a potential to becoming actual.
    ,אלוקים            the plain meaning of the word is that it describes divinity. It describes the One who possesses all the divine powers. This is the reason it is expressed in the plural, i.e. not merely אל or אלוה, but the One Who comprises  all the divine powers within His essence. An example of such use of the word is found in Joshua 24,19. אלוקים קדשים הוא It means that in His capacity as אלוקים  He comprises all aspects of holiness, sanctity. We find a parallel use of words describing terrestrial authority in Isaiah 19,4 where such rulers are described in the plural as אדנים קשה, "a harsh master" (although the adjective applied to "them" is in the singular). The reason the noun is in the plural is because such rulers manifest their authority in so many different ways. If such use of the plural is appropriate for describing terrestrial rulers, how much more so is it appropriate for describing G'd whose authority is manifested in innumerably more ways than the authority of even the most powerful human king on earth. Their entire authority is, after all, only derived from G'd. G'd, by definition, is One, indivisible, but His powers are many.
    We find many other examples of nouns in the singular being described as if they had been written in the plural. To name some: ליל שמורים הוא (Exodus 12,42) "it is a night of vigil," (the word for "vigil" is in the plural). Or, (Leviticus 23,28) יום כפורים הוא “it is a Day of Atonement."
    Another reason why the Torah refers to G'd as אלוקים in the plural is the great deal of intelligence, wisdom, and insight He employed when He created the universe. [I believe the author treats each attribute as something separate, hence He justifies the plurality of attributes by referring to the One who employed all these attributes in the plural. Ed.] This is what Solomon had in mind when he wrote in Proverbs 3,19 "ה' בחכמה יסד ארץ כונן שמים בתבונה." The Lord founded earth by employing wisdom, He established the heavens by employing understanding." G'd is described as employing different attributes when creating the universe.
    From an homiletical point of view the name אלוקים describes G'd in His capacity as judge. This is what the Torah meant when it wrote אלוקים לא תקלל (Exodus 22,27) "you must not curse a judge." Onkelos translates the word in that verse as  ,דיינא judge. We have an unequivocal verse in Psalms 75,8 proving that the word means judge, i.e. כי אלוקים שופט זה ישפיל וזה ירים “For G'd is a judge; He raises up one man while bringing down another." The term אלוקים for G'd is appropriate at this point as He employed the attribute of Justice when creating the universe.
    From a mystical point of view, i.e. קבלה the word is composed of two separate words אל הם. The first word is a name for G'd in the possessive form, the second word הם describing all the other attributes G'd employed when creating the universe. We find something along those lines in Numbers 31,16 הן הנה “they are the very ones."
    As to the letter י which so far is unaccounted for by this kabbalistic approach), we find such a letter י in Kohelet 12,1 וזכור את בוראיך" “and remember your Creator," where the letter י appears to be extraneous at first glance. [After all we have only  one  Creator, and what did Solomon mean? Ed.] The author contents himself with the enigmatic words: "the intelligent student will understand what I mean."[I believe the message is that the letter has been slipped in to hint at the ten emanations which are part of basic kabbalistic teachings, explaining how totally abstract matter could have been converted into tangible matter. Ed.] 
    "heaven and earth." Whenever the word appears it adds something to the meaning of the plain text. At the most basic level, the two words here are meant to convey that two additional matters or raw materials were involved in the creation of heaven and earth. 
    According to the plain meaning of the text, we understand the two words as references to the two different raw-materials (elements) G'd employed when creating heaven and earth, seeing the two are obviously not made of the same material. This is the meaning of "the earth was tohu vavohu", i.e. that after the initial act of creation earth was still in a chaotic state. The specific meaning of the two words is that the material, was covered with a form, This is what is meant by Isaiah 66,2 The first three words in that verse refer to existing material, whereas the last words "My hands have fashioned," refer to G'd supplying this material with a distinctive form, צורה. According to this verse in Isaiah, G'd first  created  the raw material, ,ברא but subsequently His activities consisted only of  refining  such raw material by acts of יצירה respectively. ,בריאה creation of matter, consisted of merely creating the smallest physical particle, a ,נקודה “a point," something barely perceptible. This little particle formed the beginning of the entire solar system.
    Looked at from an homiletical point of view, the extra words את in the phrase "heaven and earth," include the sun, moon, stars in the case of the word  שמיםand the entire range of vegetation in the case of the word ארץ  .  
    1,2.  ,והארץ היתה תהו ובהו“and the earth had been in a chaotic state, etc." This is a reference to the raw material which had not yet been properly defined and therefore could not yet be named. This explanation is analogous to what our sages have said in Kidushin 40 בתוהא על הראשונות “he had second thoughts on what he had thought before." The Torah called this indefinable material "tohu," whereas Greek philosophers called it "hayuli," the original matter. The word "bohu," on the other hand, refers to this material once it had been equipped with a distinctive shape and had assumed a definitive form. The word בהו is actually two words comprised of  בו הוא"something which does have a certain form by which is identifiable". This is what Isaiah 34,11 had in mind when he said "He will measure it with a line of chaos and with weights of emptiness." The prophet related the word "a line," to the word which described something indefinable, visible but not substantive. Incidentally, this word is related or derived from Psalms 40,2 קוה  קויתי ה' i.e. intense hope precedes concretisation of one's wishes. Ed.] An artisan envisages מקוה, a building in his mind's eye before he builds it. The relationship of the word is that the stones are the manifestation, the format of the building the artisan had first envisaged.
    To sum up the whole passage: "At the beginning G'd created a minute amount of matter out of absolute nothingness. This contained within itself the potential and energy to expand into what we call "heaven and earth." After this initial stage of creative activity by G'd the earth had still remained in a chaotic state, matter without separation into shape or form of the four basic raw materials (elements) of the universe, i.e. fire, wind, water and dust. The word הארץ includes all these four basic materials the earth is made of. Even though the material  עפר is only the last one described in the record of מעשה בראשית at the creation of man. Ed.] the Torah refers to it first when speaking about ארץ which was a minute point. Philosophers called it a "point," [to distinguish between the solar system which  appears in constant motion, whereas earth  appears stationary. Ed.]. They viewed the earth as if it were a point surrounded by the planetary system. Earth was viewed as stationary based on Kohelet 1,4 והארץ לעולם עומדת “and the earth remains in its place forever." This is in contrast to the planets surrounding it which move from place to place and never remain in the same spot. Only a small part of earth is in motion, ever. The reason the planetary system, i.e. ,שמים  is called עליון  lofty, high, is because the material it is made of is so delicate, so fine, and so pure. Earth, on the other hand, is made of the coarsest, the most opaque material.
    Once the Torah had begun to discuss the properties of earth it returns its attention to the heaven and lists the other basic raw materials (elements) in their proper order, i.e. "fire, wind, and water. 
    The word חשך darkness, is a reference to elemental fire which is dark (compare Shemot Rabbah 2,10.) [This recalls the statement of our sages that the Torah was written with black fire on white fire. Ed.] It is listed ahead of the second element רוח, wind, seeing that fire is a more comprehensive element than wind. The wind precedes water, i.e. "the wind (spirit) of G'd hovered over the deep." This is because wind is a more comprehensive element than water. Water, on the other hand, is a more comprehensive element than earth (dust). We find this order of the basic elements both in Kohelet and in Job.
    Just as the Torah in this instance began its detailed description with the נקודה the "point," when it wrote: "and the earth was chaotic," so the Book of Kohelet begins with this "point" describing it as something which remains in place forever, i.e. והארץ לעולם עומדת (Kohelet 1,4). Next Solomon mentions the element fire when he wrote וזרח השמש ובא השמש sun shone and the sun set (Kohelet 1,5)." After the fire Solomon mentions the wind in Kohelet 1,6 where he wrote  סובב סובב הולך הרוח “the wind goes round and round." Lastly, Solomon mentions the water when he wrote הנחלים הולכים אל הים", “all the rivers flow into the sea" (Kohelet 1,7).
    Also in the Book of Job (Job 28,24) its description of creation begins with the "point," i.e. earth, or "dust," when the author wrote: i.e. כי הוא לקצות הארץ יביט תחת כל השמים יראה, ”for He sees to the ends of the earth, observes all that is beneath the heavens." The reference to the heavens is a reference to fire. The text continues: לעשות לרוח משקל ומים תכן במדה when He fixed the weight of the winds, set the measure of the waters." We observe that the elements are listed in the same order as in Kohelet and in Bereshit. The reason for this is that all these three Books concern themselves with some degree of research, and its words are based on our knowledge of nature.
    In our verse the Torah informed us that the earth assumed a shape, that the darkness which is the fire, spread out above the mixture of dust and water. This mixture is called תהום,"the deep," in the language of the Torah. It describes the ocean which has earth dissolved in it. Compare Jonah 2,6 תהום יסובבני, "the deep surrounds me."
    The wind was blowing entering the darkness and hovering above the water. When the Torah speaks of ורוח אלוקים, we would actually have expected  ורוח האלוקים, i.e. “the wind (spirit) of G'd;" the reason the Torah chose to omit the letter ה , thereby apparently identifying wind as something divine, this is because of all matters in the physical universe wind is the closest to the invisible abstract force called G'd. Even though in some respects fire is even more insubstantial, diaphanous, than the wind, the Torah did not want to associate this word with G'd seeing that we described fire as a product of, or rather synonymous with, darkness. 
    From an homiletical point of view, the words בראשית ברא אלוקים את השמים ואת הארץ are understood to mean "on account of three merits the universe was created, the merit of  חלהi.e. giving the priest the first portion of a woman's dough, the merit of מעשרות i.e. the various tithes given to the Levite or the priest, and the merit of בכורים, bringing part of the first ripe produce to the Temple as a gesture of thanksgiving. This statement is based on all of these three commandments being described in the Torah at one place or another as  ראשית"the first of something." (Numbers 16,2; Deut. 18,4; Exodus 23,19). Furthermore, our sages said (Bereshit Rabbah 1,6) "the universe was created for the sake of Moses who has been described as  ראשיתin Deut. 33,21 וירא ראשית לו 'He regarded him as His  .ראשיתThese three commandments called  ראשיתnot only have a common denominator, but each one of them is also an allusion to "wisdom," something called ראשית. The word is translated as חוכמא , wisdom, by the Jerusalem Targum on Genesis 1,1. This is all because the letters in the commandment  בכוריםthe first ripe fruit, allude to the Unity of G'd (according to Rabbi Chavell, the author means the three letters in the word  ב-כ-רallude to  בינהinsight, כתר crown, and ב=ראשית חכמהrespectively). Similarly, the commandment of  ,מעשרותtithing, is a reference to such superior wisdom as the number 10 is reminiscent of the Power of the One and only Creator. The commandment of חלה by its very definition represents the very first of a woman's productive activity, making bread and donating its first part to representatives of the spiritual leaders of the people, the priests.
    As to the Midrash stating that the merit of Moses accounted for the creation of the universe, this is not only because we have seen that he is associated with  ראשיתbut also because it was he who was found worthy to give the Torah to the Jewish people.
    If you examine the word  בראשיתmore closely you will observe that it contains an allusion to the building of the first Temple which stood for 410 years, corresponding to the word  בזאת in the verse  בזאת יבא אהרן אל הקד“equipped with this (410) Aaron will enter the Temple" (Leviticus 16,3). You are no doubt aware that our sages in Pessachim 54 have stated that the Temple was created before haven and earth. [the reference is to the plan for the eventual site of the Temple on earth, or to its counterpart in heaven. Ed.] This is the reason the Torah first wrote  בראשית ברא"first G'd created something," and only afterwards to alert the reader that some things preceded the creation of heaven and earth. Seeing that according to Bereshit Rabbah (end of second chapter) G'd is reported as having envisaged the Temple as being destroyed and being rebuilt, the Torah wrote that to hint that there would come a time when G'd's presence would be withdrawn from the Jewish people.
   ורוח אלוקים מרחפת על פני המים "and the spirit (wind) of G'd hovered above the surface of the waters." This is a reference to the Torah which even at a time of the withdrawal of G'd's presence, שכינה would never be totally forgotten by His people even when they are in exile.
     ויאמר אלוקים יהי אור"G'd said: "let there be light." This is an allusion to messianic times. The period of the kingdom of the Messiah is alluded to in Isaiah 60,1 "Arise, shine, for your light has dawned; the Presence of the Lord has shone upon you."
    ,ויבדל אלקים בין האור ובין החושך"and G'd separated the light from the darkness." This is an allusion to the separation between the Jewish people and the Gentile nations, the former always looking forward to the Messiah and redemption, whereas the Gentiles are content to remain is spiritual darkness. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah, 2,5 commented on this that in this verse we have a reference to the four kingdoms [preceding the messianic age Ed.]. This is what they said: "the words והארץ היתה תהו ובהו are a reference to the empire of the Babylonians; the wordובהו  is a reference to the empire of the Medes. The wordוחשך  is a reference to the empire of the Greeks, whereas the word תהום is a reference to the Roman Empire. Finally, the wordsורוח אלקים  refer to the spirit of the Messiah." 
    The point the Midrash, is trying to make is that G'd foresaw all historic developments already before He even commenced to create the physical universe, a concept which is described in Isaiah 46,10 as מגיד מראשית אחרית "foretelling future events." The sages wanted to reassure us that the whole objective of the creation of the universe was the period of the Messiah. 
    If you will examine the text even more closely, you will observe that the word בראשית, is composed of the two words אש ברית, an allusion to the third and enduring Temple based on the prophecy in Zachariah 2,9, (see commentary by Rabbi Chavell). The words are derived from a rearrangement of the letters in בראשית. You can also divide the word בראשית to form the two words ברא שית, suggesting "He created the foundation," שיתין, the place underneath the altar in the Holy Temple in Jerusalem which the Talmud described as the "navel" of the earth. A third possibility is to divide the wordבראשית  into,ברא תיש  "He created a ram," an allusion to the ram offered on Mount Moriah by Avraham in lieu of his son Yitzchak. Our sages in Avot 5,6 have described this ram as having been created prior to the conclusion of the six days of creation. Another word contained within the wordבראשית  is the word ארשת, an allusion to speech (Psalms 21,3).
    The meaning of the additional letter י, which combined with the word ארשת spells ,בראשית ,is that we have an allusion to the ten directives G'd uttered and which are recorded in the Torah's report about G'd's creative activity. Remember that the universe was created in the month of Tishrey and that the word בראשית alludes to this, i.e. the letters can be read as א-בתשרי.
    Concerning this date of when the universe was created there is a dispute in Rosh Hashanah, folios 10-11, between Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua. The former holds that the universe was created in Tishrey, whereas Rabbi Yehoshua believed that it was created in the month of Nissan. Although, generally speaking, in a dispute between these two scholars we rule according to the view of Rabbi Yehoshua, in this instance the Talmud rules in favour of the view of Rabbi Eliezer. This is the meaning of the statement on that folio: "when we pray nowadays on Rosh Hashanah, describing it as זה היו תחלת מעשיך, 'this is the day when You commenced Your works,' this reflects the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer."
    Looking at the words בראשית ברא אלקים את השמים ואת הארץ from a rationalistic, investigative point of view, it is a well known fact that the universe is divided into three basic spheres. One sphere comprises the world of angels, i.e. celestial regions; the second sphere is what we call "outer space," the sphere of the planetary system; the third sphere is our own terrestrial world. All three parts of the universe were created by the same invisible force. The word בראשית is an allusion to this mysterious force which is the origin of everything in creation, a force which itself knew no beginning. First, this force created the celestial regions and the angels therein. These are called אלקים in the Scriptures. The world of planets is called שמים; our own terrestrial world is known as הארץ. It is due to these considerations that the Torah could not commence by writing אלקים ברא בראשית, but had to write בראשית ברא אלקים in order for the word ברא to refer back to the word בראשית. This enabled us to appreciate that a mysterious force called  בראשית created the region of the angels known as אלקים. The term "earth" includes such phenomena as the moon and anything closer to earth than the moon. The next verse explains this in greater detail when the Torah writes: והארץ היתה תהו ובהו, that the part of the universe known as the terrestrial region had been in a chaotic state at the time when the Torah had described the commencement of creation, i.e. ברא. The subject that is referred to as having been in a state of chaos are the four basic elements the existence of which had been hinted at in the previous verse as we explained earlier. The word ארץ here is a generic term applying to each of these four components our terrestrial earth is made of, collectively as well as separately, such as in Genesis 1,10 ויקרא אלקים ליבשה ארץ. In view of this [ארץ without the letters וה in front, Ed.], the word  והארץ refers to Earth, i.e. all its four elements combined. The words   תהו ובהו on the other hand, refer to the element   alone. The Torah tells us that at that stage this element could not be defined as it could not be isolated.
    You should know that the number of planets is 955, corresponding to numerical value of the word השמים.  [The final letter ם is considered as equivalent to 600. Ed.] You will find this idea in a book called מעשה מרכבה, where we are told that at the time G'd descends from the celestial regions, i.e. from 955 רקיעים, heavens, and He seats Himself on the throne commensurate with His glory, all these heavens as well as the gateways to the regions called  ערבות, recite the verse שאו שערים ראשיכם, "lift up you gates your heads, etc." (Psalms 24,9).
    We also find in Derech Eretz Rabbah, that "G'd is the solitary Ruler in the celestial regions, His name is One, and He resides in 390 heavens [the numerical equivalent of the word שמים, Rabbi Chavell.]. Each one of these "heavens" has been stamped with His name, a name which has been alluded to in the Torah (Deut. 32,1) האזינו ה-שמים, "hearken  the Heavens."  When I shall explain that verse in due course, I will quote that Midrash in detail. At any rate, it is impossible to reduce this number of heavens.
    According to our sages in the Talmud (Kabbalists), there are only seven heavens and they are enumerated in Chagigah 12. We quote: "Rav Yehudah said that there are two kinds of heaven seeing that the Torah wrote in Deut. 10,14: השמים ושמי השמים, 'the heaven and the heaven of the heavens.' Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said that there are seven heavens and they are called: וילון, רקיע, שחקים, זבול, מעון, מכון, ערבות. According to researchers, i.e. the philosophers, there are nine heavens. They are: גלגל המקיף compare Maimonides hilchot Yesodey Ha-Torah),גלגל המזלות  the zodiac, i.e. the horoscopes, and the seven "heavens" dominated by the seven fixed stars [an antiquated astronomical concept believed in by all astronomers until exploded by Copernicus about 1540. Ed.] According to these "philosophers," the four elements of our terrestrial universe rank below these regions dominated by what is known as שבעה כוכבי לכת, the 7 fixed planets.
    King Solomon already listed these four elements in the same order in a single verse in Proverbs 30,4 where he wrote:  מי עלה שמים וירד, מי אסף רוח בחפניו, מי צרר מים בשמלה? מי הקים כל אפסי ארץ? "Who has ascended to heaven and come down? Who has gathered the wind (spirit) in his hand? Who has wrapped the water in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? According to the philosophers the element of fire receives its heat from the planet moon which is immediately above it and closest to it. This is due to the constant motion of that planet. It is a well known fact that every body which is in motion generates heat by its motion. The larger the body in question and the closer to earth, the greater the heat it generates and its ability to warm other bodies which are close to it. Seeing that it is the nature of fire to rise constantly, it is the first element to receive warmth from the moon. The fact that fire rises must certainly have a purpose. The moon itself, however is not warm nor does it inflame. Nor does fire rise indefinitely.  Both the earth and the moon have been assigned definitive orbits separated from each other by an atmosphere which neither can break out of. Just as water, which has a tendency to descend, cannot descend to the extent of flooding the earth, so fire cannot ascend beyond certain limits and inflame what is beyond those limits. These philosophers use Job 37,18 חזק כראי מוצק ועדו , "strong like a mirror which has been cast," as proof that the atmosphere separating planets and their respective orbits from one another is impenetrable.
    I have already pointed out that the universe was created in the month of Tishrey, a month under the  influence of the zodiac sign מאזנים, "scales." This is also the meaning of the second verse in Genesis, that the wind of the Lord was hovering above the deep." We know that the zodiac sign governing the wind is "scales," whereas the zodiac sign governing water is  עקרב, "scorpion." The correct interpretation of our verse is therefore: "When did G'd create heaven and earth? At a time when the רוח אלוקים  rises develops and rises in the morning, i.e. at the time when the zodiac sign "scales" which is the zodiac sign pertaining to the רוח, "wind" hovers "above the face of the waters" which is close to the zodiac sign "scales," the sign pertaining to the waters.
    The reason why these respective zodiac signs are called "scales" and "scorpion" as well as the reason for the names of the remainder of the zodiac signs is because a cluster of stars form a shape reminiscent of such objects or animals in the sky. According to tradition, at the time the deluge occurred the constellations of the seven fixed stars was as follows: There was a cluster of stars resembling the shape of a lamb; there was a similar cluster of stars resembling the shape of an ox; the same was the case with the zodiac signs "twins," both of whom resembled human beings. There was a constellation resembling a lobster (cancer), a constellation resembling "scales," a constellation resembling a scorpion, a constellation resembling a bucket, i.e. a human being drawing water; All these horoscopes or zodiac signs were named after their appearance in the sky at the time of the deluge.
    It may be true that the reason these signs appeared in that fashion in the sky at the time of the deluge was meant to remind man of Divine supervision of his fate by his recalling the names of the horoscopes. Our sages in Pessikta Rabbati 2,9 as well as in Tanchuma  have explained this in the manner we have outlined.
    You should also know that the מולד תשרי i.e. the precise time when the moon began a new orbit to signal the beginning of the month of Tishrey at the time when G'd created Adam, was the night of Monday the fifth hour, 204 parts into that hour. By counting backwards from that time, our sages arrived at the conclusion that G'd began creating the universe on the 25th day of Ellul, assuming that the stars had already become manifest. How did our sages know all this? 
    They knew this from the מולד of the month Nissan following. [According to our astronomical experts, each lunar orbit occurs at a predetermined distance from the previous "month," i.e. 29 days and 12 hours plus 793 parts of an hour. Considering the fact however, that the planets had not been placed (hung) in orbit until the fourth day of creation we know for certain that this could not have occurred on Monday as we said, i.e. the day on which Adam was created. Nonetheless this was the true date according to the scientists.
    As to the fact that in our prayers on New Year's day we recite:זה היום תחלת מעשיך  "this is the day when You (G'd) commenced Your work of creating the universe," how do we account for that statement? We may accept such a statement regardless of whether the creation of the universe commenced when the moon was in the position of  on the eve of Monday or on Friday the 10th hour plus some parts of the hour,  provided we count Adam as having been created on the 6th day after 12 hours of night and two hours of daylight had elapsed. This would have been the hour when G'd brought Man before Him to be judged for the first time. [the purpose of  ראש השנה. Ed.] The meaning of the words "this is the first day of Your works," then is: "this is the first day Your creatures (man) had to face Judgment." If we interpret our liturgy in that fashion we do not have to refer to fictitious times, i.e. imaginary days and hours prior to the functioning of the planetary system in orbit. The fact that the Torah does not mention G'd as having  completed anything, i.e. ויעש on the first day but only refers to G'd as having "created, ברא, on that day makes it clear that the sages who composed this prayer are not at odds with the view of scientists. Had they referred to G'd's "creating" the universe on that day, they would have had to refer to ברואיך, "Your creatures," instead of  מעשיך, "Your completed handiwork."
    Let us now turn to the mystical aspects of Torah, קבלה, revealed in our verses thus far. The words בראשית ברא אלוקים את השמים ואת הארץ contain within them an allusion to the ten sefirot, "emanations." The "Heaven and Earth" referred to here are the celestial counterparts of our terrestrial universe. These are not part of the planetary system. They are referred to in Psalms 68,34 as שמי קדם וארץ החיים, "the ancient heavens." The term ארץ החיים, refers to what is known in Psalms 142,6 , "the land of (eternal) life." The word בראשית, on the other hand, is an allusion to the true wisdom, similar to what the Psalmist describes asיראת ה'  ראשית חכמה, "the beginning of true wisdom is reverence for the Lord." The letter ב in  בראשית refers to the "second" of the emanations, i.e. חכמה, counting from אין, the highest emanation downwards. You will observe therefore that both the word ראשית and its first letter ב,  are testimony to the Supreme wisdom which was at work when the universe was created. Seeing that everything is derived from this wisdom, the letter  is written in larger script to alert the reader to this thought. Although this is the second letter in the alphabet it is the first one when it comes to what we can comprehend. [seeing that it is beyond us to comprehend the essence of the One represented by the letter א Ed.] The meaning of the phrase then is: "the wisdom with which the universe was created is known as אין."  Anything preceding that act of creation is out of bounds for us to investigate. This is why the emanation above that of חכמה is known as אין , nothing. [In our days this emanation is known as כתר.  Ed.]. The reason that the tenth emanation was named  אין is based on Psalms 111,10 ,והחכמה מאין תמצא  "How could you find the (type) of wisdom which is beyond (physical) existence?" The line in Psalms would have to be understood as an announcement rather than as a question when accepting this interpretation.
    At any rate, even this ultimate aspect of wisdom is somehow alluded to in the shape of the protruding bottom of the letter ב. This is what the Kabbalists had in mind when they said: "if they ask the letter ב 'who has created you?' it will point its protrusion in the direction of where the letter א should have preceded it (Bereshit Rabbah 1,14)." This letter  is the true כתר, "the crown of the universe." 
    The author describes “wisdom” as “Sefer,” seeing that the generations pass from this earth and their wisdom disappears with them except for what has been committed to paper, i.e. a book, a “Sefer.”
    “Sefor” is the בינה  “insight,” employed by man when he counts. This we also know from Chronicles II 2,16: ויספר שלמה כל  .האנשים הגירים אשר בארץ ישראל אחרי הספר אשר ספרם דוד אביו. ”Solomon counted all the aliens who were in the land of Israel, besides the census taken by his father David.
    The word “Sippur” refers to all the other countings and numbers that man can achieve and talk about.  You should be aware that the word “Sefer” represents the letter י  of the three letters י-ה-ו, whereas the word “Sefor” represents the letter ה in that sequence; finally, the word “Sippur” represents the letterו  in that sequence. This is what is meant by תפארת which is the sixth of the emanations.  You are also aware that the mumerical value of the wordספר    is 340. In view of this, the three times we encounter the word ספר   are three different names for שכל , intelligence. Although “intelligence” is multifaceted, and of different strengths, these three aspects of intelligence are the major ones,. Similarly, the above-mentioned three letters of the Holy Name of G’d are the principal ones. They are all derived from the same root, the One who has stamped the world with His imprint, the כתר, crown, which is also known as אין סוף  “The Infinite One.” 
    You need to appreciate that the words in Exodus 15,25 שם שם לו חק ומשפט  ,“there He gave them statutes and social laws,” is an allusion to this wisdom . (According to a Kabbalistic text called  ginat egoz, the fact that the letters of the word  שם appears three times in the above-mentioned verse may be the reason for this comment in the ספר היצירה). 
   אלוקים In this instance this is a reference to “teshuvah” another expression for this particular form of intelligence represented by the emanation בינה. This intelligence was involved in creating the physical universe. This is what we have in mind in our prayers on New Year’s Day when we refer to that day as being the first of G’d’s works. This was the attribute of G’d Avraham addressed when he is reported as praying to אלוקים  in Genesis 20,17, ויתפלל אברהם אל האלוקים . The Torah means that he addressed himself to the last letter ה in the word האלוקים . We find that David also addressed that level of intelligence represented by the name אלוקים when he said in Psalms 66,17 אני אל אלוקים אקרא 
    
    
    
    
    
   ויבדל  אלוקים בין האור ובין החשך , “G’d separated between the light and between darkness. According to the plain meaning, the word חשך here refers to the absence of light. It is not the same as the “darkness: which we discussed earlier in connection with the words “the darkness was on the face of the deep (1,2). We had described that particular brand of darkness as “fire.” (compare page 5). 
The Torah does not mention the words כי טוב “that it was good,” in connection with the second day .On the third day however, when G’d completed what He had done with the water the Torah mentions the word טוב, “good” twice ; the first time the word refers to completion of the creative directives associated with the waters, the second time to express G’d’s satisfaction with the progress achieved on that day itself.
	My question concerning this is: Why should the fact that the directives concerning the water on earth had not yet been completed should the Torah omit to mention that what had been achieved was “good,” seeing that the skies, as well as the angels had been completed on that day the Torah should have described this as “good?” G’d should have decreed that these phenomena should endure, just as He had in connection with the accomplishments on the first day! None of these achievements appear inferior to the ones which were deemed as deserving to endure as soon as they had been created!
	I believe that the absence of the word  believe that the absence of the word טובat this juncture is potent proof for the argument this “lower” terrestrial  universe represents the main purpose of G’d in creating the universe. As long as the Jewish people perform the will of G’d, observe what is written in the Torah, our domain is the principal arena of the universe Even though G’d had completed creation of the angels already on the second day, that day was not distinguished by the description “good” being applied to it. Nothing in the celestial regions qualified for permanence until the waters in the terrestrial world had been separated from the dry land when G’d gave that directive on the third day and said: יקוו המים מתחת השמים אל מקום אחד ותראה היבשה “let the waters which are below the heaven congregate in one area so that the dry land becomes visible.” Once this directive had been carried out, the heaven, i.e. the celestial regions qualified for permanence. At that point the Torah saw fit to describe the creation of the celestial regions as being “good.”
	Our sages summarise their commentary on this paragraph in Bereshit Rabbah  5,7 as follows: “seeing the work involving the waters had not yet been completed, because it had not been completed in the terrestrial regions, the Torah did not want to mention that the creation of the celestial regions was “good.” We see from here that the terrestrial part of the universe is the principal part of existence. Perhaps this is the reason that the dry land was called ארץ, seeing it was this region which completes carrying out G’d’s will and His intention when creating a physical existence, is intention when creating a physical existence, מציאות . [I believe that what is meant here is that the least two letters in the word ארץ are an abbreviation of the word רצון, pointing to G’d’s will, whereas the first latter אmay allude to G’d as the אחד, the One and Only Unique One.  Ed.] The author attributes his conclusions by pointing to Maleachi 3,12 who speaks about ארץ חפץ, the implication being that “earth performs the will of the Lord.” 
We also find in connection with the fourth day in the paragraph “let there be luminaries in the sky of the heaven,” that the Torah clearly hints that that the luminaries were created only for the sake of  being useful in this terrestrial world. This is what is meant by the words (1,15)  להאיר על הארץ , “to provide light on earth.”  This proves that the  creatures of  the  celestial regions, though great and mighty in stature, nonetheless have been created only for the sake of the creatures in the “lower” regions of the universe.  I have further proof from the mouth of Moses himself who has said in (Deut. 10,14 ) הן לה' אלוקיך השמים ושמי השמים ,”indeed the heavens as well as the heaven of the heavens belong to the Lord.” The fact that Moses mentioned the “heaven” of our lower regions, i.e. the sky first, indicates that he considered it as more important to G’d than the the celestial “heaven.”  All this is our sages have said as homiletical comment in Sanhedrin 93.where they phrased is as: “the righteous are greater than the ministering angels of G’d.” 
	Another homiletical comment is based on the sages there asking: why was the word טוב omitted on the report of the second day? Because on this day the גהנם, ”purgatory” was created . We surmise this from Isaiah 30,33 כי ערוך מאתמול תפתה  , “for Tophet has long been ready for him, having been created yesterday.” This day was called אתמול, “yesterday,” as it was a day which a “yesterday” but  no ”day before yesterday.”  Another reason cited by our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 4,5) for the absence of the word “good” on the second day is that מחלוקת, strife was created on that day.  This is what is meant by the words(1,6)  ויהי מבדיל בין מים למים, “and it will form a divide between waters and waters.”  Rabbi Tivyomi commented on this” “if even a divisiveness which served the purpose of the Lord did not deserve to be describes as “good,” how much more so must divisiveness which does not serve the purpose of the Lord  but to frustrate His works be hateful?”
	From a conceptual point of view we may see in the very number “second” implies that something has become different, other than the unity implied in the word “one.” It is the source of all division and otherness. As far as the sages saying that both purgatory and strife were created on that same day, they meant to tell us that whoever is guilty of causing strife will ultimately wind up in purgatory. Seeing that both strife and purgatory were created on that day, we may view that day as one that causes damage. To implant this in our consciousness the sages (Zohar on Eykev 271) that one must not commence new projects on Mondays. Not only this, but we are told in Pessachim 109 not to eat זוגות "food in "twos”, i.e. two dishes, as this is a health hazard for people. This prohibition is based on the fact that the first “Monday”, second day, was not blessed with the description  “good.” It all goes back to the fact that the divisiveness introduced into the universe on hat day was the first of its kind.
	Starting with this divisiveness other disagreements ensued, earth not complying with the will of G’d. On the third day (1,11-12) when G’d directed that earth should produce  עץ פרי עושה פרי “fruit bearing trees which are themselves edible,” all that earth produced were עץ עושה פרי, “fruit-bearing trees.” The trunks earth produced were not edible.  On the fourth day, the day when the luminaries were hung in the sky the two large luminaries soon turned into a larger one and a smaller one. Our sages in Chulin 60 relate that there was an argument between the sun and the moon concerning the sun’s superior status. G’d had to intervene and ask the moon to downsize. On the fifth day G’d had to “salt away” the female of the Leviathan as explained by our sages in Baba Batra 74. Acccording to the Talmud there G’d castrated the male of that species while killing the female. and preserving its flesh (salting it away) for consumption by the righteous in the distant future. On the sixth day, the day the first man and woman were created, they sinned, causing further divisiveness and resulting in their banishment from גן  דן, We observe that divisions were manifest on every single one of the days following the second day  when such divisiveness first appeared.
	 יקוו המים “let the waters be gathered together.” This directive was needed seeing that the mass which the Torah had previously called תהום was a mass of water within which particles of earth were all over the place causing this mass to be extremely murky. The element “dust” had to be raised so that earth could become a habitat fit for all kinds of land-based creatures. The two directives we observe here were the very opposite of natural law. We know hat the specific weight of dust is greater than that of water and that as a result water should have covered the earth all over. G’d decreed for water which previously was “on top” to descend and “earth or dust” which had previously been submerged to rise. This reversal of natural law is alluded to in Psalms 136,6 לרוקע הארץ על המים כי לעולם חסדו, “Who spread the earth over the waters, His steadfast love is eternal.” Providing His creatures with earth as a habitat was an everlasting act of kindness. This is the reason the Psalmist in Psalms 36,7 speaks of  צדקתך כהררי קל, משפטיך תהום רבה. “Your righteousness  is like high mountains, Your justice like the great deep.” The psalmist means that G’d demonstrated His righteousness when He gave the directive to the great deep that the waters should submerge themselves contrary to their nature in order to benefit both man and beast.
	We may further explain the words ותראה היבשה, “and let the dry land become visible,” to mean that the reason it is called יבשה as it could not produce any fruit as long as it was wet. Now that the dryness became visible the whole process of creating the waters had been completed. Now it was in order to refer to the result as “good.”
	According to the Midrash  the words יקוו המים mean that the waters should be measured, i.e. the word is derived from קו, “line.” We find the word having this meaning in Zecharyah 1,16, וקו ינטה על ירושלים, “and a measuring line will be applied to Jerusalem.”  	 Another meaning of these words  views them as if G’d had said: יקוו לי המים, “let the waters congregate for Me.” The matter is best explained by means of a parable. (compare beginning of Bereshit Rabbah 5) A king once built a palace  and he populated it with deaf and dumb people  These people made a point of making signs by means of which they enquired after the king’s wellbeing, etc. and generally displayed appreciation of the king having provided them with a residence. The king reasoned that if these people were so appreciative of what he had done for them ,surely if he placed intelligent people in this palace they would be at least as appreciative. What happened however was that the intellligent people zeized the palace for themselves instead of displaying any signs of gratitude. They claimed that the palace was theirs. Thereupon the king decreed to let the palace revert to what it had been before he had ordered it to be built. Applied to our situation in Genesis the moral of the story is that prior tothe creation of man G’d was hailed by the inarticulate beings He had created. As soon as He peopled the earth with articulate and intelligent human beings they turned their back on Him so that he decreed to let the earth revert to the state it had been in prior to the creation of the universe. At the beginning of creation the waters  praised and lauded G’d their Creator as we know from Psalms93,4 מקולות מים רבים אדירים משברי ים, “more majestic than the breakers of the sea is the Lord.” According to the Midrash there th waters referred to G’d as אדיר. Already the generation of Enosh rebelled against G’d and not too long hereafter he generation of the deluge carried its rebellion against G’d to such lengths that                               G’d destroyed them. G’d decided to do away with that generations of living creatures whereas He allowed lowed the waters to remain undisturbed. This is the meaning of  Genesis 7,12 ויהי גשם על כל הארץ.
	אל מקום אחד, “to a single place.”The waters had previously extended as far far as the throne of G’d Himself. If so, how awas it possible for them to be compressed into a single מקום, site? This teaches that on occasion  something small in size can embrace  and control something far larger and presumed more powerful (Bereshit Rabbah 5,5.)

	1,10 .  ולמקוה המים קרא ימים. “And the gathering of waters He called  ‘oceans.’” The term “oceans” does not apply to the actuall waters but to the hollow of the globe within which they are situated. This is why Onkelos translates these words as ולבית כנשות מיא.,meaning the dug out part. which holdes the waters in one place and prevents it from overflowing. Isaiah 11,9 which reads: “and the waters cover the sea,” proves that this is the truw meaning of “oceans.” Genesis 1,22 describing the habitat of the fish also supports this view. The Trah writes: ומלא  את המים בימים, “and they shall fill the waters in the oceans.” A further proof of the correctness of this interpretation is found in Kings II 16,17 ואת הים  מעל הבקר הנחשת אשר תחתיה  הוריד ,”and the tank he -(King Achaz) lowered from the (bronze) oxen which were below it.” The fact that the word for ocean in our verse is inythe plural proves that it refers to the depressions in the globe that the waters are in, else the fact that the surface of the waters are contiguous would require that the Torah write the word  ים, “ocean” in the singular. The Talmud in Baba Batra 74 states that there are seven oceans.

	1,11. תדשא הארץ דשא. “Let the earth be covered with herbs.”The earth was directed to become material fit for vegetation and living creatures. However, the earth aborted part of G’d’ directive as itb should have produced fruit-bearing trees with edible trunks.

	1,12. The Torah continues by reporting that the earth produced  דשא,; it does not say that “G’d made every tree  which bears fruit according to its categgory, etc.” The reason is that it was not appropriate to associate G’d’s name with the inferior categories of “life,” vegetation, something that is immobile. We find G’d’s name associated with the creative process again when 
the Torah reports the coming into existence of a variety of living creatures on earth on the fifth day (1,21) . The reason is that these creatures are useful tools of man in a variety of ways helping him to fulfil functions with his mind, not only with his body. Vegetable matter is of imprortance only for man’s phusical existence, for his body.. The soul does not need to grow.
	If you will pay careful attention to the text you will observe that the Torah mentins five distincts categories of vegetation: 1) תדשא הארץ דשא; 2)עשב מזריע זרע ; 3)   עץ פרי,   (a tree whose trunk should taste the same as its fruit) 4) עושה פרי, “fruit-bearing;” 5) אשר זרעו בו למינהו. i.e. the fruit itself the seed of which should correspond to its respective category. 
	You should realise that the number 3 is peculiar in that it  contains within it all the basic umerical units which are “one, two, or indivisible numbers.” The number 2 represents a pair, whereas the number 3 itself represents any number which is divisble only by itself or by the number 1. This number is ”distilled,” i.e. an emanation of the number “One.” Seeing it is part of that “One,” something which by very definition remains concealed, -hence the word עולם, “something hidden, concealed,”- we can understand why all the creations that came into existence up until that day had remains hidden, invisible. The light G’d created on the first day had remained hidden from the creatures(as we explained on the words יהי אור.) Also the firmament, רקיע which came intoexistence on the second day as well as the trees of Eden which were created on the third day were hidden from the creatures on earth (compare Bereshit Rabbah 16,4). Everything which was created up until the third day is called עולם. Anything created from the fourth day on is known as שנה,” (derivative of the word שנים=two.) The reason for this is that just as the number 3 is part of the concept “One,” so the number 4 is part of the concept שנים,  “two.” After all, four is nothing except twice the number 2.
light do we see light.” Anyone who does not deserve to continue his physical life in that world and deserves to receive his retribution in the physical world of the bodies will resume physical life at the time of the resurrection, a life which is due to the domain we call אור החיים.
	To teach us that this is so we have been told in Daniel  12,2  ורבים מישיני אדמת-עפר יקיצו, אלה לחיי עולם ואלה לחרפות לדראון עולם; “many who have been asleep in the dust will awaken, some to eternal life others to reproaches, to everlasting abhorrence.” Daniel speaks about “many” who will awaken; they will not all awake. Those who deserve a life in the spiritual regions will not undergo the metamorphosis of thousands of years in a grave but their souls will be transferred to eternal life immediately. Another name of this עולם החיים is נצח. This is what is meant by Psalms 16,11 תודיעני אורח חיים שובע שמחות את פניך נעימות בימינך נצח, “You will teach me the path of life. In Your presence is perfect joy; delights are ever in Your right hand.”
	You have learned that the hidden life of pre-universe times and the lofty regions which G’d built when He created the luminaries are the pleasures of the souls who experience the teachings of the Torah. In due course, they will again merit to enjoy these pleasures with which they had been familiar [prior to sharing life on earth inside, a body. Ed.] The former period is described as ימים, the latter as שנים. This is hinted at in our verse here (Genesis 1,14) when the Torah speaks of לימים ושנים. It is an allusion to the gradual ascent from one spiritual region to an even higher spiritual region.
	This whole subject becomes even clearer when the Torah described how these commandments were translated into reality. We read  (1,16)  ויעש אלוקים את שני המאורות הגדולים,”G’d made the two large luminaries;” this is a reference to the spiritual luminaries. When the verse continues with את המאור הגדול “the great luminary;” and when it continues further ואת המאור הקטן, “and the small luminary,” this is a reference to the physical luminaries i.e. the sun and the moon.
	Looking at the plain meaning of our verses: The reason why one of the two luminaries is described as (relatively ) small is because whenever there are two phenomena both described as “great or large,” it is usual that one of the two is larger than the other.
	If you will examine the text of our paragraph in the Torah carefully, you will find that it explains four separate matters. 1) These luminaries are always found in the same positions which have been assigned to them initially, i.e. they are stationary and do not move. [Here too the astronomy of our author is based on  outdated concepts. The luminaries are deemed captive on the periphery of the planet and are assumed to move with it automatically. The only part of this chapter which is relevant to our times is that the moon does not have light of its own and that only the sun has been assigned by G’d to emit light. I see no point in translating discarded concepts even if the author thought he could use scripture to support the theories current in his time. Ed.]
	1,18. ולמשול ביום ובלילה. “and to rule by day and by night.” The sun rules by day, the moon at night. Remember that G’d not only enabled these luminaries to provide light, but He also equipped them with the ability to exercise dominion over the creatures in the “lower” regions, i.e. they can cause damage to creatures on earth or their influence may enable creatures on earth to continue to exist. The sun contributes to our continued existence by means of its power to promote growth by day, whereas the moon has similar influence on certain plants which grow at night. Moreover, the moon controls the ebb and tide of the oceans exercising influence over wells and fountains. 
	From a kabbalistic point of view the words למשול ביום ובלילה also are an allusion to the powers which guide these two great luminaries in turn, i.e. the signs of the zodiac. These exercise a great deal of power over the fate of mankind unless countermanded by G’d’ s personal intervention, השגחה פרטית	
	You will note that the two daily communal offerings presented on the altar of the Temple by the priests on a daily basis corresponded to the powers exercised by sun and moon by day and by night respectively.(compare Numbers 28,4) The Torah writes in Deut. 4,19 אשר חלק להם ה’ אלוקיך אותם לכל העמים, “which the Lord your G’d has assigned to all the (other) nations.” This is a reference to the fate of the Gentiles who are governed by forces of the planetary system (and accounts for the preoccupation of people with astrology). Instead, the Jewish people offer two daily sacrifices in order to neutralise these forces presided over by sun and moon. The Torah continues in the same passage we quoted from Deuteronomy 4,19 to contrast the factors governing the fates of the Jews by writing (verse 20) ואתכם לקח ה’  ויוצא אתכם מכור הברזל ממצרים להיות לו עם נחלה כיום הזה. “You, however, the Lord your G’d took and removed you from the iron crucible, from Egypt, in order to for you to become  a people for Him, and inheritance as of this day.” This verse sums up the difference between the forces governing the fates of the Gentiles and G’d’s personal providence in supervising the fate of the Jewish people. When the Torah (Deut. 17,3) wrote the words אשר לא ציויתי “which I did not command,” this referred to the sun and the moon whom G’d did not command to exercise this control over the people’s fates. He did however, command the צבא השמים, “the host of the heaven”, i.e. the stars “the guiding forces of sun and moon” to exercise such control.  I plan to write more about this in my commentary on the respective verse in Deuteronomy 17,3. 
	This also explains to you the reason why fasting is effective in warding off  negative influences on man. It is similar to an animal sacrifice and requires that one prepares for it beforehand, similar to a sacrificial animal which has to be checked out prior to its becoming offered on the altar. The act of fasting reduces the person’s blood, fat and flesh, and the time (late afternoon) when one must officially prepare to observe a fast is the one when both sun and moon exercise their control on earth jointly. This is why Shmuel said  (Taanit 12) that any fast-day which the person who observes it did not so designate before nightfall on the previous day is useless. He also said that any fast-day which did not include a sunset is not called a fast-day. Conversely, the tears shed by the supplicant as part of his fast also rank as part of an animal sacrifice as the latter was usually accompanied by a libation of water. We have a long-standing tradition that the gates of tears are never locked, i.e. that even when G’d has deliberately turned aside from our entreaties because of our sins, He did not turn away from our tears (Berachot 32). Tears are a derivative of the power of water, which itself is a derivative of the emanation חסד, ”love” which is on the right (positive) side of the diagram representing the ten emanations. [The “left” side represents negative spiritual attributes. Ed.] The “right” side of G’d’s emanations is always ready to welcome repentant sinners. This is such an important principle that everyone would do well to keep it in mind.
ולהבדיל בין האור ובין החשך     ,“and to separate between the light and between the darkness.” The verse mentions three distinct functions of these luminaries. 1) To give light; 2) to exercise dominion; 3) to provide separation. G’d assigned three lofty  purposes to these luminaries. It is clear, of course, that behind these apparent causes of what moves the universe is the real Ruler, i.e. the Creator. It is this idea which is expressed in Isaiah 55,10 where the prophet speaks of G’d as ונתן זרע לזורע ולחם לאוכל  “and  provides seed for the farmer and bread for those who eat it.” Although the prophet in that verse describes the rain, it is clear that there is a more basic force behind the rain. What the verse tells us is that the rain is an instrument of G’d at work just as the sun and the moon are manifestations of G’d their Creator at work controlling His universe This idea is elaborated on in Hoseah 2, 23-24 where the prophet writes  concerning the future: אענה נאום ה’ אענה את השמים והם יענו את הארץ.והארץ תענה את הדגן ואת התירוש ואת היצהר והם יענו את יזרעל, “I will respond declares the Lord, I will respond to the sky, and it shall respond to the earth, and the earth shall respond with new grain and wine and oil, and they shall respond to Jezreel.” The thrust of the whole verse it that although these various forces of nature all contribute their best to successful life on earth and they each fulfil their appointed task, they do not possess independent powers but are agents of the Creator without whose input none of this would take place. Similarly here. The Torah describes the visible functions of the luminaries; this does not mean that G’d had abrogated His power in favour of His agents. Had He done so, these luminaries would indeed be deities as, unfortunately, many idol worshipers believe.
	It is precisely in order to forestall such mistaken ideas that the Torah warns us in Deut. 4,19 “lest you raise your eyes heavenwards and behold the sun, the moon and the stars, the heavenly hosts and be lured into bowing down to them or serving them.” Had G’d wanted to invest these agents with independent powers the Torah would have described this by having G’d order them” האירו, משלו, הבדילו! “provide light!, exercise dominion! Establish separations!
	You may recall that the sages of Israel had to write to King Talmai that the meaning of the words חלק להם   אשר(compare the quote of Deut. 4,19. 4,19) does not mean that they have the powers of deities but that their function is merely to provide light (compare Megillah 9). This was a warning to the Gentiles not to be misled into paganism through the wording of the Torah. [King Talmai of Egypt third century B.C. forced 72 Jewish scholars to translate the Torah while sitting in separate cubicles each unable to consult with the other. According to tradition they miraculously rendered the Torah into Greek using exactly the same words. Ed.] The word חלק could otherwise have been understood by Talmai and other Gentiles as meaning that G’d “engaged in power-sharing” with such heavenly bodies as the sun the moon and the stars. The fact is, however, that G’d did give the Gentiles the choice to either serve Him or to serve what they perceived to be deities. This did not, however, mean that He ever agreed that these phenomena were deities or had separate, independent  powers. The Jewish people were not given such a choice at all. Proof that this is so is found in Ezekiel 20,33 where the prophet had debated this issue with Jews who had felt abandoned by G’d in exile claiming their “Master” had sold them, i.e. “freed them from the obligation to serve Him.” Ezekiel threatened them saying  חי אני נאום ה’ אלוקים אם לא ביד חזקה ובזרוע נטויה ובחמה שפוכה אמלוך עליכם .“As I live, says the Lord G’d, with a strong hand and an outstretched arm and with outpoured fury will I rule over you.”
	The reason the luminaries were created (made functional) on the fourth day is because the fourth day is precisely in the middle of the seven days of the מעשה בראשית our chapter deals with. Another reason is that the sun and moon undergo four changes daily in the periods of time allocated to their respective dominance. [Both day and night are divided into four time-periods  each known as a משמרת in the language of our sages. Ed.] Similarly, the month [period of lunar orbit (roughly)] is divided into four weeks. The solar year is divided into four seasons. For these and other reasons it was appropriate that the functions of sun and moon commenced on the fourth day of creation.
	They had to be created following the emergence of vegetation on earth which became manifest on the third day so that we would have incontrovertible proof that  G’d had preceded creation and not vice versa. If, for instance, the Torah would have reported the directive: “let there be luminaries” on the third day and the directive: “let the earth produce herbs, etc.” on the fourth day, we would have concluded that not G’d but the celestial forces had been responsible for the universe as we know it. This concept was known in ancient times as קדמת העולם, “the eternal existence of the world.” People would have had reason to believe that  the existence of vegetation had been due to the respective influence of sun and moon on the ability of plants to grow. Now that the Torah had reported the directive תדשא הארץ דשא as having preceded the command יהי מאורות there is no room for misunderstanding. This proves that earth had not existed from times immemorial but had come into existence as a result of a directive of its Creator. If there had not yet been any celestial bodies such as sun, moon, the stars, who could have promoted the growth of vegetation if not G’d?
	Please note that in this paragraph the expression מאור, “luminary” occurs five times.  This corresponds to the five kinds of light there are. 1) The light of the day. 2) the light of the sun; 3) the light of the moon; 4) the light of the stars; 5) the light of the zodiac constellations. Only the planet sun was created in order to provide light for earth (compare Bereshit Rabbah 6,1)
	וירא אלוקים את האור כי טוב, “G’d saw the light that it was good.” The belief that the system of luminaries was beneficial for the creatures on earth is based on the availability of light and darkness.  We read in Job 9,9 עושה עש כסיל וכימה וחדרי תימן, “the One who makes the Bear and the Orion, Pleiades and the chambers of the south wind.” The constellation Pleiades supposedly cools, whereas the constellation Orion supposedly causes warmth on earth. The constellations each fulfil opposite roles and are matched one against the other. Each of them helps the growth and ripening of a variety of plants and fruit in its own fashion. This is also what G’d had in mind in Job 38,31 when He had asked Job: “can you tie cords to Pleiades?” People on earth obtain an insight into G’d’s power by observing the operation of the forces of nature and marveling at the intelligence which created such a system. As a result of their appreciation of G’d’s intelligence and power they praise Him. This is what Isaiah 40,26 spoke of when he urged the people שאו מרום עיניכם וראו מי ברא אלה, “raise up your eyes to the heavens and behold who has created all these?” All of this is meant when our verse reports that G’d took a look at how His directive had been carried out and concluded that the results were good.
	Another reason G’d referred to all this as טוב, ”good,” is that He foresaw already the great miracle which would be invoked in the future when Joshua would bid the sun and the moon to stop orbiting until he had completed his pursuit of the Canaanites (Joshua 10,12). The wording there is שמש בגבעון דום וירח בעמק אילון, “stand still sun at Gibeon and moon in the valley of Ayalon.” Another reference to a similar miracle is found in Judges 5,20 where the prophetess Devorah describes the stars as having changed their orbit to help Barak fight Siserah.
	1,20. ישרצו המים “let the waters swarm, etc.” After the Torah had completed its report about the final appearance of heaven, i.e. when both the material for the earthly heavens, “sky” and the material that earth consisted of had been formed and put in their respective places, G’d directed that the waters produce creatures capable of some movement. He used the expression נפש חיה, ”living creature,” meaning a נפש, essence of life, the fish in the oceans. Also the birds which were created from a combination of water and earth are mentioned here when the Torah wrote ועוף יעופף על הארץ, “and birds which will fly above the earth.” We know that the birds contained the raw material earth as the Torah described their coming into existence with the words ויצר ה’ אלוקים מן האדמה כל חית השדה ואת כל עוף השמים, “G’d formed from the soil all the living creatures of the field as well as the birds in the sky” (Genesis 2,19). This prompted our sages in Chulin 27 to state that the birds were created out of the רקק, “mud”. The meaning of that word is “a mixture of water and earth.” Seeing that there is such a thing as נפש without חיות, life, such as the essence of the plants, the Torah had to add the word חיה when it described what we call “living creatures.” נפש is what enables “living creatures to move.” Similarly, the element נפש is what enables plants to grow, i.e. to “move” without leaving their place on earth. [Our sages called the product of earth when it made vegetation sprout forth נפש הצומחת, “an essence of life capable only of growth; my translation. Ed.] We may therefore be correct in understanding the word נפש as “some force enabling growth by the one possessed of that force.”
	This explains why on the third day there was no mention of the word נפש, seeing that before the sun and moon made their appearance there had not been a manifestation of any plants growing. There are a total of five different kinds of movement. 1) תנועה עולה; 2) תנועה בינונית; 3) תנועה תחתונה; 4) תנועה משברת, 5) תנועה מתפשטת. The category of movement called עולה refers to the motions of birds which have a tendency to rise into the atmosphere. The second category called בינונית includes all horizontal movement be it on earth or in the waters. The third category  refers to crawling,  i.e. “feeling one’s way hesitantly by means of touching objects for guidance.” The fourth category is movement by bipeds, on two legs. The fifth category refers to moving on one’s belly. The reason the day on which all these creatures were introduced is called the “fifth day” is because it was the day on which G’d created five categories of motion by living creatures.

	1,21. ויברא אלוקים את התנינים הגדולים, “G’d created the large sea-monsters, etc.” According to the plain meaning the Torah speaks about a category of fish. Seeing they are so extraordinarily large, the Torah attributes their creation to G’d Himself instead of to the water. This is in line with the Torah crediting G’d personally with creating Man when we read in 1,27 ויברא אלוקים את האדם בצלמו. “G’d created Man in His image.” In both instances the Torah intended to convey that G’d created these bodies ex nihilo, out of previously non-existent matter.
	Some Greek scientists, quoted by Nachmanides, claimed that they had personally observed such monsters having bodies 500 miles long. Also our sages in Baba Batra 73 describe the dimensions of these monsters as being gigantic. Rabbi bar bar Chana claims to have encountered them on his voyages. He goes on about unbelievable feats performed by these monsters. [The author lists some; I prefer to direct the reader to the folio in the Talmud. Ed.] The reader may also be interested in my treatment of the subject in my book  “the Just lives by his faith.” Ed.]
	According to an homiletical approach the meaning of the words התנינים הגדולים refers to Leviathan, both the male and the female of the species (compare Baba Batra 74). The reason the Torah mentions the word גדולים, ”large ones,” is that Leviathan was extraordinarily large. His carcass was found in the great ocean which spans the globe. The word  הגדוליםis similar in meaning to the same word applied to the “big luminaries,” which distinguished them from the smaller stars. These luminaries are several times the size of earth.
	It is quite possible that the absence of the usual  ויהי כן after the report of the creation of Leviathan was meant to alert us to the fact that this pair did not endure and that is what the sages meant who told us on the same folio of the Talmud that if the two had been allowed to mate they would have caused the destruction of the globe. What did G’d do? “He castrated the male of the species and killed the female, salting away its flesh for consumption by the righteous at a future time.” This is the meaning of Isaiah 27,1 הרג את התנין אשר בים. “He killed the monster which was in the sea.” This verse also testifies to the fact that there was both a male and a female Leviathan as the verse first referred to לויתן נחש ברח, and continues to speak about  ועל לויתן נחש עקלתון, והרג את התנין אשר בים. When Isaiah spoke of “He killed the monster,” this indicates that the male  was left bereft of his mate.
	This may have prompted King David to describe the function of the surviving male Leviathan being for G’d “to have fun with.” (Psalms 104,26). As to the exact wording of the text in Psalms,     לויתן זה יצרת לשחק בו, I believe what David meant was for Leviathan to have fun in the ocean. After all, verse 25 spoke of the הים הגדול, “the great ocean.”
	G’d said to Job (Job 40,25) “can you draw out Leviathan by a fishhook?” All these verses prove that only one of the species remained alive. 
	The reason our verse spoke about את התנינם, may have been to allude to the fish in the ocean which are to serve as food for the Leviathan. On the other hand, my great teacher Rabbi Shlomoh (Aderet) felt that that the Midrash refers to a real meal which will be served to the righteous in the world to come. He understood the saying quoted in Vayikra Rabbah 7,3 by Rabbi Berechiah literally. [This is at variance with Maimonides who understood all such Midrashim as purely allegorical as Rabbi Chavell pointed out in his notes.] Rabbi Berechiah bases himself on the verse in Leviticus 7,24 which seemed to him extraneous and from which he derived that the righteous who had refrained from eating any diseased animals or any which had died of natural causes, i.e. טרפה ונבלה, would be compensated in the future by participating in a meal from the meat of the Leviathan. The text does not say that these righteous will feast on “Leviathan,” but “on the meat of Leviathan.” This word suggested to my Rabbi that the Talmud discussed a real meal. Naturally, what the sages had in mind with this meal was not something exclusively physical, designed to only provide satisfaction for the body; this would certainly not be germane to the domain of the world of the future. 
	We know that spiritual forces are awakened and strengthened through the intake of physical food. The idea behind this feast therefore is that seeing it would be extremely satisfying from a gastronomic point of view, the spiritual benefits derived from it would be commensurate. It is not unlike the time when Yitzchak asked Esau to provide him with tasty venison to enable him to bestow a spiritual blessing on him (Genesis 27,4). We also encounter such a spiritually uplifting meal when Moses entertained his father-in-law Yitro in Exodus 18,12 where the eating is described as taking place לפני האלוקים, “in the presence of G’d,” i.e. it was a spiritual experience. Another example of such a meal is recorded in Samuel I where we are told that the young prophets stood and prophesied before Samuel as a result of having taken part of that meal. At any rate, it is likely that the meal G’d will serve the righteous in the future will have a similar effect on them. Some commentators believe that the food i.e. both meat and fish served at that meal, possesses special properties as the animals from which it will be prepared had been the original ones created during the six days when G’d made the universe. Our present world simply does not deserve that the people in it experience such delights. This is why the people who will be invited to participate in that meal will be the ones who have led exemplary lives in this life, denying themselves any forbidden pleasures.
	It is entirely possible that such pure foods had been prepared already when Adam and Chavah were still in Gan Eden prior to their sin. There may even have been an allusion to this when the Torah described the tree of knowledge as inspiring the desire to acquire additional knowledge (Genesis 3,4)
`	Nowadays we are already familiar with a variety of drugs which are helpful in this regard. If that is so, then there can be no question that under the ideal conditions prevailing in Gan Eden some of the plants which were created during the six days of  creation must have possessed such power. After all, the manna which the Israelites ate during their trek through the desert, though physical food, was designed for people of an especially high intellectual level. It was meant to enable the Israelites to comprehend abstract concepts and phenomena such as angels. The manna did not contain any superfluous ingredients which had to be excreted by the body as we know from Psalms 78,25  לחם אבירים אכל איש, “each man ate bread designed for highly intellectual persons.” Our sages in Yuma 75 explain that this means that all of the manna was absorbed by the body.
	Our sages have found an allusion to the food which will be provided for the righteous in the future when they said in Chagigah 12: “G’d grinds manna in the heavens for consumption by the righteous.” Perhaps the period when this meal will be served will coincide with the end of the period when man [his surviving soul? Ed.] will require physical food to sustain him. Subsequent to that meal the period which our sages have described as an era during which the righteous will “sit” with their crowns on their heads enjoying the splendour exuded by G’d’s presence will commence, so that the meal served from the remains of the Leviathan will be the very last physical meal these souls will ever imbibe. Just as the eighth day of the festival of Sukkot, שמיני עצרת, is so named as it represents the pinnacle of the previous seven days of the festival as well as its conclusion, so the meal consisting of the Leviathan may be the pinnacle of physical life on earth to be followed by life of a totally different, exclusively spiritual level.
	Looking at our verse from a rational, investigative point of view [ this is still a quotation from the writing of Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet on this subject], the subject of Leviathan which G’d created male and female may be an allusion to the relationship of שכל ונפש, mind and soul. The Kabbalists have explained that man, as opposed to the angels, is not obligated to act in a certain manner. Seeing that angels are intrinsically rational beings, they have שכל intelligence, but do not have a soul. As a result they have no free choice. Man who has both נפש ושכל, is different. We may perceive of שכל as the masculine part of man’s spiritual faculties, whereas נפש represents the feminine part of these faculties. Alternatively, you may view שכל as the צורה, “form,” and נפש as theחמר , “material.” The word לויתן, “Leviathan,” means “connection;” it is a combination of the two words לוית חן, (compare Proverbs 1,9 where the word חן describes that there is an element of פאר, ”magnificence” connected with Leviathan, as well as Genesis 30,34 ילוה אישי אלי, “my husband will join me”) The intellect (masculine, active) is perceived as joining the soul, (the feminine, passive). If our sages called this “monster” לויתן, this expressed the idea that it combined both masculine and feminine properties within one whole. It was an unusual species. At other times our sages speak of Leviathan as if it were two different creatures, one male one female. Seeing that both the נפש as well as the שכל aspect of man i.e. his non-tangible components, become attached to the body of man, we can now understand why man was not created similar to the disembodied angels who are dominated by their intellect. The reason is that G’d wanted that נפש and שכל  be dependent upon one another at all times so that in fact these two forces operate as if they were disembodied entities. This is what the sages meant when they said that if the male and female Leviathan were tied to one another so that they are indispensable to one another they would ruin the universe. [the Hebrew word is נזקקים, a word which describes the dependence of male and female marriage partners on one another. Ed.] The reason is that the urge to reproduce the species would be absent in the world if its superior creature, man, were to be guided merely by intellectual powers. It is the נפש, the seat of desire, which motivates man to seek physical union with the female and thus to ensure the survival of the species. On the other hand, if intellect would exercise constant and ongoing dominance on נפש this would result in the נפש part of man to become so attached to the divine that just as the prophet Elijah [compare Elijah’s departure from earth in Kings II 2,11. Ed.] the נפש would “drag” its body with it to the celestial regions in order to cleave to G’d. What did G’d do in order to prevent either of these developments to occur? “He castrated the male, the power of שכל, and He “killed” the female power, i.e. נפש. Castration is a denial of the ability to procreate; “killing” is also a form of the denial of life. This is why our sages described the absence of something either as a form of castration or as a form of death. When the Midrash  went on to say that G’d “salted away the meat of the female Leviathan  for the righteous in the future,” the word “salted” is a simile for everything which keeps for a long time. This is why an eternal covenant between G’d and the Jewish people is described as ברית מלח עולם, “a covenant of salt for all times.” The presence of salt is insurance against loss by deterioration. On the other hand, the sages made fun of people who thought they could stash away their money thus guarding it against loss, and they advised the giving of charity as an insurance against losing one’s money. They coined the phrase (Ketuvot 66 ) “he who salts his money will experience that it shrinks.” The overall consideration guiding our sages in the way they depicted the Leviathan was that by depriving both male and female of the power to procreate this would lead to the depopulation of earth. By telling us that G’d salted away” the meat of the Leviathan, the sages wanted to remind us that the righteous will have a life to look forward to in the hereafter. In that world their existence would not be limited by time.
	Seeing that the origin of both נפש and שכל is in the region of water, the water created on the second day, they are also frequently described as fish, i.e. they have this in common with the fish that they both were created out of water [though out of different categories of water. Ed ] Thus far I have copied from the words of my teacher, may his light continue to shine. [Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet obviously was still alive at the time Rabbeinu Bachya wrote this part of his commentary. 1235-1310 Ed.]
	Now to a kabbalistic approach to the matter of the תנינם. You are aware of a tradition that the angels were created on the fifth day [the view of Rabbi Chaninah in Bereshit Rabbah 1,4 as opposed to views that they were created on the second day. Ed.] The “great monsters” are viewed as the four camps in which the שכינה, the presence of G’d, may be found. The Talmud Taanit 31 called these 4 regions מחול [maybe an acrostic. Ed.] These regions serve the purpose of acknowledging G’d’s greatness in song and thanksgiving. This appears based on Judges 5,11 שם יתנו צדקות ה', ”there they will sing the salvations of G’d.” In describing what was created on the fifth day, the Torah mentions ועוף יעופף, which refer to the angels who fly all over. [the word ועוף in that instance is not understood as a noun, i.e. “bird,” but as part of the activity of flying. Ed.] The reason why the angels are compared to עוף יעופף is because already the prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel describe them as having two sets of wings (Isaiah 6,2). The Targum of the word וכפלת, “you will double over, i.e. fold,” in Exodus 26,9 is ותעוף. You know that the Torah calls any bird which flies with two wings  עוף. [as opposed to flies, butterflies etc, which have more than 2 wings to fly with. Ed.] It does not matter that the act of flying is of a physical nature or merely a description of the movement by disembodied spiritual creatures such as  angels. When the Torah describes these creatures as flying על  הארץ  על פני רקיע השמים "over the earth and the sky of the heaven,” the words על הארץ refer to the place upon which the angels stand, whereas the words על פני רקיע השמים are an elaboration on the meaning of the words על הארץ, i.e. in the lower regions of the universe. We find a similar use of this expression in Ezekiel 1,15 where the prophet speaks of והנה אופן אחד בארץ, “and here one wheel  was on the ground.” [Rashi understands the word there as “below,” i.e. not in the celestial regions. Ed.] Yonathan ben Uziel also renders the word בארץ there in the same sense.
	Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai (compare Zohar Bereshit 46) understands the word ועוף as a reference to the archangel Michael of whom it has been said in Isaiah 6,6 ויעף אלי, “he flew to me.” The word יעופף referred to the archangel Gavriel of whom we are told in Daniel 9,21 מועף ביעף “he was lifted in flight.” The words על פני רקיע השמים refer to the angel Uriel. This is the mystical meaning of the words מרכבו  ארגמןin Song of Songs 3,10. The intelligent reader will understand what I refer to. [The word ארגמן is understood as an acrostic of the names of the four angels א-וריאל, ר-פאל, ג-בריאל, מ-יכאל  The alternate name for Gavriel is Naftali,) 
	ואת כל נפש החיה הרומשת “and every thing which has a living soul which moves.” this is a reference to the vision of Ezekiel of the four-faceted חיה, i.e. the phenomenon with the faces of a human being, a lion an ox and an angel. Ezekiel 10,15 mentions it as being a subject of his vision when he stood at the banks of the river Kevar
	ואת כל עוף כנף למינהו, “and every winged bird according to its kind.” Here the Torah explained that the angels created on the fifth day were of a variety of categories, of varying degrees of holiness; some of them  were the products of the element fire, others of the element water. Some were powerful enough to overpower fire, others would be destroyed by fire if they were in on a collision course.(compare Yuma 21).
	1,22. ויברך אותם אלוקים”G’d blessed them.” These creatures required this blessing seeing that the humans would engage in hunting and killing them in order to consume them. You may ask why G’d is not reported as blessing the trees and other plants which humans and animals use to feed on? Seeing that G’d Himself had stated in Leviticus 25,21 that the produce of the field was destined for consumption by the Torah-observant Israelites, why did the produce of field and orchard not qualify for a similar blessing? We need to answer that all the living creatures were created as male and female, similar to man himself. This is why G’d blessed them that they be fruitful and multiply by begetting offspring from one another. Not so with the plants which proliferated all over the earth in great abundance. They did not require such a special blessing as they were not in any danger of extinction by hostile man. As to the reason that we also do not find a duplication of the blessing G’d bestowed to the creatures of the fifth day to those created on the sixth day, this was because the blessing G’d bestowed on the fifth day included the moving creatures not created until the sixth day. All living creatures which were not able to speak are in the same category (compare Nachmanides).
	You should know that the continued existence of the fish is also due to the power of this blessing; in fact this is why they did not perish during the deluge. The Torah is on record that “all the creatures on dry land perished (Genesis 7,21)” Our sages in Zevachim 113 specifically mention that the fish did not perish. even though all the trees as well as all the moving living creatures perished then.
	Another feature of the blessing bestowed on the birds and the fish is that they are not restricted to producing offspring to certain periods of the year but can do so on a year-round basis, something that is not the case with either trees or vegetation of the ground. Even the mammals  have a tendency to produce their young only at certain times during the year.
	1,24. תוצא הארץ נפש חיה, “let the earth bring forth living creatures, etc.  "Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 7,7 state that this is a reference to the spirit of man. [it refers to the animalistic life-essence of man] which does not share the spiritual qualities of man’s G’d given soul and therefore returns to earth upon his death. This is what Solomon had in mind in Kohelet 3,21 “and the spirit of the animal which returns to earth below.” Another meaning of this word might be that it refers to the spirit of intelligence, in which case the word  ארץhere must be a reference to the word הארץ in the very first verse of the Torah, i.e. what we described as ארץ החיים.
	According to a Midrash the words נפש חיה actually refer to a variety of  souls, seeing that the verse continues נפש חיה למינה, בהמה ורמש וחיתו ארץ למינה. In other words not just one kind of נפש. When the Torah continues in the next verse  to describe that G’d (as opposed to earth) “made the wild beasts according to its kind, the domesticated animals according to its category and the creeping things according to their respective categories,” this verse talks about the bodies of these respective species only. The meaning of this Midrash is that the word נפש חיה in verse 24 refers to the collective life-force of the animal world. When the Torah speaks in verse twenty-five about what G’d made, this is a reference to the bodies seeing that in that verse no mention is made of the words נפש חיה .
	Another comment in the Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 7,7) sees in the word נפש חיה a reference to the demons. According to that interpretation G’d did create the spirits of these demons but did not create their bodies. The Sabbath arrived before G’d had gotten around to make the bodies of these creatures. This 
phenomenon was meant to teach man an important lesson. If, on the Sabbath eve, close to the onset of the Sabbath, man has a chance to complete the purchase of a desirable object, he should desist. It is not appropriate for the servant (man) to insist on completing something at a time when his Maker saw fit to to desist.
	1,26. נעשה אדם, “let us make Man.” After the waters had been given the power to produce living creatures which swarmed in the ocean and, in the case of earth, it had been given the power to produce mammals, the Torah had used such expressions as ישרצו המים, or תוצא הארץ in the case of the mammals, when it comes to describing the creation of man the Torah speaks of “let us make.” According to the plain meaning of the text the subjects of the words “let us make” are G’d together with the earth which had been the subject of verse twenty four. Earth would contribute the body of Man just as it had contributed the bodies of the animals, whereas G’d would contribute the soul. We have confirmation of this in Genesis 2,7 where the Torah reports וייצר ה’ אלוקים את האדם עפר מן האדמה ויפח באפיו נשמת רוח חיים.”G’d formed man dust from the earth and He blew into his nostrils a living soul. Thereupon man became a human being.” What G’d “blew” into man’s nostrils was a soul which originated in the celestial regions 
	The word בצלמנו in our verse describes an attribute, such as in Daniel 3,19 וצלם אנפוהי אשתני, ”and the form of his face was contorted.” Another verse in which the word צלם describes an attribute is Psalms 39,7 אך בצלם יתהלך איש, ”man walks as a mere shadow.” 
	The word כדמותנו on the other hand, describes the image of the form seeing that things which are similar to one another are described in Hebrew as דומים זה לזה. The thrust of the verse is to  inform us that man was to resemble the celestial beings as much as possible while at the same time resembling the creatures in the “lower” world. He would resemble the celestial beings by sharing some of their attributes while he would he would resemble the creatures in the “lower” world by his outer appearance, i.e. that his body would appear to be made from earth (This is what Rabbi Moshe ben Nachman wrote quoting Rabbi David Kimchi.)
	Other commentators see in the word נעשה, i.e. the plural “we will make,” a pluralis majestatis, a form of expression used by superior beings such as kings when they really only refer to themselves. They use this mode of expression to suggest that though they are only individuals they act on behalf of a multitude. Even a relatively unimportant individual such as Lavan arrogated to himself such importance when he said to Yaakov (Genesis 29,27) ונתנה לך גם את זאת, “and we shall give you also this one (Rachel).” We find another example of this mode of speech when Balak told Bileam  (Numbers 22,7) אולי נכה בו ואגרשנו “perhaps we can defeat it (the Israelites) and I will expel them.” Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra, quoting unnamed sources, sees in the word נעשה a form of the intransitive passive form similar to what we find in Isaiah 26,18 ישועות בל-נעשה ארץ “no salvation (victories) were performed on earth.” I do not think there is a need for such contrived explanations.
	The Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 5,7) approaches the matter from an homiletical point of view and has Moses ask G’d when he was told to write this text if the wording was not apt to mislead the heretics by confirming their view that there is more than one initial force at work in the universe. G’d is supposed to have told Moses: “go and write; let those who want to err, err.” 
	An investigative rational approach sees in these words a reflection of how G’d had delegated various powers to various angels each one of whom is in charge of different segments of the universe. In the first instance He addressed Himself to an angel who presides over the other seven domains in the universe. [we had described these as equivalent to the antiquated system of the seven fixed stars. Ed.] When G’d used the plural נעשה, He simply indicated that His instructions would be carried out in conjunction with this angel who is the super-angel, so to speak.
	Sanhedrin 38 phrases this concept somewhat differently when G’d is described as always consulting with His entourage, פמליה של מעלה, before undertaking any major activity. The word נעשה therefore refers to G’d’s delegates in the universe. We find in Genesis 11,7 prior to G’d dispersing mankind all over the globe and confusing their uniform language that He used the plural, i.e. הבו נרדה, “let us descend, etc.” This too was a reference to this Divine entourage. In other instances, this “entourage” is called “G’d’s court of judgment, בית דינו של הק’בה. In the case of Sodom G’d made Avraham a “member” of this court when He revealed to him His intention to execute retribution on the people of Sodom (Genesis 18,20) although we do not find this form of the plural where G’d is quoted as speaking. A third expression our sages have used to describe this reaction by G’d prior to His making far-reaching decisions involving mankind is the word נמלך, “He consulted.” There is a verse (Daniel 4,14) בגזרת עירין פתגמא ומאמר קדישין שאלתא, “the matter is by decree of the wakeful ones and by word of the holy ones;” this is an allusion to these delegates whom G’d has appointed and without “consulting” whom He does not orchestrate major changes in the world as we know it. These delegates are nothing but vessels created by His will which He employs in order to make His works manifest. It is similar to when our body reflects the will of our soul. Anyone observing man’s activities does not relate them to a robot within man but to an intelligence and willpower resident within his body. According to Amos 3,7 כי לא יעשה ה’ דבר כי אם גלה סודו אל עבדיו הנביאים, “for G’d does not do anything the secret of which He has not first revealed to the prophets,” the prophet extends the concept of G’d taking His creatures into His confidence even further. We are entitled to extrapolate that if G’d reveals such matters to his prophets who are only flesh and blood, how much more does He do so to the angels He has appointed to supervise the smooth running of the universe? Nonetheless it is evident that G’d has no need of all these agents, otherwise how could He have created the universe in the absence of such angels? Conversely, even these powerful agents of G’d have need of Him all the time.
		1,27. בצלמו, “in His image.” The term צלם refers to an intellectual achievement. When the Torah wrote the word בצלמנו this was meant to alert us to the fact that the intellectual life-force within man has been emanated from G’d’s own Holy Spirit. As a result there is a great difference between the צלם, ”the abstract image,” and the physical appearance of someone who possesses it, i.e. the תאר, the form in which it is presented. I do not agree with Rabbi David Kimchi who believed that the wordצלם  is equivalent to the word דמות, “outward appearance, form.”
	Maimonides also agreed that there is a great difference between the two. At the beginning of his “Guide for the Perplexed,” he writes: “there are many people who understood the word צלם in Hebrew to be a description of the outward appearance which one perceives. These people are in error. In fact their error is so great that it borders on heresy. It might lead them to believe that G’d is corporeal. The fact is that the word צלם and the word תאר refer to two totally different concepts. The word תאר  refers to the outward shape and form which we perceive with our five senses, whereas the wordצלם  applies to the essential core of such a phenomenon. An example of the former is found in Samuel I 28,14 מה תארו “what does he look like?” Another example is found in Judges 8,18 כתאר בני המלך, ”just like the king’s sons.” Concerning the essential core of man’s spiritual makeup the Torah wrote that he is בצלמו , “like our own core,” meaning that the spiritual disembodied essence of man makes him similar to the disembodied phenomena in the world of the angels The Torah emphasised this when it wrote  בצלם אלוקים ברא אותו ,”in G’d’s own image He created him.” We know that G’d is not physical, so the word could not refer to a physical appearance This is also the reason for Psalms 73,20 צלמם תבזה, “their image You despise.” One does not “despise” the outward appearance of a person but the inner core such an image may reflect. Clearly, the Torah wanted to tell us by using the word בצלמנו than man and G’d have something in common which is of the essence, the abstract intellectual ability of his soul. Maimonides elaborates further on this theme in his ספר מדע, fourth chapter. 	
	There are others  who claim that the word בצלמנו means “the image which has been separated from Us.” This means “the image of our celestial world, the world of angels as well as the terrestrial part of the universe, i.e. all parts of the universe.“ Man is supposedly composed of elements of all three “worlds.” This is the reason that in many philosophical books man is referred to as עולם הקטן a “microcosm.” Job already alluded to this (Job 19,26) when he said ומבשרי אחזה אלוקה, “and though still of my flesh I will behold G’d.” He meant that through different parts of his body (3) he will be able to perceive the three parts comprising the universe, i.e. the work performed by G’d when He created the universe. Man’s head which is the seat of his intellect corresponds to the “highest” part of the universe which is the domain of abstract intellectual beings. The second part of man’s body from the neck down to his loins, is man’s middle part, and the point from which two branches, i.e. his right hand and his left hand branch out. They in turn are known by seven different names, i.e. functions: האצבע, היד, הכף, הטפח, הזרת, האמה ,זרוע “the (index) finger, the hand, the palm of the hand, the “span” (handbreadth), the “span” (distance between small finger and thumb when the fist is opened), the elbow (distance from extended middle-finger to the elbow), and the upper arm. All of these correspond in some way to the “middle” universe, the world of the galaxies. This world contains 7 primary galaxies which have the seven fixed stars attached to them. This part of man also contains the heart which is the origin of his thoughts. It is comparable to a king sitting in the innermost chamber of his palace and is comparable to the fixed star “sun” which is the center of the seven fixed stars and their galaxies. It is that star which bestows its light on this “lower” world on account of which it performs all its tasks. 
	The third part of man begins from his loins downwards. This part contains the ability to procreate, existence as a living organism (ability to excrete, etc.) and loss (of energy). This part corresponds to our “lower” world in which death, procreation, etc. are common phenomena. Our “lower” world, as opposed to the other parts of the universe is subject to constant disintegration and renewal.
	After having explained this you should remember that at any place in the Torah where G’d appears portrayed as if He were possessed of physical attributes such as mouth, nose, arms, eyes, ears, etc., none of these expressions must be understood at face value, i.e. literally. They are words which teach that in the “higher” worlds there are phenomena which correspond in their functions to these organs of the human body. Every time our sages say דברה תורה כלשון בני אדם, “the Torah used a syntax with which human beings are familiar,” this is what they referred to (compare Berachot 31 and many other places). In other words: due to the fact that we humans experience certain feelings and emotions we are unable to properly understand beings which are devoid of such feelings. Therefore, in order to give us at least an inkling of what goes on in those worlds, the Torah employs words and concepts with which we are familiar.
	Once we have learned to appreciate that these terms employed for celestial phenomena are in fact merely similes, we will be able to strip these words of their terrestrial significance in our minds and see in them expressions used to describe attributes of the celestial world which correspond in some way to the meaning of these organs in our own world. Concerning this we are told in Proverbs 28,5 ומבקשי ה' יבינו כל, “those who seek out the Lord will understand all.”
	If the Torah had not employed expressions used in this terrestrial world to describe phenomena in the celestial regions but had employed terms reserved for application to abstract intellectual beings, most people would not have even had an inkling of what the Torah was speaking about, neither of the subject matter nor of the attributes of these beings. This is why the Torah employed terms which enable a least the educated people to understand what the Torah had in mind. Every individual has to understand these terms based on his own insight into matters super-terrestrial. The one thing that we all have in common is knowledge of the existence of the Creator. Seeing that this is so, all of us are under an obligation to serve Him. Even though the scholar derives some advantage of being more familiar with celestial beings than the ordinary person, as far as his knowledge of the existence of the Creator is concerned this makes him no different from everybody else.
	The philosophers have tried to illustrate this with the following parable: when a rich man arrives at the home of a man as a guest and he is accompanied by his beasts, the host feeds the rich man all kinds of delicacies, while at the same time feeding his animals food which is appropriate for them. In a similar way, the Torah expands our ability to perceive some super-terrestrial phenomena provided we have first prepared ourselves through the acquisition of both knowledge and the appropriate moral conduct..
	A kabbalistic approach to the words נעשה אדם, ”let us make man,” sees in these words an allusion to G’d’s seven attributes. This is made clear by Bereshit Rabbah 5,3 where we are told in answer to the rhetorical question: “with whom did G’d consult? With the souls of the righteous and various phenomena representing the world already in existence The matter may be compared to a king who had a number of advisors who was not in the habit of undertaking anything of importance without consulting with his advisors. On the other hand, Rabbi Ami, in that same section of the Midrash said that G’d consulted “with His own heart;” according to him the matter is comparable to a king who had built a palace having entrusted the project to an architect but when he saw the result he was not pleased. Who was he supposed to be angry at if not at the architect? This is the meaning of the words in Genesis 6, 6 ויתעצב אל לבו, He was saddened at His heart.” Rabbi Assi, in the same paragraph, described the matter differently when he said: the matter can be compared to a king who conducted his business through a broker and was dissatisfied with the result, the broker not having realised a profit for him. Clearly, the king’s displeasure would be directed at the broker. So far  the Midrash.
 	Our verse contains some profound and hidden meaning, .which the Kabbalists who have tried to decipher hidden meanings of G’d’s message to man in the Torah have understood as the basis for the system of the ten emanations which include man seeing he has been created in a manner which corresponds to the structure of these emanations. When G’d said: בצלמנו, “in Our image,” the meaning is the “image” which was similar to that of the celestial regions and its inhabitants. The word כדמותנו, “similar to our appearance,” on the other hand, refers to the emanation called תפארת, “harmony,” which applies to the fact that man has a body.
	Let me now explain the entire  verse. Everyone who wants to have an understanding of the uniqueness and the unification of the various components man is made of should concentrate on the following: Man’s head, which is what lends whatever dignity and distinction his body deserves is equivalent to the highest emanation called כתר, “crown,” a description borrowed from the words in Psalms 119, 160, ראש דברך אמת as well as from the same word i.e. ראשו כתם פז in Song of Songs 5,11. Man’s brain and his ability to verbalise it, חכו, corresponds to the emanation חכמה, “wisdom,” which is something internal. This is what is meant by Song of Songs 5,16 חכו ממתקים, “His palate is sweet.” The word חכמה itself also alludes to the letters of the word  מוח חיך [the letter ה  is subject to being exchanged for either י  or ו under certain conditions, see Torat Chayim. Ed.] The word חיך, an allusion to the power of speech, corresponds to the emanationבינה , “insight.” This is the emanation which translates potential into actual forces. In other words, language translates thoughts into an intelligible and usable format. This is meant by Song of Songs 5,16 כלו מחמדים ”they are all a delight.” Just as in the world of emanations בינה translates the wisdom into some applicable form, so in man, language converts his knowledge into something communicable. We have already mentioned on several occasions that in kabbalistic terms the three words כתר, חכמה, תשובה  are essentially all the same thing Similarly, when it came to the formation of man, brain-power speech (palate)-language are all part of the same organ called head. The arms of man to the right and the left respectively are patterned after the emanation חכמה which is alluded to in the ספר היצירה according to which ברית הלשון מכריע בינתים i.e. the emanation תשובה corresponds to לשון, communication by means of language. This means that you have five “upper” emanations. The emanation תפארת reinforces and lends strength to all the other emanations. Concerning this emanation תפארת  Moses said in Numbers 16,22 אלוקי הרוחות לכל בשר, “Lord of the spirits of all flesh.” Man’s feet, his right thigh and his left thigh correspond to the two emanations נצח, והוד respectively.” The organ on which circumcision is performed corresponds to the emanation יסוד also known as צדיק which is known as ברית, “covenant,” and is situated in the centre (between left and right). This covenant reconciles the opposing emanations נצח  והוד. This helps you to understand that the appropriate time for the righteous to sleep with their wives is on the Sabbath seeing the emanation יסוד is the seventh when you consider that the top three emanations (כתר, חכמה, בינה ) are lumped together as one. When Elisha ben Avuyah (known in the Talmud as “Acher,”) observed the essential unity of the body so that the emanation מלכות remained “cut off, separated,” he concluded that possibly there are two domains in the universe each one of which had control of one section of it. He did not consider that  the “odd” emanation could be the heart. concerning which G’d had said ויתעצב אל לבו, “He consulted with His (own) heart.”
	Concerning this “heart,” the Kabbalists (sages of the Midrash) had quoted the parable of the king and his architect. This is also what the sages had in mind when they described the Etrog, the fruit taken on the festival of Sukkot together with the other species which however is kept separate and not bound up together with them, as symbolising the heart. Although it is not part of the אגודה, the “bunch” it nonetheless invalidates the other three species by its absence. The commandment of “take for yourselves, etc.” cannot be fulfilled without this Etrog. The intelligent reader will understand.  Once man has understood this very important insight his eyes will be illuminated and he will be able to ward off any alien philosophies which might otherwise endanger his belief in G’d and His Torah. It will be as clear to him as the sun in the sky that G’d has neither צורה  or דמות. This is what Moses told the people in Deut. 4, 15 when he referred to the revelation at Mount Sinai and said לא ראיתם כל תמונה “you did not see any visual image (on that occasion).” Moses made a point of stressing this so that we would understand once and for all that when the Torah speaks of G’d in terms of physical attributes these are only allegorical remarks.
 	1,28 ויברך אותם אלוקים ויאמר להם אלוקים פרו ורבו “G’d blessed them. G’d said to them: ‘be fruitful and multiply.’” If what is written here were meant to be a single blessing, the Torah should have written: “G’d blessed them saying ‘be fruitful and multiply.’” He had done just that when He blessed the fish in the oceans in 1,22. Seeing that the Torah again wrote “G’d said to them,” it is clear that this referred to a separate blessing. whereas the blessing to be fruitful and to multiply was a different blessing. The only reason the Torah repeated the name of G’d was to alert us to the fact that the Torah speaks of two blessings. The first blessing was given to the body’s ability to regenerate itself so that man could live indefinitely both in body and in soul. His food and the nutrients it contained should be blessed. It should replace whatever man’s body sheds in the course of each day, reducing his vitality; as a result man would not experience the process of aging and the progressive weakness associated with that process.
	The doctors are all agreed that man in this universe needs to add fluids to his body in order to counteract the ongoing loss of such fluids. This loss they ascribe to two causes. 1) The air which surrounds us on all sides and the heat it contains which has a tendency to draw moisture from our bodies. 2) The internal heat of the body which also drains the fluids which man was equipped with at birth. As a consequence of these factors man’s food and drink must be balanced so as to compensate for the loss of fluids and moisture we experience on a daily basis. In our present state, the replenishment of these fluids through the intake of food and drink is not sufficient to replace all the fluids which are being lost so that as a result of this gradual loss of our vital fluids we age and eventually die. If the food and drink intake contained all the ingredients to counteract the natural diminution of our vital fluids no one would ever show signs of age or die of old age.
	Concerning this blessing the Torah wrote: “G’d blessed them.” He gave them a divine blessing, i.e. the use of the word אלוקים suggests that the blessing was that they should be like G’d, i.e. live forever. This is what Assaph had in mind when he wrote in Psalm 82,6 אני אמרתי אלוקים אתם, “I had said you are G’d-like.” This is also the meaning of what a philosopher wrote in the book  called ספר המגלה that this first blessing given to man was that his food, though based exclusively on produce of the earth, should be sufficient in quality to counteract natural aging. As a result of such a blessing he was inherently capable of living forever. This is also the meaning of the words in verse 29 “here I have given to you all the herbs containing seed on earth and every tree thereon which produces seed as food to eat.” You will note that when designating what humans were to eat, the Torah underlines the importance of these plants generating seed, זורע זרע, whereas such capability of the food generating seed is not mentioned in connection with the plants designated as fodder for the animals. There the Torah merely wrote (verse 30) כל ירק עשב לאכלה, “all manner of green herbs as food.” These foodstuffs assigned to the animals did not have the power to regenerate themselves by producing seed, hence they could not do so within the animals which consumed them. This blessing was valid for man until he sinned. Once he had sinned, his whole nature underwent a change. In the future this blessing will be restored to man and this is what Isaiah 11,7 had in mind when he described the idyllic situation at that future time when both man and beast will be eating straw. Man will once again be able to derive all the nutrients necessary for his infinite life from the very vegetable matter assigned to him at creation. This may also have been alluded to already in our verse where the Torah phrased such food as serving man “in the future,” i.e., “it will become fit as food for you.” לכם יהיה לאכלה. If the Torah had in mind only the present world it need merely have written לכם הוא לאכלה, “for you it is as food, “or לכם נתתי לאכלה, “to you I have given it as food.” The fact that verse 29 begins with the past tense and concludes with the future tense is a clear hint that the Torah tries to tell us something beyond what is immediately obvious. The additional information contained in that future tense is that in due course G’d will reactivate certain functions of the human body enabling it to absorb certain potential in the food he consumes to be used by his body so that his body completely replaces any vital fluids lost through exposure to the elements. Thus far I have quoted from the author of the book ספר המגלה.
 	The second blessing deals with being fruitful and multiplying. The reason G’d’s name is mentioned once more in that blessing is to make clear that by reproducing man becomes a partner of G’d in the universe. This is what Chavah had in mind when she said after giving birth to Cain (4,1) קניתי איש את ה', “I and G’d together have acquired a man.” Our sages in Kidushin 30 have said: “three partners between them acquired (contributed to his existence)  man. They are: G’d, man’s father and man’s mother.” The purpose of the commandment to procreate profusely is so  that the birth of the body be a prelude for the acquisition of the intelligent essence of man, his נפש השכלית. It is this intelligent essence which enables him to serve his Creator. Were it not for that, man’s superiority to the animals would be nil, i.e. מותר האדם מן הבהמה אין, (Kohelet 3,19).
	When the prophet Ezekiel 23,37 quotes G’d as saying וגם את בניהן אשר ילדו לי, “and also their children who have been born to Me,” he meant the children whose purpose in being born was to serve G’d. The implication of the verse is that all Israelites were born for the sake of His Holy Name, in order to serve G’d.
	The wicked people who see in the purpose of producing children a function of merely populating the universe, to eat and to drink just like the animals, completely misunderstood what the Torah has in mind with this blessing. Already at the time man engages in impregnating his wife with his seed he must strive to concentrate on this purpose of procreation. He must desire to draw down upon himself some of the Holy Spirit, similar to when an animal was offered up as a sacrifice. This too was done in order to draw G’d’s presence down to us in our part of the universe.
	These two verses between them tell how G’d provided food for both man and the animal kingdom to sustain itself on earth. He decreed concerning all other living creatures that they feed only on the part of the vegetation that does not produce seed to perpetuate itself. They were not to feed on either fruit or grain or other forms of seeds. Man was not to eat meat, i.e. creatures which had once been alive, capable of moving on earth or in the air. The reason G’d did not permit man to eat meat (at that stage) was that any creatures which are equipped with the ability to move freely contain some element of a superior life-force which makes them similar to man who has an intelligent soul. Such animals possess enough intelligence to be discriminate in the choice of which foods are beneficial for them and which are harmful to them. They also possess sufficient intelligence (instinct) to avoid danger and to try and save their lives when danger threatens. When the generation of man had become corrupt in their ways and G’d had to bring on the deluge, the animals had copied man’s corrupt ways which eventually led to their meat becoming permitted to man as food. The Torah testified to the corruption of these animals in Genesis  6,13 קץ כל בשר בא לפני כי מלאה הארץ חמס, “the end of all flesh has come before Me for the earth is filled with violence.” At that time only Noach had remained righteous and he saved the nucleus of each species with him in the ark. In return for his keeping the animals alive they became his food henceforth. Even so, G’d never permitted man to consume the life-force of the animal, its נפש. This is why even Gentiles are not permitted to eat tissue from an animal while it is alive. For the Jewish people the eating of blood is also forbidden as it is essential to the preservation of the life-force, נפש. Proof that the animals too had become corrupt is found in Genesis 6,12 כי השחית כל בשר את דרכו, “all flesh has become corrupt.” Nachmanides claims that the reason ritual slaughter is required as the only method which makes the animal’s flesh permissible to the Jews is that it ensures that we will not consume the essence of the animal, its נפש. As far as the Biblical prohibition of צער בעל החיים, “not to cause pain to living creatures” is concerned, (Shabbat 128) the sages introduced the blessing which must be recited before slaughtering an animal which expressly states אשר קדשנו במצותיו וצונו על השחיטה, “who has sanctified us with His commandments and given us the directive to perform the ritual of slaughtering.” [The author copied much of the latter half of this paragraph from Nachmanides’ commentary. Ed.]
	1,31. וירא אלוקים את כל אשר עשה והנה טוב מאד, “and G’d saw all that He had done and it was very good. According to the plain meaning of the text, the words “very good” include everything that G’d had done during the entire six days. Although during those six days or stages He had characterised the end of each day as having produced results which were “good,” now that He saw the completed project it qualified for the description “very good.” You must remember that every component of the universe is dependent on its continued existence on another component. Assuming that there was only a single species of living being on earth,  this species could not survive unless it had earth to subsist on. On the other hand, earth itself could not endure unless the heavens were operating normally as it depends on the celestial bodies orbiting properly. So you see every single component of the universe is interdependent on other components. Not only the terrestrial parts of the universe are interdependent but even the celestial parts are dependent on the terrestrial parts. [This is part of the meaning of the word אחד in Deut. 6,4 as the author explains there at length when he discusses the mystical implication of the word. Ed.]  
	Translated into our microcosm, the human being, this can be appreciated easily if we consider that legs cannot perform their functions and walk unless they are attached to a torso. This is one of the reasons philosophers refer to man as a microcosm. On the other hand, we also find the universe itself referred to as אדם גדול, when the writer wants to describe the universe and all that exists within it. [Rabbi Chavell substantiates this by quoting from רלב'ג (Gersonides) in his book מלחמות השם. Ed.] This is also what Isaiah 48,13 had in mind when he said קורא אני אליהם יעמדו יחדו, “when I call unto them they all arise simultaneously.” When addressing this verse, and the word יחדו specifically, our sages in Chagigah 12  say that it means “they do not lose contact with one another.” From all the above we may conclude that every component of this universe when considered on its own is merely a potential form of energy or entity. When viewed in this light it is not surprising that G’d reserved the description “very good,” until all components had been created and the entire universe was able to function as He had planned.
	It is interesting that when the Torah reported the birth of Moses in Exodus 2,2, his mother is reported as ותרא אותו כי טוב, “she saw him that he was good;” surely this is an unusual comment especially in view of our tradition that Moses had been born prematurely. The real meaning of the words is: “she was aware that he had the potential to be good.” When Moses had become a leader of the Jewish people and had proven himself over and over as an outstanding man, the Torah applies the adjective מאד, “very” to him when complimenting him on his modesty and humility. We are told in Numbers 12, 3 והאיש משה ענו מאד, “and the man Moses was very humble.” What his mother had seen as a potential and had described as “good,” had by now become “very good,” seeing he had translated his potential into an actual.
	The virtue (attribute)  called טוב is the greatest virtue of all and it has been reserved for G’d Himself as He alone is the true personification of “good.” We know this from Psalms 145,9 טוב ה' לכל, “G’d is good to all.” The meaning of Psalms 136,1 הודו לה' כי טוב is: “He is good for He has done good for us.”
	Looking at our verse from an homiletical point of view, Bereshit Rabbah 9,9 sees in the description והנה טוב a reference to the יצר הטוב, the urge which tells us to be good, whereas in the word מאד it sees an allusion to the evil urge יצר הרע. What the Midrash has in mind is that but for the addition of this יצר הרע, an urge to be “independent, individualistic, etc.,” man would not engage in founding a household, marrying and raising a family; as a result of such lack of enterprise and individuality the world would soon be in ruins. 
	The sages of the Midrash explained further: the words והנה טוב מאד are an allusion to death. Death is the reason that generations of humans feel the need to procreate in order to renew  themselves through their offspring. The sages went so far as to institute a benediction to be said in the house of mourners in which one refers to G’d as הטוב והמטיב, “as the One who is both good and metes out goodness.”

Midrash has in mind is that but for the addition of this יצר הרע, an urge to be “independent, individualistic, etc.,” man would not engage in founding a home and raising a family; as a result of such lack of enterprise and individuality the world would soon be in ruins.
	The sages of the Midrash explained further: the words והנה טוב מאד are an allusion to death. Death is the reason that generations of humans feel the need to procreate in order to renew themselves through their offspring. The sages went so far as to institute a benediction to be recited in the house of mourners in which one refers to G’d as הטוב והמטיב, as “the One Who is both good and metes out goodness.”
	The Torah reminds us by using the word וירא in connection with the word עשה that G’d had created that which He presides over including the planetary constellations in their respective orbits. The verse also contains an allusion to the fact that there are a total of nine such planetary constellations as the philosophers have said (Maimonides, Guide for the Perplexed 2,9). The word והנה in our verse is a reference to the tenth planet the planet called גלגל השכל. The numerical value of the letters in the word והנה  is the same (66) as the numerical value of the word גלגל. This 10th planetary constellation is the one which is responsible for the motion of all the other planetary constellations. (Rabbi Chavell writes that he has found confirmation of this in the liturgical poem כתר מלכות attributed to Shlomoh ben Yehudah Ibn Gabirol born Malaga 1021 died Valencia 1058). In Chagigah 12 this planetary constellation is called ערבות i.e. the highest of the seven “heavens,” רקיעים which are enumerated there. The planetary constellation which encompasses all the others moves them and activates their orbits. This is the constellation which was called טוב in the Torah, the letter ט in that word alluding to the nine planetary constellations. This is why G’d used the words והנה טוב מאד when He reviewed the physical universe He had created. These words were a reference to the גלגל השכל which sets in motion the ninth planetary constellation which in turn causes the orbits of all the eight other constellations within it. By using the word מאד whose numerical value is 45, the Torah provides a clue to the observation made by our sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 1,1 that there is a distance of five hundred miles between one such planetary constellation and the next one. The number 45 then alludes to the nine times 500 miles the highest of these constellations is removed from earth.
	יום הששי, “the sixth day.” According to the plain meaning of the text the additional letter ה which prefaces the word ששי, “sixth” here is merely in deference to the fact that on that day the crown jewel of the universe, i.e. Adam, had been created. His creation marked the completion of G’d’s work of creating the universe. He had been the objective of G’d’s entire undertaking. This is why the word הששי “the sixth day,” alerts us to the fact that finally the day had arrived. Another lesson that the use of the word הששי is meant to teach us is that the day was different from all the other days which represented the number “five,” seeing that on each day the number five played a prominent role. By using the extra letter ה i.e. “five” on this occasion the Torah drew attention to the fact that this day “presided” over the other days which represented only the number “five” each as opposed to the sixth day. 
	Let me illustrate what I mean when I describe all the other days as featuring the number “five.” On the first day we find that the Torah speaks about five different kinds of light. On the second day the Torah mentions five different kinds of רקיע, sky or heaven. It also speaks of מים, water, five times. On the third day the Torah speaks of five different kinds of vegetation. On the fourth day the Torah mentions five different kinds of luminaries. On the fifth day the Torah speaks of five different categories of motion. in relation to the various categories of living creatures. On the sixth day we learn about the five senses which distinguish man’s body, as well as about five kinds of spiritual movements and about five types of  sensory perceptions which distinguish man’s soul. We are also told about five different names applicable to the living soul (based on Bereshit Rabbah 14,11. They are called נפש, רוח, נשמה, יחידה, חיה respectively). For all these reasons the Torah sealed its report of the six days of creation with the letter ה.
	You should consider further the reason why each of the phenomena which were created during the six days had to be created on their respective days and not on any other day. Also, you should appreciate why the day on which light was created was called יום אחד, and why the day on which the sky was created was called יום שני, etc. The reason is that on each of these days something unique  occurred. On the first day, the day light was created, this very light was meant to remind us of the One, the Unique One, the Creator. G’d Himself, in His capacity as being unique, is associated with light as we know from Psalms 27,1 ה' אורי וישעי, “G’d is my light and my salvation.” There were actually two categories of light; one existed prior to these six days, the other was something that became manifest for the first time on the first day. 
	The day on which the sky was created was called יום שני because it alluded to the presence of a “twosome,” whereas previously there had not been any divisions. As of the time the sky (heaven) was created there was heaven on the one side and earth on the other. The description יום שני, commonly understood as “a second day,” may be just as aptly translated as “the day when two domains were separated.” Basically, what happened on that day was that the same element “water” was divided, separated into “upper waters” and “lower waters.” In other words: “what had been one now became two.” The third day was so named because on that day it became evident that the globe had been divided into three parts. One third was meant for civilisation, one third was wasteland and the remaining third was made up of water. [the author does not think in terms of how much of the globe was allocated to each of these three categories but to the division between water, habitable land, and land unsuitable for human habitation. Ed.]. The fourth day was so called as on that day the luminaries and the stars were hung in the sky; they, especially the sun, divided the year into the four seasons, the day into four periods of six hours each, and the month into approx. four weeks. The fifth day was called “fifth,” as on it the living creatures on earth were created all of whom possessed five modes of motion. The sixth day was called “sixth” as on it man who extends into all six directions of the globe was created.
	Shabbat 88, concentrating on the homiletical aspect of the word הששי instead of merely ששי, concentrates on a covenant entered into by G’d with His universe according to which it would continue in existence only on condition that the Jewish people would accept the Torah on the sixth day of Sivan when the appropriate year would arrive.  
	A kabbalistic approach sees in the letter ה in the word הששי  a reference to the sixth of G’d’s seals. G’d had sealed the activity of every day with one of His seals and on the sixth day He affixed the sixth of these seals.
	In addition, the previous five days were still part of the month of Ellul, seeing He had commenced creating the universe on the twenty-fifth of that month. Now on the sixth day, it was the first day of the month of Tishrey, a day that represented New Year in the future. In our prayers on that day we refer to it as the first of G’d’s creations, i.e. the first day the universe operated as a complete unit. It was the day Adam was judged, and has ever since remained the annual day on which G’d sits in judgment of mankind. Another explanation for the word הששי is that it does not refer to the previous word יום at all. Rather, it is a possessive clause and means that this day “belongs” to the sixth. It is a day known as “the sixth.” The reference is to the sixth seal of G’d we have mentioned previously.

	2,1. ויכלו השמים והארץ וכל צבאם, “and the heaven and the earth and its host were completed.” The word ויכלו has been positioned by the Torah next to the word הששי, to hint at the Ineffable Name of G’d in the respective first letters of the words הששי, ויכלו השמים והארץ. The message is that although this name of G’d has not appeared in the text of the entire chapter dealing with the creation of heaven and earth and all that is in it, this attribute of G’d nevertheless was involved during the creation from start to finish .	The reason that in the opening verse of chapter one where the creation of heaven and earth is reported the Torah made no reference to the word צבאם, “their hosts,” is that at that point the Torah inserted the word את both in conjunction with “heaven” and in conjunction with “earth.” The word את always includes something which has not been spelled out. Here, at the beginning of chapter two, where the Torah did not insert this word, the words וכל צבאם take the place of the word  את in the previous chapter.
	The word צבאם in its various forms alludes to angels such as in Kings I 22,19. Another instance where the word צבא מרום clearly refers to the angels is in Isaiah 24,21 וכל צבא השמים. The reason that the Torah wrote the word in the singular, i.e. צבאם, instead of צבאותם, is that we have a tradition that each nation has a representative at the celestial court, an angel called שר. When G’d engages in destruction of the nation represented by such an angel, He does not proceed until He has first neutralized that angel. The source of this tradition goes back to Shir Hashirim Rabbah end of chapter eight. In other words, the Torah refers to these forces as individuals although they represent a multitude of people. 
	The Torah did not mention the word ברא, “He created,” in connection with either the angels the human souls which had not yet been assigned bodies in order to teach us that all parts of the universe are interconnected. The entire universe consists of three parts 1) The world of the angels; 2) the world of the planetary constellations, “outer space,” in our language; 3) the atmosphere and earth, our habitat. The world of the angels acts as the soul of the planetary systems, whereas the planetary system  exerts its impact on our terrestrial part of the universe. We have a clear verse in Hoseah 2,23 which spells this out. אענה נאום ה', אענה את השמים, והם יענו את הארץ. ”I will respond declares the Lord, I will respond to the heaven, and it shall respond to the earth.”

	2,2. ויכל אלוקים ביום השביעי, “G’d completed on the seventh day etc.” The plain meaning of the verse is certainly not that G’d completed His work on the seventh day itself. If this were the meaning it would mean that G’d performed creative work on at least part of the Sabbath. The meaning of the words is that as soon as the Sabbath started G’d had already finished whatever He had been in the process of doing. An example of a similar construction can be found in Exodus 12,15  אך ביום הראשון תשביתו שאר מבתיכם, “but on the first day you shall remove leaven from your houses.” The intention in that verse is certainly not that we are to wait until the first day of Passover to remove the leaven. The intention is that we should ensure that when the first day of Passover commences we had already removed all our leaven.
	An homiletical approach to these words is offered by Rabbi Shimon in Bereshit Rabbah 10,10. He says that the wording of this verse teaches that whereas it is impossible for a human being to precisely know when Friday ends and the Sabbath begins, G’d who knows the times (He has created) with absolute precision need not therefore add extra minutes before the onset of the Sabbath and abstain from work during them, as there is no fear He would violate the commencement of the Sabbath. Seeing that G’d completes His work only at the precise moment the Sabbath commences, this might be viewed by man as if He had continued working into the Sabbath.
	A kabbalistic approach to our verse sees in these words an allusion to work G’d will complete during the seventh millennium, i.e. after the earth as we know it will have reverted to its primeval state at the end of the sixth millennium. This corresponds to what our sages have said in Rosh Hashanah 31 that this earth [commencing with the creation of Adam, Ed.] would endure for six thousand years which would be followed by one thousand years of destruction.
	וישבות ביום השביעי, “He rested on the seventh day.” The term שבת is applicable to anyone who rests temporarily and expects to resume his regular activities. on the following day. In this instance it means that G’d will resume creative activity after the seventh millennium. This is the reason the paragraph concludes with the word לעשות, i.e. “to do,.” or “to complete.”

	2,3. ויברך אלוקים את יום השביעי “G’d blessed the seventh day.” Rashi explains this by saying that the blessing consisted of the manna [which the Jewish people would not need to collect on the Sabbath during their wanderings in the desert, Ed.]. He also sees the word “He sanctified it,” as applying to the fact that manna did not fall on the Sabbath. With all due respect to his fame as a commentator, I do not believe that an interpretation which delays the effectiveness of a blessing for two for thousand years into the future is what the Torah had in mind here.
	I believe that the blessing referred to a new phenomenon which became manifest on that day, namely that the light remained active throughout the twenty four hours of that day. On the Sabbath there was no visible difference between day and night and that is the reason we do not find the words “it was evening, it was morning,” in connection with that day.
	When the Torah added the words ויקדש אותו, “He sanctified it,” this means that G’d set the Sabbath apart, distinguished it from the other days. Whenever something is set apart from the norm the term “sanctified” is appropriate. When G’d instructed the Jewish people to be distinct, separate from the nations of the world (Leviticus 119,2), He used the phrase קדושים תהיו, “be holy,” i.e. be distinct, remain separate.
	Looking at our verse from a kabbalistic point of view, the words יום השביעי refer to the seventh emanation which is called  עולם הנשמות, “world of the souls,” as it is the region in which the powers of the soul are rooted. This region therefore may aptly be described as the fountainhead of all blessings. During the six days of the week the soul may be compared to someone who is merely a guest  without a home. On the Sabbath the soul is like a guest who has found a home. This is why the Torah used the word ויברך ה' את יום השביעי, “He conferred a blessing on that day,” i.e. the soul derives a blessing from its source  on that day. As to the words ויקדש אותו, the meaning is that the blessing the Torah spoke of originated in a separate domain.
	אשר ברא אלוקים לעשות. “which G’d had created to do.” The word לעשות in this instance refers to work which G’d did on the sixth day though it had originally been meant to be done on the seventh day (based on Rashi). Nachmanides sees in the sequence of the words  שבת מכל מלאכתו אשר ברא אלוקים לעשות a hint that as of that day G’d no longer engaged in either the kind of creative activity He had engaged in on the first day when He created ex nihilo, nor the kind of activity He continued with during the remainder of the six days when He converted original matter into more refined matter. It is also possible to explain the words אשר ברא אלוקים, as referring to G’d “sealing” the whole מעשה בראשית, seeing that the repetition of the word אלוקים here needs justification. The Torah repeated these words in order to ensure that the reader would attribute the entire work of the six days of creation to a single Creator. He who had started it also completed it. The word לעשות on the other hand, teaches that He who had originated matter now instructed the various parts of nature to continue His work in accordance with the rules He had laid down.
	We have already mentioned a kabbalistic view of the additional word לעשות when we spoke about the seventh millennium. King David also hinted at such future developments when he composed his hymn (Psalm 92) entitled מזמור שיר ליום השבת., “a song for the Sabbath day.” During the course of that hymn he speaks of “the righteous who will bloom like a date-palm, like the cedar tree in Lebanon.” Intelligent readers will understand the mystical meaning of these words. [a reference to developments after the seventh millennium. Ed.] 
	In the 51st chapter of Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer we read: “heaven and earth will undergo a metamorphosis and will reappear in a renewed version.” The verse in scripture from which this is derived is Isaiah 34,4 ונגולו כספר השמים, “and the heavens shall be rolled up like a scroll,” i.e. like man who reads a scroll and rolls it up when he has come to the end. Similarly, when the time comes, G’d will “roll up” the heavens like a book The prophet also speaks of a similar development occurring to earth when he said  והארץ כבגד תבלה, “and the earth will become moldy like a garment” (Isaiah 51,6). The earth is compared to man who disrobes and folds up garments and then opens them and wears them again. G’d will perform something analogous to this with earth when the time comes. The root בלה is used in a number of scriptural verses to describe a process of destruction preceding a renewal. Rabbi Eliezer says specifically that this will be the process experienced by heaven and earth, and that just as we find in nature that a leaf will wither on the vine, or that the fruit will shrivel on the fig tree (Isaiah 34,4) only to be regenerated, so this will happen to the universe G’d has created. The lesson to be learned from such a phenomenon is that there is a G’d who causes disintegration but that He Himself is not subject to such disintegration. Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer.
	You must appreciate that the first seven days (including the Sabbath) of creation are intended to acquaint us both with what happened once and with what will happen again. They are symbolic of the six thousand years the universe will endure in its present form and the one thousand years during which it will undergo a total transformation. Bereshit Rabbah 8,2 states that in G’d’s calendar one day is equivalent to a thousand years in our calendar. This insight is based on Psalms 90,4 כי אלף שנה בעיניך כיו אתמול, “for one thousand years in Your eyes are like yesterday.”
	It is clear that there is an allusion to something which will occur in the future in the millennium corresponding to the report of every single day of the creation as portrayed by the Torah. The first day on which light was created alludes to the first millennium during which Adam was alive. Adam was considered the light of the terrestrial world. When you consider that in the report of the first day the Torah mentions light five times and darkness only three times,  you can understand that during this millennium light, i.e. goodness and peace, gradually asserted itself over darkness and the evil which darkness symbolises. The second day of creation, on the other hand, symbolises the second millennium during which the deluge occurred. This is the reason that the word טוב does not occur in the report of that day of the creative process.This is also why we do not find the words ויהי כן, “it remained thus,” until the end of verse seven instead of immediately after the directive in verse six that a heaven should become manifest. Our sages considered the absence of the mention ”it was good” on the second day as so serious that they discouraged people from commencing major undertakings on Mondays, the second day of the week. It is not appropriate for man to commence an enterprise on a day when G’d “lost” His world to the deluge.
	If you have been under the impression that our sages discouraged new undertakings on Mondays because they considered this a bad omen, please reconsider. The fact is that the evening of the second day (Sunday night) commences under the aegis of the horoscope צדק (Jupiter), whereas by day the second day of the week is under the aegis of the לבנה, the moon, both of which constellations are positive; these planets symbolise light and uprightness. It would therefore be appropriate to commence undertakings on such a day which seems to augur well for people. How then could the sages have forbidden such a thing except for man to commemorate G’d’s dismay at the need to have destroyed so many of His creatures? The third day corresponded to the third millennium; on that day the word  כי טוב occurred twice. The first time the words occur they symbolise the cancellation of the decree to destroy the earth by means of a deluge; the second time these words refer to what occurred in the year 2448 when G’d revealed Himself to His people and gave them the Torah Just as G’d had given permission to earth on the third day to produce vegetation and that vegetation had remained hidden at the threshhold of earth waiting to reveal itself until Adam the crown jewel of creation came into existence, so the third millennium was reserved for the Jewish people who are reported in Exodus 1,7 to have been fruitful and to have been multiplying in Egypt during that millennium. The sanctity and spiritual superiority of the Jewish people had remained hidden from the world until they received the Torah at Mount Sinai. The fourth day of creation corresponds to the fourth millennium, the period during which the Jewish people accumulated more wisdom than any other nation. The two great luminaries allude to the written and the oral Torah respectively. The “great luminary” symbolises the written Torah, whereas the “small(er) luminary”, the moon, symbolises the oral Torah. The stars which are always considered as part of the moon’s domain, represent those parts of the oral Torah which, though not necessarily the last word in halachah, nonetheless provide great moral lessons for the Jewish people. The fifth day symbolises the period during which the Jewish people were in exile amongst the nations of the world who have been compared to נפש החיה הרומשת על הארץ, ”the living creatures  which crawl on earth.” This is the reason that the words ויהי כן, “it remained thus,” are absent at the conclusion of the Torah’s report of what transpired on that day. It is a hint that our exile will not go on forever, but that in the end we will experience redemption. The sixth day corresponds to the sixth millennium (which at the time of writing by our author was barely 50 years old). Just as the Torah reports at the beginning of its report of that day that the earth brought forth all manner of animals including those that creep, so the sixth millennium finds us in exile at its beginning. The various beasts were created before the “sun” shone on earth, a period when they reigned supreme on earth. This is the meaning of Psalms 104,22 תזרח השמש יאספון, “once the sun shines they will be gathered in.(to their dens). ”Adam was created after the sun had begun to shine as this was the time when he would rule. The psalmist in Psalms 104,23 again refers to this when he says יצא אדם לפעלו, “Adam will set out to do his work.” Just as Adam took control on the sixth day of creation, something alluded to in the words “let us make Adam,” so the Messiah will arrive and take control of the earth during the sixth millennium after a tenth of that millennium has passed, corresponding to the hour at which the sun rises in the morning. The reference is to the משיח בן דוד, the Messiah who is the descendant of David, the final Messiah. It has been written of this Messiah וכסאו כשמש נגדי, “and his throne is as the sun before Me.”(Psalms 89,37). It is he who is meant when the Torah spoke of Man as being made in the image of the Lord. Daniel 7,13 describes him as ארו עם ענני שמיא כבר אנש אתי הוה , “and behold! With the clouds of heaven, one like a man came.” This is presumed to occur 118 years into the sixth millennium if Daniel’s prediction in chapter 12 ,17 will prove accurate. [Seeing that the commentators obviously misunderstood Daniel’s calculation of when the Messiah would come, as the time has long passed, I have omitted explaining how our author believes that Daniel arrived at his calculation. Ed.] 
	The seventh day corresponds to the seventh millennium, which will be all Sabbath. All this will occur after the arrival of the Messiah and the resurrection of the dead will have been completed. All the people resurrected will participate in this “Sabbath,” and will enjoy indescribable physical and spiritual pleasures. I believe it is this period to which both Hillel and Shammai alluded when they said (Beytzah 16) מחד שביך לשביתך, “from the first day (of the week) prepare already for your Sabbath.” This statement did not only refer to the need to prepare superior food to honour the forthcoming Sabbath physically, but it also meant that we are to prepare ourselves spiritually at all times for the eventual Sabbath in that millennium. Although Hillel phrased this principle differently, both scholars alluded to the same thing. Our mental focus should not be restricted to the  daily problems but we should prepare ourselves spiritually for the  millennium which bears the name “Sabbath.” 

	2,4. אלה תולדות השמים והארץ, “These are the products of heaven and earth.” It is well known that heaven and earth between them comprise all creatures which possess a body. According to the plain meaning of the text they are here described as  תולדה, “product,” to remind us that they were “born” just like babies are born, i.e. they had parents, they were not eternal. The word is designed to deprive all those who believe in the eternal existence of the universe of a basis for their theories.
	From an homiletical point of view, (Shemot Rabbah 30,3) the critical word here is the word אלה, “these.” Whenever this word appears in the Torah it represents a break in continuity with what had been written prior to that  word. This word is also the basis of the statement by our sages that G’d had been building and destroying a number of worlds prior to creating the present one. At that point, He had saidדין הניין לי ודין לא הניין לי , “these please Me whereas the others do not please Me” (Bereshit Rabbah 3,9). The wording “He created and destroyed,” is not to be understood literally; it means that G’d looked at various plans of various universes He had contemplated creating and after finding them inadequate  He went back “to the drawing board,” to plan an even better universe I have discussed the matter already in connection with the words יהי אור.
	Other comments in the Midrash there concentrate on the spelling of the word תולדות. First, the very word תולדות teaches that whereas previous plans by G’d had been shelved, the present world had been found worthwhile to translate into practice. There are only two instances where the word תולדות is spelled with both letters ו such as here The second instance is in Ruth 4,18 when the descendant of David, Peretz, the ancestor of the Messiah of davidic ancestry is mentioned. When that happens, G’d will banish death from earth. The spelling that we encounter in both these instances is that at the beginning of the word the letters ת-ו are in the reverse order of their appearance at the end of the same word, i.e. ו-ת. At the time G’d created the present world the angel of death had not been assigned any authority. After man sinned, the angel of death was given wide-ranging powers so that as of that moment all future “products,” תולדות, were spelled defective. With the birth of Peretz the son of Yehudah, the ancestor of the Messiah, a person had been born who would (through his descendant the Messiah) banish death once more from earth. This is hinted at by the spelling of the word תולדות in connection with mention of his eventual offspring The source for our tradition that death will be banished from earth at that time is Isaiah 25,8  בלע המות לנצח, “He will  banish death forever.” 
	From a rational, investigative point of view, the appearance of the two letters ת in our word where they appear as if facing one another, suggest that heaven and earth are in opposition to each other, the first letter ת referring to heaven, the second to earth. This concept is found in Proverbs 25, 3 where Solomon wrote  השמים לרום והארץ לעומק. “As the heavens in their height, so the earth in its depth.” In order to ensure that we do not remain with the thought that earth is inferior to heaven by definition, the Torah reverses the order in which the names heaven and earth appear in the very next line by writing ארץ ושמים, in that order. All phenomena in the universe are the product of the same Creator; one part is not inferior or superior to the other. Heaven “faces” earth, i.e. is oriented towards earth, and earth faces heaven, i.e. is oriented towards heaven. It is even possible that this was what G’d had meant to tell Moses when He answered his question in Exodus 3,13-14 concerning which name of G’d he should mention to the Israelites when identifying himself as G’d’s messenger. At that time G’d described Himself as אהיה אשר אהיה, ”I shall be (remain) who I am.” He meant: “I will always respond in kind to whatever you (the Jewish people) will do. If you will give charity, as you are directed to by the Torah in Deut. 15,8, פתוח תפתח את ידך, ‘be sure to open your hand (to the needy),’ I shall distribute charity, as is written in Deut. 28,12 יפתח לך ה' את אוצרו הטוב, ‘G’d will open for you His good treasure.’”
	בהבראם, “when they were being created.” Our sages in Menachot 29, seizing on the fact that the letter ה in this word is written in smaller script, explain “He created them (heaven and earth) with the letter ה. 	
	Looking at the word as plain text, the meaning is that G’d did not experience strain or fatigue as a result of having created heaven and earth. Amongst all other letters in the Hebrew alphabet there is not a single one which does not require some form of exertion, i.e. moving the muscles of mouth, tongue or throat, in order for us to formulate it and say it audibly except the letter ה. This idea is hinted at in Psalms 33,6  בדבר ה' שמים נעשו וברוח פיו כל צבאם, “by the word “heh” the heaven was made and by the breath of His mouth all their hosts.” David meant that no exertion is needed in order to pronounce the letter ה; it suffices to exhale with the breath of one’s mouth, an involuntary “activity.” The message of the full verse in Psalms is that although the Torah describes that G’d performed many activities, i.e. ויעש, עשה, when He created the universe, it affected His state of being no more than the exhaling of the letter  הaffects a human being’s fatigue. In other words, when G’d said “let us make נעשה  אדם,” He exerted only as much energy as is needed to exhale with one’s mouth.
		Looking at the word בהבראם from an homiletical point of view, you will observe that the letters in that word are the same as in the name אברהם, although they are arranged differently. This prompted Rabbi Yudan to say in Bereshit Rabbah 12,8 that the universe was created for the sake of Avraham. Should you be perplexed at such an inference, I refer you to Psalms 89,3  עולם חסד יבנה, “the universe was built on loving kindness,” or Michah 7,20   חסד לאברהם. Both of these verses equate Avraham with loving kindness. What the sages of the Midrash meant therefore was that Avraham personified the very attribute G’d employed in creating mankind, i.e. the universe. We may therefore say without hesitation that the universe was created for Avraham, i.e. for the likes of him.
		A kabbalistic approach to the word בהבראם, understands it to mean that He (G’d), created it with the letter ה. This letter is the last letter in the Ineffable four-lettered name of G’d, and it is written in smaller than usual script in the Torah; it was emanated from the energy which is part of the attribute of אלוקים, and it was this part of G’d’s “energy” which created the universe On other occasions this part of G’d’s “energy” is called יד ה', “the hand of G’d,” such as in Isaiah 66,2 ואת כל אלה ידי עשתה, “and all of these (phenomena, the universe) My hand has made.”  We find a verse with a similar meaning in Job 12, 9  מי לא ידע בכל אלה כי יד ה' עשתה זאת? “Who amongst all these does not know that the hand of G’d has made all this?” Whenever the wordאלוקים  is mentioned in the first chapter of Genesis, it refers to the emanation called תשובה, i.e. the first letter ה in G’d’s Ineffable Name. It is this letter and what it represents that we speak of in our prayers on New Year’s day which is the Day of Judgment, the anniversary of when the universe was completed. This emanation תשובה extends (presides) for the duration of the Ten Days of Penitence which are called  עשרת ימי תשובה. This is why our sages have inserted a paragraph in the principal prayer עמידה during these days in which we acknowledge G’d as מי כמוך אב הרחמים, “who is like You father of mercy?” The reference  is to the two letters ה, i.e. א, ב הרחמים which appear in the Ineffable Name. The letter ה is the letter which was added to Avraham’s name when it was changed from אברם to  אברהם The addition of that letter enabled him to procreate [together with Sarah, seeing he had fathered Ishmael before that letter was added to his name. Ed.]  Our sages have said (Bereshit Rabbah 44,12) “Avram could not produce viable sperm, Avraham could.” I will explain this further on Genesis 29, 32 in connection with the words והיה שמך אברהם in Genesis 17,5-6. Here the Torah simply drew attention to the fact that the very letter which was instrumental in creating the universe was the one added to Avram’s name in order to give him the ability to produce his son Yitzchak. He who had created the laws of nature is at liberty to change these laws when it suits Him. There is no power which is able to prevent Him from exercising His will.

	
anniversary of when the universe was completed. This emanation תשובה  extends (presides) for the duration of the Ten Days of Penitence which are called עשרת ימי תשובה. This is why our sages have inserted a paragraph in the principal prayer עמידה during these days in which we acknowledge G’d as מי כמוך אב הרחמים, “who is like You O father of mercy?” The reference is to the two letters, i.e. א-ב הרחמים which appear in the Ineffable Name.
	The letter  ה is the letter which was added to Avraham’s name when it was changed from Avram to Avraham. The addition of that letter enabled him to procreate [together with Sarah, seeing that  he had fathered Ishmael  before this letter was added to his name. Ed.] Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 44,12 have said “Avram could not produce viable sperm whereas Avraham could.” I will explain this further on Genesis 29,32 in connection with the words והיה שמך אברהם in Genesis 17,5-6. Here the Torah simply drew attention to the fact that the very letter which had been instrumental in creating the universe was the one added to Avram’s name in order to give him the ability to produce his son Yitzchak. He who had created the laws of nature is at liberty to change these laws when it suits Him. There is no power which is able to revent Him from exercising His will.
	ביום עשות ה' אלוקים ארץ ושמים “on the day the Lord G’d created earth and heaven.” G’d’s Ineffable Name had not been mentioned up until now during all the events of the first six days. From a purely textural point of view, פשט, the name אלוקים is appropriate for matters connected with laws of nature, (the numerical value of the word =86, the same as the Hebrew word for nature, i.e. הטבע), and it testifies to G’d introducing some new element, whereas the Ineffable Name alludes to the fact that G’d is eternal and had never been preceded by any phenomenon. The Torah did not mention this name of G’d as it wanted to concentrate on the fact that new phenomena came into existence during the six days of creation. Had it been the intention of the Torah to inform us first and foremost on the fact that G’d preceded any phenomenon, it should have introduced G’d’s Ineffable Name as a reminder that He is the “Eternal.” Inasmuch as the Torah was primarily concerned with revealing that which G’d chose to reveal, it used only the nameאלוקים  during that stage of its report.
	The Midrash sees in the fact that the Torah chose to use only the name אלוקים  during that part of its narrative, proof that originally G’d had planned to involve only His attribute of Justice, i.e. the מדת הדין, in the creation of the universe. When man was created and G’d realised that he could not survive if only the attribute of Justice were active in the world, G’d co-opted the attribute of mercy.
	From a rational, investigative point of view, we must remember that the universe is comprised of 26 different categories of phenomena. They are: 10 phenomena which are totally abstract, of a purely intellectual nature (the ten levels of angels mentioned by Maimonides in his Yesodey Hatorah) Then there are the nine planetary constellations. Add to these the four raw materials earth is made of. Add to these the נפשות, the three different levels of souls, i.e. נפש, רוח, נשמה, and you have a total of 26 basic phenomena. This number corresponds to the numerical value of the letters in the Ineffable name, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה. 
	It is a known fact that these various parts which constitute the universe did not assume their final and completed format until the sixth day. As a result, it was not appropriate that G’d associate His name as the attribute י-ה-ו-ה with something defective and incomplete. You should appreciate further that the 26 parts of the universe we have mentioned are all included in what the four-lettered name of G’d stands for; in fact they are included in the three letters making up that name (each letter symbolising one of the three worlds, the world of the angels, the world of the planetary system, and our terrestrial universe), seeing that the letter ה  appears twice in that name.
	A kabbalistic approach  views the activity which resulted in the universe materialising as totally dependent on the Creator Who is both the labourer and the architect (referred to in Bereshit Rabbah 1,1). In that parable we had said that a king who builds a palace does not do so merely by relying on his own knowledge, but he employs experts to advise him. The architect in turn does not build without first having used his mental and intellectual faculties. This is the deeper meaning behind the words of Solomon in Kohelet 2,12  כי מה האדם שיבא אחרי המלך את אשר כבר עשוהו, “for what can man who comes after the king do? It has already been done.” The crucial word is עשוהו instead of עשהו. The plural is a reference to G’d together with His בית דינו, “His court of advisors” (compare Kohelet Rabbah 2,14). 

	2,5. וכל שיח השדה “and all the trees of the field, etc.” The Torah should really have written the words עצי השדה instead of שיח השדה, “shrubs of the field.” The reason the Torah chose the expression שיח is connected with Genesis 24,63 ויצא יצחק לשוח השדה, Yitzchak went out to the field to pray.” The expression שיח refers to prayer. The Torah hints by the use of this word that all the trees and plants pray to G’d, i.e. praise Him and acknowledge Him. Our sages have also based this on Psalms 65,14 יתרועעו אף ישירו, “they raise a shout and break out in song.” David had been speaking about pastureland in that Psalm. The “song” attributed to the plants is their praise of G’d. G’d had wanted that all is creatures including the plants praise Him.

	2,6. ואד יעלה מן הארץ, “and a mist would rise from the earth.” The plain meaning is that these words refer to the steam which rises from the moisture of the various concentrations of water on earth. As they usually contain some solid particles from earth, the Torah called it  אד“mist.” Seeing that the rain results from this moist mist and the clouds accept it, the cloud itself was called  אד as we find in Job 36,27 יזוקו מטר לאדו, “which cluster into rain, from His mist.”
	An homiletical approach views these words as a reference to the ענני הכבוד, “the clouds of G’d’s glory” which were gathering strength and rising. According to the Midrash, the words מן הארץ which are mentioned in our verse first and the strengthening of the clouds of glory are an allusion to the great honour these clouds receive from G’d Himself. This is what our sages in Chulin 60 referred to when they said concerning the herbs, that at that time the angel in charge of the world opened his praise of the Lord with the words: יהי כבוד ה' לעולם ישמח ה' במעשיו “May the glory of G’d last forever and may He derive joy from His works” (Psalms 104,31). The angel said these words as a form of prayer, just as a similar expression in Kings I 8,57 when Solomon said יהי ה' אלוקינו עמנו, “let the Lord our G’d be with us.” The meaning of the words ישמח ה' is “so that He will have reason to rejoice.”
	והשקה על כל פני האדמה, “and it provided irrigation for the entire earth.” The reference is to the planetary system and all that is below it. and exerts influence on life on earth. The additional word כל, “all,” is the reason the sages said in Sanhedrin 35 that the dust of the earth was collected from all four corners of the earth.

	2,7. וייצר ה' אלוקים את האדם עפר מן האדמה. “G’d formed Adam from the dust of the earth.” After the Torah mentioned the creation of Adam already in its report of what was created on the sixth day, it now returns to the subject and fill in details about how he was created. The Torah detailed the first stage of Adam’s creation  when it wrote in Genesis 1,27 “G’d created Adam in His image.” That first stage of man’s creation consisted of using dust from the earth. Now the Torah describes a further stage in Adam’s coming into being by describing this process as וייצר, “He formed him,” i.e. He made him into a Golem, a man-like form lacking vital statistics  G’d blew a soul of life into Adam’s nostrils from His own Holy Spirit. 
	The reason that the Torah had not mentioned this detail in its narrative of events of the sixth day is because the Torah did not want to interrupt the report of the creation of physical matter by introducing the creation of spiritual and therefore abstract matter at that time."Basically, the entire narrative concerned itself with matters of a physical nature. Even the blessings bestowed on the creatures including man referred to matters that are physical such as procreation, populating the earth, and the blessing that man was to exercise dominion over the other creatures in nature and to conquer the hidden treasures of nature concerned matters material, not matters which are of a spiritual character. The soul, נפש, i.e. man’s lowest abstract life-force, is involved in all these matters only inasmuch as it has been provided by G’d with a natural urge to accomplish certain things. This urge, by itself, is not something spiritual. It dies when man’s body dies. It is the life-force which man shares with the animals. It would have been inappropriate to mention an eternal soul side by side with phenomena which are destined to die, as was anything created during the six days. These six days could be described as the days destined to end in death. Only the Sabbath elevated man to the level of נצחיות, “infinity.” The soul which distinguishes man from all the other creatures in the terrestrial universe was not mentioned until after the Sabbath was mentioned as it was the Sabbath which infused man with this potential of “infinity.” This is why the Sabbath is also known as “the day of life. (we pointed this out in connection with our discussion of the seventh millennium on verse 3)
	A kabbalistic view of our verse couples the words וייצר ה' אלוקים את האדם  and ויטע ה' אלוקים גן בעדן in the next verse together It would be similar to Chronicles I 4,23 המה היוצרים ויושבי נטעים, “they were the potters, who dwelt at Netaim, etc.” The word היוצרים in that verse corresponds to the word וייצר in our verse, whereas the word נטעים corresponds to the word ויטע. You need to do a little research to understand what was meant in Chronicles where the verse concluded with the statement  עם המלך במלאכתו ישבו שם " ”with the king to help him with his work they dwelt there.” Consider that in chapter one the Torah had written in connection with man’s creation “let Us make a human being in Our image,” and had continued: “G’d created man in His image.” At that time the word עפר, “dust,” had not been mentioned at all. G’d had never said: “let Us make man out of dust. or out of the soil.” The reason was that everything connected with the creation of man contains both revealed and hidden aspects. That which impacts on the creatures in the “lower” world has been revealed. That which impacts only on the beings in the “higher” worlds has remained hidden. This is why we are forced to arrive at our knowledge of what the text has seen fit to conceal by careful study of what the text has seen fit to reveal. When we are told in our chapter ויטע ה' אלוקים  followed by the statement that man was placed in the garden the Torah speaks of, this means that man has a residence in celestial regions also. Obviously, in that connection we do not expect the Torah to mention things which exist only on earth such as soil and dust. In chapter five, however, where the Torah again reports the creation of man and even says that he was created to resemble G’d, בדמות אלוקים עשה אותו,  this refers to the word ויצמח in verse 9 of our chapter here where the Torah speaks of earth and dust, i.e. refers to man’s terrestrial habitat. It is quite easy to understand then that the verse which speaks of planting man in his celestial habitat mentions neither trees nor garden. This is reserved for verse 9 where the expression used by the Torah is ויצמח. 
	What we learn from all this is that the whole of the story of creation is one that played on two levels, so that what have been described as the products of heaven and earth at the beginning of our chapter are inseparably interwoven with one another.
	עפר מן האדמה “dust from the earth.” During the first hour of the sixth day the earth and dust from the various parts of the world were assembled. During the second hour this earth was made into some form of dough, kneaded. During the third hour the various  parts of the body were structured and textured. During the fourth hour a living soul was breathed into Adam. During the fifth hour he stood on his legs. During the sixth hour he named the various animals. During the seventh hour he was presented with his wife Chavah. During the eighth hour Adam and Chavah performed marital intercourse on a bed and when they had completed this act of procreation four of them got up from the bed. [Chavah had give birth to Cain and Hevel. Ed.] During the ninth hour Adam was commanded not to eat from the tree of knowledge. During the tenth hour, both Chavah and Adam sinned by eating from that tree. During the eleventh hour they were judged (they were told their punishment). During the twelfth hour  he was expelled and left Gan Eden. This is what is meant by Psalms 49,13: אדם ביקר בל ילין, נמשל כבהמות נדמות, “man did not spend a night in honour; he is like the beasts that perish.” This is how the verse was interpreted in Sanhedrin 38, and also in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 11. What we are to learn from this paragraph in the Talmud is that the hours of the day allocated to the creation of and progress of Adam, the first human being, corresponded to the progress of the creation of the universe during the six days. When the Midrash speaks about the raw material of man, dust, being assembled during the first hour of the sixth day, this corresponded to G’d’s directive on the first day “let there be light.” At that time, abstract concepts, אצילות, had not yet been separated from matters material. There had not been any kind of separation of any of the potential forces of energy in the universe from one another.
	During the second hour, when some limits had been imposed and some separation had been decreed, man’s body was separated through “kneading” his raw material into where his head, his legs, his arms, etc. were to be. [Interestingly enough the Hebrew word for kneading has the same root as the Hebrew word for “limit,” “frontier,” etc, i.e. גבל. Ed.] This corresponded to G’d’s directive on the second day “let there be a firmament in the sky so that it separates one kind of water from another kind of water.” The third hour, when Adam was assigned different organs corresponded to the third day on which different parts of earth became visible. The fourth hour when Adam was given his soul corresponded to the fourth day of creation when the luminaries became operational After all, what the sun is to earth, the soul is to the human body. The fifth hour, the hour when man was finally able to stand on his feet, corresponded to the fifth day, the day the angels were created. We have it on the authority of the prophet Zachariah (Zachariah 3,7) that angels are considered as “merely standing.” [they cannot progress spiritually. Ed.] The sixth hour when Adam named the animals corresponded to the sixth day when he came into being. The seventh hour when Adam was given his mate, Chavah, corresponded to the Sabbath who is Man’s “queen” in a spiritual sense. 
	Bereshit Rabbah 14,7 addresses the repetitive wording עפר מן האדמה by saying that this is to tell us that earth is composed of male and female matter. The male matter is known as עפר, the female matter as אדמה. Not only earth, but all phenomena on earth, be they inert vegetable matter or animals, are composed of male and female parts. Another  reason cited by the Midrash for the repetition of the word עפר, i.e. the addition of the word אדמה, is that this word refers to a special earth, the earth from the site of the Holy Temple. This is important as it reminds us that G’d created us from the source of our eventual atonement, the Temple being the source of our atonement. The Torah in Deut. 32,43 specifically mentions that the earth of that site brings atonement, וכפר אדמתו עמו, “its earth will bring atonement for His people.” Another allusion to this atonement is the fact that the Jewish people were commanded in Exodus 20,24 to construct their altar out of  earth, אדמה, to drive home the point that the altar which is the instrument of our atonement was capable of doing this thanks to it being constructed out of אדמה. Adam was to remember where exactly he originated from and to where he would return to if he became sinful and would be expelled from  Gan Eden. This is the meaning of 3,29 “to work the earth that he had been taken from.” Here the Torah already previewed man’s descendants and their habitat when it wrote quoting Cain in Genesis 4,14 הן גרשת אותי היום מעל פני האדמה, “here You have expelled me this day from the face of the earth.” Cain added  ומפניך אסתר, “and I have to hide from Your benevolent presence.” He was referring to G’d’s presence, the שכינה. We find similar expressions for that meaning of “G’d’s presence [as opposed to “hiding” from G’d, something already Adam had found to be impossible. Ed.] in Psalms 24,6 מבקשי פניך, “the ones who seek out Your benevolent presence.” Another similar construction is found in Psalms 27,8  את פניך אבקש, “I will seek out Your benevolent presence.” This is also what is meant in Genesis 4,16 ויצא קין מלפני ה', ”Cain left the benevolent presence of G’d.” We find another verse telling us something similar when the prophet Jonah with whom G’d had communicated tried to escape this closeness to G’d. The Book of Jonah 1,3 describes his behaviour in these words ויקם יונה לברוח תרשישה מלפני ה', ”Jonah arose to flee to Tarshish from the benevolent presence of G’d.” It was Jonah’s intent to escape the very part of the land of Israel where G’d’s benevolent presence is manifest. Once he would accomplish this he was confident that G’d would not communicate with him further and he could abort the mission G’d wanted him to undertake.
	 ויפח באפיו נשמת רוח חיים “He blew in his nostrils a living soul.” You should know that the nose is an instrument of the soul. The soul enters man by way of his nose and it leaves him by the same route. This is why the sages in Yuma 85 have stated that if someone takes a fall that one has to examine him including his nose. This is based on Genesis 7,22   כל אשר נשמת חיים באפיו ....מתו “all who had the spirit of a living soul in their nose...died.” It is one of the wondrous phenomena of the creation of man that you find the letter ש  associated with this instrument (organ) [the fact that the nose is divided makes it appear like a letter ש This is an allusion to the name of G’d  שדי which in this manner is engraved on the body of every human being who has been circumcised. This is the mystical meaning of Job 32,8 ונשמת שדי תבינם “the breath of Shaddai that gives them understanding.”
	We know that the nose is the organ by means of which we smell and that the soul derives pleasure from certain fragrances. This is the reason the Talmud Berachot 51 prohibits us from even smelling incense or other fragrances intended for idolatrous purposes. The smell of any fragrance leaves behind a memory. We have it on the authority of the Torah in connection with the sacrificial offerings Leviticus 6,8 that smell acts as a reminder. ריח ניחוח אזכרתה לה', “its pleasant fragrance is a memorial (portion) unto G’d.” [The person in whose name this frankincense has been offered will be remembered by G’d as having accumulated a merit. Ed.]
	You should so be aware that the scientists are divided in their views about the nature of the soul. They have written innumerable volumes about this subject. Some of them [Maimonides in his introduction to Pirke Avot, chapter 1] claim that the soul is a single force which however has three sub-categories. 1) the category which houses our desires, something we have in common with all the animals. 2) the source of growth, something possessed both by animals and all manner of plants. 3) the ability to think coherently, the soul of wisdom. All these functions are part of a single soul. Other scientists-philosophers [Avraham Ibn Ezra in his commentary on Kohelet 7,3] claim that there are three distinct souls operating within man all of which are distinct from one another. The intelligent soul is an entity of its own, the potential to grow is an independent force. The animal kind of soul, which is the seat of all desires, i.e. the desire to eat, drink, procreate or simply indulge in sex, as well as the desire to sleep, are all part of the animalistic soul in man and constitute a separate soul. They are a part of what man has in common with the animal kingdom. The seat of that particular soul is the liver. This “soul” is called on occasion נפש, and on occasion  רוח Its seat is in the liver. In Deut. 12,20 it is called  נפש when the Torah writes כי תאוה נפשך לאכול בשר, “when your “soul” desires to eat meat, etc.” On the other hand, we find that Solomon writes in Kohelet 7,9  אל תבהל ברוחך לכעוס, “do not let your spirit be eager to become angry.” He also wrote in Proverbs 29,11 כל רוחו יוצי כסיל, “a fool vents all his feelings.”
	The נפש הצומחת is the force that enables man to grow physically. He shares such a force with all the trees, etc. Just as trees possess such built-in powers, man too possesses such a growth potential. As distinct from the seat of all desire which is presumed to be in the liver, this force does not have a specific location but is present in all parts of man‘s body. It remains active until a certain point in is life. The soul of intelligence is something exclusive to man, something he shares with beings in the higher worlds, beings which live forever in their sacred domains The seat of this soul is in man’s brain, and it is generally referred to as נשמה. This is what the Torah described in our verse as the נשמת חיים  which G’d “blew” into Adam’s nostrils. We also have a verse in Isaiah 42,5  נותן נשמה לעם עליה, “He gives a soul  to the people on it (earth).” There are numerous similar verses throughout the Bible.
	According to the view of the philosophers who believe that each person has three separate souls, we find support for our sages in  Sanhedrin 65  who report that the famous teacher Rava created a human being. When he brought this creature before Rabbi Zeyra, Rabbi Zeyra spoke to him whereas the creature could not answer back. Thereupon Rabbi Zeyra said to that creature (Golem): “you are man-made; go back to the dust you have been made of.” This passage in the Talmud is proof that man has three distinct souls. Rava, who was familliar with Kabbalah, and had studied the Sefer Yetzirah, had infused this creature with the “soul” which governs motion. He was unable, however, to provide his creature with the power of speech. The power of speech stems from the soul called חכמה. 
	However, our verse here is proof that there is only one overall soul, but that it contains three different potentials without these different abilities having different origins. The reason is that Adam, as distinct from subsequent human beings, was merely a clod of earth; this is why the Torah went on record in Genesis 2,7 וייצר ה' אלוקים את האדם עפר מן האדםה, “G’d fashioned man dust from the earth;” as soon as Adam’s form had materialised G’d “blew” into him this soul of which it is said  ויהי האדם לנפש חיה, “man then became a living creature,” i.e. he became able to move. just as the fish and the animals of which the Torah had said that they had become שרץ נפש חיה, “a swarm of living creatures.” This is the meaning of the word חיה, that thanks to this “soul” Adam became a living creature whereas originally he had been inert unable to move, just like a stone.
	Regardless of which view one has of the soul, all Jewish sages and philosophers are agreed that the part of the soul which survives physical death is the נפש החכמה, “the soul which is rooted in the emanation חכמה.” Many philosophers have cited various proofs for this. I will quote only two from a large selection of such proofs.
	The first miraculous aspect of that soul is the fact that it is able to know many things which transpire in the universe, be it in the atmosphere, on earth or in the waters, without the benefit of eyesight, a sense of hearing or any other sensory organs to guide it. The five sensory organs or abilities are something which serve only the physical part of creatures such as the animals.or even human beings. They are like tools in the hands of an artisan. Whereas the physical eye perceives that the sun is high in the sky, the “eye” of the נפש החכמה, the spiritual soul, recognises that the sun is 170 times the size of our globe as the great scholar Rabbi Moses ben Maimon has written at the beginning of the third chapter of his Sefer Hamada. Whereas the physical eye sees many shapes inside the water, the “eye” of the spiritual soul is well aware that the true appearance of these shapes in the water is quite different from how they appear to the physical eye of a beholder. If the five senses had been intended to serve our spiritual soul to perceive and define the phenomena in this world, then whatever is at the periphery of the universe would be devoid of meaning and useless as none of the five senses with which living creatures have been equipped would be able to perceive and evaluate such phenomena (compare Jeremiah 16,19). 
	The spiritual soul of man as a tool of perception does not deceive him, neither is it limited in its ability to deliver a true picture of things as they are. The function of the spiritual soul within man’s body is simlilar to that of the sailor (or captain) on board of a ship. When such a captain leaves the boat, he does not cease to be a captain. Similarly, when the spiritual soul departs from man’s body when the body dies, it lives on. On the other hand, the so-called soul which is merely נפש חיה in the language of the Torah, is unable to exist on its own once the body it has inhabited has died. One of the reasons for this is that the five sensory organs contain elements of physical matter and it is impossible for such phenomena to be active unless they are within their “habitat,” i.e. a body made up of similar matter. The spiritual soul, on the other hand, is not subject to such limitations as it originates in an abstract world, a world in which physical matter is not needed. It possesses insights both into celestial matters as well as into matters which are earthly in nature. It is able to do all this only because it is of a purely spiritual character. When this spiritual soul is interested in acquiring knowledge about earthly matters, it uses man’s five senses in order to acquire such knowledge. When the same soul is desirous of expanding its knowledge about supra-terrestrial matters it employs its intelligence and its wisdom. Once this spiritual soul leaves the body it has inhabited until the death of that body it can no longer use the terrestrial “soul” i.e. its five senses to perceive matters that pertain to the terrestrial universe. seeing that it has lost touch with these senses which have expired together with the the body they inhabited. All of this is proof that the spiritual soul of man survives after the death of its body.
	The second remarkable phenomenon is this: When a child is small it knows absolutely nothing. As the child grows up it is able to absorb progressively more knowledge and wisdom from its spiritual soul. Whatever such an individual acquires from its spiritual soul will not escape from any of the three parts he is composed of, neither from his body, nor from his נפש חיה, (a combined form of body and primitive life-force) nor from his spiritual soul. He does not have a fourth part. By rights, a person ought to acquire more and more intelligence and knowledge in proportion to his physical growth and good health, seeing that this appeared to have been the process by which he matured for the first 2 decades of his life. By the same token we could reason that a person who has a weak body must necessarily lag behind in intellectual and spiritual achievements. In practice, however, we frequently observe the very reverse to be the case. Frequently we notice that people who suffer physical afflictions do not simultaneously lose their intellectual and spiritual powers. They remain mentally and spiritually at their best until the day the body dies. This proves conclusively that the acquisition of wisdom and knowledge, i.e. abstract forms of values, is quite independent of the body or even the נפש חיה of a person combined with his physical prowess. If this is so, this is proof positive that man’s mental and spiritual capacities are due to a higher form of soul, that which we have called the נפש החכמה, the spiritual soul. The body has absolutely no share in the mental and spiritual development of a person except that it serves as the vessel, the container within which such mental and spiritual forces are able to function and to make it the base of their operations. 
	Dead people do not possess any mental or spiritual energy. The existence of such mental and spiritual energy is exclusively due to the living. It is clear then that what we have called נפש, or נפש חיה, is a phenomenon that lives only within what we call “nature,” for it is certainly true that this “natural soul” is able to absorb חכמות, wisdoms of a variety of degrees. When the body dies it dies as part of “nature,” and “nature” is unable to receive any input from such a dead body (i.e. the wisdoms it used to possess).
	We have therefore established two remarkable principles: 1) man is composed of two major components or essences. Part of man’s essences lives as an integral part of “nature,” in fact due to the existence of “nature.” Without nature that part of man simply could not exist. 2) The second part of man’s essence dies through the very fact that it is bound to “nature.” This second part is the body. The reason both the soul and the body share such experiences is that they have been joined together so that (to a limited degree) each one has to share the experiences of the other. The body gets an inkling of what life’s potential is all about because it has become joined to the soul. The soul experiences what death is all about because it has become tied to the mortal body. Death may be considered as a punishment for the soul who has allowed itself to be misled by the body. It follows that essentially the soul is supposed to live forever; its death is incidental. The reverse is true of the body which essentially is mortal but lives temporarily by merit of the soul it hosts.
	Once body and soul part company, each one resumes its natural destiny, i.e. the body dies and the soul lives on forever. In both cases this separation means that a temporary, unnatural union or partnership has been broken up, each partner returning to its essential habitat. 
	Although we have indulged in quoting philosophers and a few of their arguments concerning the nature of the soul, and we have even cited some of their more impressive arguments to prove their theories, the major foundation of our beliefs remains our holy Torah which is the source of our life. All true philosophers derive their wisdom only from the Torah. True wisdom is always the fruit, i.e. the product of profound Torah-study. The matter of the survival of the soul after the death of the body is made plain by the very fact that the soul G’d infused in Adam was called נשמת חיים, “a soul of life.” This means that the soul was “hewn” from the very source of life. The reason is that we know that the soul is derived from the source of wisdom, the emanation חכמה. The word חיים when part of the term נשמת חיים, reminds us of Job 32, 7-8 אמרתי ימים ידברו, ורוב שנים יודיעו חכמה.אכן רוח-היא באנו. “I thought: “let age speak; let advanced years declare wise things. But, truly it is the spirit in men.” We find that in Job the words חכמה and רוח appear side by side. The author is trying to tell us that רוח, “the spirit, the soul,” is the source of חכמה, wisdom. If our verse saw fit to call the soul נשמת חיים, this is an allusion to Kohelet 7,12 והחכמה תחיה בעליה, “and wisdom (the emanation of wisdom) preserves the life of those who possess it.” This is also what G’d assured the prophet of when He told him to promise the High Priest Yehoshua that his soul would be in the company of the angels  if he would observe G’d’s commandments (Zachariah 3,7) The wording is ונתתי לך מהלכים בין העומדים האלה, “and I shall enable you to be able to walk amongst these who are stationary.” We have explained repeatedly that the angels are spiritually stationary as they do not possess an evil urge the defeat of which would enable them to make spiritual progress.
	If you correctly understand the verse in Kohelet which Solomon said in his great wisdom you will also understand the lofty spiritual plateau, its foundation and its mystical significance. Although at first glance the verse ומותר האדם מן הבהמה אין, “man’s advantage over the beasts is nil,” in Kohelet 3,19  sounds rather banal, it contains deep insights. What Solomon meant was that the very advantage that man enjoys over the animals is derived from a domain called אין. The advantage of man over the beasts derives from the intelligent soul man possesses which derives from חכמה which symbolises the letter י which combines with the letter א and which in turn symbolises the uniqueness of the Creator, i.e. the רצון, “the Will” of the Creator. The words ויפח באפיו, “He blew into Adam’s nostrils,” are to alert us to the fact that this soul was not part of the basic four elements the terrestrial universe is made of [although רוח, “wind or spirit” is one of those four elements. Ed.]. Man’s soul shares five characteristics with G’d (compare Berachot 10). It is similar to G’d in all its virtues, at the same time being superior to the soul of the angels. The reason is that the soul of man was created on the first day of creation as compared to the angels who were created only on the second day. It is an accepted rule that phenomena which were created sooner are superior to those which were created later. We have an explicit statement in Sanhedrin 93 that the righteous are superior to the angels.
	To sum up: whatever man’s mouth can tell about the attributes (virtues) of G’d to the extent that he is the Creator is possible only because the soul of man is a direct creation of this Creator. A famous unnamed scholar has said: ”know your souls so that you may gain knowledge about your G’d.”
	ויהי האדם לנפש חיה,”man became a living creature.” During the entire report about the creation you will not find that the word ויהי was applied directly to something which had been created, except to light and to man. In both these instances the Torah wrote ויהי אור, or ויהי האדם respectively. The message is that man’s soul will endure forever just as the original light will endure forever as both had been created on the first day. This fact inspired the liturgical poet Rabbi Yehudah Halevi in a poem commencing with the words ברכי נפשי את ה' to write תקן נשמות עם האור הראשון תחלת דבר ה' “G’d established the souls together with the original light, the first of G’d’s creative activities.” The meaning of the whole verse is: “the main purpose of the existence of human beings is on account of their spiritual soul.”

	2,8.. ויטע ה' אלוקים גן בעדן. “The Lord G’d planted a garden in Eden.” According to the plain meaning פשט, the Torah attributed the planting of this garden to G’d Himself, personally. He did not bring a variety of trees from different parts of the globe and placed them in this garden, but the very trees were His handiwork, designed to glorify Him. Accordingly, David referred to these trees as עצי ה', “trees of the Lord,” in his Psalm 104,16 where he wrote ישבעו עצי ה' ארזי לבנון אשר נטע, “The trees of the Lord drink their fill, the cedars of Lebanon, His own planting.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 15,1 interpreted these words to mean that G’d gave these trees the ability to endure indefinitely and never to become victims of decay. These trees did not need irrigation nor did they have to be pruned. Had this not been so, who would have tended them after Adam was expelled from that garden? They were the personification of what is written in Ezekiel 47,12: לא יבול עלהו ולא יתום פריו לחדשיו יבכר כי מימיו מן המקדש המה יוצאים, “its leaf will not wither nor will its fruit give out, every month it will yield new fruit, for its waters emanate from the Sanctuary.”
	Our verse provides a further detail concerning this garden by writing מקדם, ‘from an easterly location.” This word supports our long held belief of the beneficial effect of winds originating in the east. of the earth seeing that Paradise had been planted in that part of the globe. It is a well known fact that the best fruits grow in the East. This knowledge has been implanted in us by the Torah when Moses in his blessing to the tribe of Joseph wrote in Deut. 33,14 וממגד תבואות שמש, “and with the bounty of the sun’s crops.” Seeing that all crops depend on the sun, Moses must have had in mind the area where the sun rises, i.e. the Eastern part of the land of Israel. Our sages (Yuma 21?) may have referred to this phenomenon when they said that the east wind has a beneficial effect on the minds of men, providing a sense of mental equilibrium, a sense of energy, etc. It brings with it a better kind of air. For these reasonsוישם שם את האדם אשר יצר  “G’d placed man whom He had fashioned in there.”
	A kabbalistic approach to our verse understands the meaning as follows: The words ויטע ה' אלוקים גן בעדן מקדם refer to a planting which had taken place a long time ago, hence the word מקדם, “since primeval times.” Had G’d planted the garden at the time described in the story, He would simply have had to give a directive such as He did during the reports of creation in chapter one. The fact that the Torah does not do this but describes G’d  as “having planted it”, rather than as having commanded it to come into existence is proof that the garden preceded the creation of the universe. In fact, this “planting” had already been alluded to in the very first word of the Torah, the word בראשית. (compare what we wrote on page 15)
	Keeping in mind that this garden dated back to an era preceding that described in the Torah in chapter one, the words “He placed there the human being whom He had fashioned,” must have a different connotation. The words אשר יצר are a reference to the source of man, i.e. his soul. We have already explained that man’s soul originated in the emanation חכמה. We can now appreciate that the refined souls originate in the East. This is the meaning of the statement we find in the Sefer Habahir (by Rabbi Nechunyah ben Hakanah) that the זרע of Israel, i.e. its descendants originated in the Eastern parts of the universe  because the marrow in the spinal cord comes directly from the brain from which it is transmitted to the male organ and converted into semen. We find proof of this in Isaiah 43,5 כי ממזרח אבי זרעך וממערב אקבצך, “for from the East will I bring your seed (descendants) and from the West will I gather you in.” The prophet tells us that when Israel will be good, will perform G’d’s commandments, their souls will (once again) originate in that Eastern region. If, however, they will fail to live up to G’d’s expectations, their seed, i.e. the seed, (the souls of their children) will be gathered up from the Western part of the universe. [according to Rabbi Chavell this is an assurance that the original light, though hidden from mankind after the sin, has never been removed from earth but has only been stored in areas inaccessible to us] When we read in Kohelet 1,4,דור הולך ודור בא, “a generation goes and a generation comes,” this means that all the souls have already been assigned to this world and until each one has been hosted by a body the redeemer cannot come.
	What did the prophet mean in the second half of his verse when he said ממערב אקבצך, “I will gather you in from the West?” It means that Israel will be  gathered in, “protected” from the very attribute which always displays a tendency to be attracted by the West. Why is it called “West?” Because there all the seeds intermingle. [I believe this is a way of saying that sanctity is being compromised by intermingling with souls who originate in spiritually negative areas. Ed.] The attribute described as “East,” is a reference to the emanation תפארת, “harmony,” the central line (of the emanations). [Rabbi Chavell refers the reader to the commentary of Levush on Recanati 8,1] for a more profound appreciation of the author’s comments.]
	From that region the souls travel to the foundation of the universe, a region known as ברית, “covenant.” This is why the author of the Sefer Habahir wrote that the seed comes to the Israelites by means of  the spinal cord which gets its input from the brain travelling down to the male member.
	The attribute called West is the עטרה, ‘crown,” may be the reason why our sages in Baba Batra 25 said that the שכינה, “the presence of G’d’s supervisory attribute,” is in the West. Just as the seed travels from the brain through the spinal cord to the male member, so the soul wends its way from the region known as תשובה via the קו האמצאי,“central line,” which is the Eastern part of the universe and it arrives by way of the West. I believe that the prophet Isaiah alluded to this when he said in Isaiah 48,1 שמעו זאת בית יעקב  הנקראים בשם ישראל, וממי יהודה יצאו, “listen to this O house of Yaakov who bear the name Israel and who have emanated from the waters of Yehudah.” The expression “who have emanated from the waters of Yehudah,” means “from the seed of Yehudah.” The reason the prophet called Israel “Yehudah,” is because the flag of Yehudah represented the Eastern part of the encampment of the Israelites in the desert.

	2,9. ויצמח ה' אלוקים מן האדמה, “The Lord G’d made grow from the earth, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text these words prove that there is such a thing as Paradise on earth and that it contains a tree of knowledge as well as a tree of life. The fruit of the tree of life causes those who eat it to enjoy long life, whereas the fruit of the tree of knowledge instills in those who consume it willpower and freedom of choice. to do either good or evil both in matters physical as well as in matters spiritual. Our sages in Pessachim 6 said concerning this “לא שנו אלא שדעתו לחזור, the ruling applies only to someone who had resolved to return to his home during the festival of Passover.” [The author uses the word דעתו in the Talmud where it refers to someone making a voluntary decision as proof that here in our verse too the term עץ הדעת, does not mean “the tree of knowledge,” but means ‘the tree permitting man a choice.” Ed.]
	We find support for this meaning of the word דעת in Psalms  144,3 מה אדם ותדעהו, “what is man that You should have granted him grace?” In other words: “why have You extended Your goodwill, Your love to man?” The meaning of the term עץ הדעת then is the tree which causes G’d to relate to man with either favour or disfavour.” Originally, G’d had withheld this kind of choice from Adam as he had been ‘programmed” in his deeds prior to his sin. This does not mean that he was not free to sin but that his actions were guided exclusively by his intellect thus practically excluding  sin as he had not been subject to temptation from within.
	Once man had sinned, i.e. had eaten from the fruit of that tree, he became possessed of an independent will, i.e. obedience to G’d’s will was no longer automatic, dictated by his intellect. The new-found “independent will” meant that he had acquired an attribute reserved for G’d, an attribute that he could handle only at great potential cost to himself.
	ועץ החיים בתוך הגן, “and a tree of life in the midst of the garden.” The Torah made a point of describing the location of this tree as “in the midst of the garden,” as opposed to the precise location of the tree of “desire,” which has not been spelled out. A closer examination of the text which placed the two words בתוך הגן exactly between the words עץ החיים and עץ הדעת טוב ורע, makes it clear that both these trees stood next to one another. Although there were two trees, and it is physically impossible for both trees to be precisely in the centre of the garden, we must assume that they had a single trunk and that the two trees branched out at a certain point above the ground, one side becoming the עץ החיים, the other the עץ הדעת. 
	The Torah continues by describing rivers which originated in that garden, describing their parameters and the countries which surrounded the garden. There were a total of four rivers which were all branches of a single river which flowed out of Eden. As long as that river was a single river its function was to irrigate the garden. Subsequently, this river split into what the Torah called ארבעה ראשים, “four headwaters.”
	You are aware already that though the Torah describes a scenery on earth when describing Gan Eden and what is related to it, the manifestations described by the Torah are metaphors for phenomena in the celestial regions.
	A Midrashic, homiletical view of our verse sees in the four rivers a reference to four kingdoms. The river Pishon is a reference to the king of Babylon seeing that we have a verse in Chabakuk 1,8  ופשו פרשיו, “describing the riders of the army of the Chaldeans (Babylonians).The land of Chavilah which our verse describes as being surrounded by the river Pishon is none other than the land of Israel, a land which the king of Babylon will ascend, and across which he and his army will spread out. This is based on Bereshit Rabbah explaining Psalms 42,6 הוחילי לאלוקים כי עוד אודנו, “Have hope in G’d for I will yet praise Him for His saving presence.”
	אשר שם הזהב, “where the gold is.” The “gold” referred to here are the words of Torah which have been extolled as הנחמדים מזהב ומפז רב, “more desirable than gold, than much fine gold.” (Psalms 19,11). We are taught by this verse that the quality of Torah studied in the land of Israel is superior to Torah studied elsewhere as is the wisdom acquired in the land of Israel.l
	שם הבדולח ואבן השהם, “there can be found the bedolach and the shoham stone.” These are names of gems and they symbolise different disciplines of Torah study such as מקרא, משנה, תלמוד, הלכות, תוספות ואגדות, “Holy Scripture, Mishnah, Talmud, Halachot, interpretations and aggadic material.”
	ושם הנהר השני גיחון, “and the name of the second river is Gichon.” This is a reference to the kingdom of the Medes, whereas the third river חידקל is a reference to the kingdom of Greece which imposed a particularly draconian rule on the Jewish people in Israel. The fourth river, the river Euphratus, represents the Roman Empire which oppressed the Jewish people inordinately. The word פרת is equated by the Midrash with the word הפרה, “breach (of trust).” Alternately, the name of the river symbolises the final destiny of the Roman Empire as alluded to by Isaiah 63,3 פורה דרכתי לבדי, “I trod out a vintage alone.” [The prophet describes the red-stained clothing of Israel returning from defeating the kingdom of Edom, (Rome).
	A kabbalistic approach to Gan Eden. The tree of life and the tree of knowledge of the celestial regions are the emanations  תפארת  and עטרת, and man’s sin consisted of a sinful deed as well as a sinful design. His sin in deed consisted of eating from the tree and what it represented. When Adam sinned this was not a denial of the supremacy of G’d, an heretical act,. Even though he had seen the tree of life next to the tree of knowledge, he did not consider the tree of life as essential but he considered the tree of knowledge the key to his existence. Inasmuch as the tree of knowledge provided the key to all opposites in the universe and enabled those who had consumed its fruit to perform all kinds of activities both in the terrestrial as well as in the celestial regions, this is what he considered as essential.
	This is why the verses describing the tree of knowledge and its allure (3.2-6) spoke of its fruit, whereas no mention of fruit is made in connection with the tree of life. Adam’s sin consisted of  קצץ בנטיעות, “pursued alien philosophies” ( the expression applied to the heresy of Elisha  ben Avuyah in Chagigah 14). Literally, the expression means that Adam “curtailed the beneficial influence of saplings G’d Himself had planted and which had been imbued with a unique divine potential.” Adam’s “cutting” this sapling was the cause that this potential contained in the sapling “withered and it dried out and perished.” As a result it was appropriate that the sapling in question revenge itself on Adam. This explains that the fitting punishment for Adam was death, i.e. that he himself would wither and dry out. Death meant that his soul and body would become separated, just as he had separated the divine part of the tree of knowledge from its earthly part.
	There have been several people whose sin has been described in similar terms by our sages. When Nadav and Avihu entered the Holy of Holies carrying man-made fire and offering incense they had not been bidden to offer, the Torah (Leviticus 10,2) records that “a fire came forth from before the Lord and consumed them.” Their death consisted of their bodies remaining intact but their souls being not being “burned” by the fire which entered through their nostrils separating their souls from their bodies. [Our author there makes a point of insisting that the souls could not have been burned seeing that even after their deaths they have been described by the Torah as “intimates of G’d.” Ed.] According to Chagigah 15, Elisha ben Avuyah (better known as Acher) was guilty of the same type of sin as Adam. (compare Chagigah 15) His mistake was that he thought he had proof that there were separate origins of celestial authority.
	On the other hand, the sin of the generation which built the Tower was of a different dimension. Those people literally denied celestial authority altogether. This is why they were punished as testified by the Torah in Genesis 11,5 “G’d descended to look...and He confused their language, and dispersed them.” They were not punished in the same way as Adam who had קצץ בנטיעה, as it would have been inappropriate to avenge G’d Who could not have been harmed by their actions. I will explain this further at the appropriate place.
	When Adam repented and saw that G’d receives the penitents with His attribute שמאל, “ he sacrificed an ox corresponding to that attribute of G’d, i.e. source of his sin. [G’d had after all, placed within man the theoretical ability to sin already when he created him. This theoretical ability to commit a sin was due to an input of the “left side” of the diagram depicting the various emanations. Ed.] 
	ונהר, “and a river, etc.” According to the Targum the Hebrew word אור, “light,” equivalent  to the aramaic נהורא, “light.” [The kabbalists consider the letter ו at the beginning of the word ונהר as part of the noun and not as a preposition such as “and.” Ed.] The Torah therefore tells us that a “light” comes forth from Eden, and that this light originates in the region known as אין סוף, “G’’d’s Essence.” The meaning of the word מעדן is that it emanates from regions which are not bounded by any boundaries, or which defy further definition by man. The region has been so named by our sages because they cannot define it . It is beyond the outermost boundaries of our understanding. We do find allusions to this such as in Job 25,5 “even the moon is not bright and the stars are not pure in His sight.” [Bildad, the speaker in this verse, describes “light” as we know it as far inferior to light in the celestial regions. Ed.] The words  ולא יאהילin that verse refer to G’d’s ability to withhold the light of the moon. It is contrasted with the light emanating in אין סוף which is never withheld and this is why the word describing whence this light emanates is in the present tense, i.e. יוצא, “it comes forth,” instead of the past tense יצא, “it came forth,” which is what we would have expected.
	להשקות את הגן, “to irrigate the garden.” This task would be performed by the emanation עטרת. [In more modern descriptions of the emanations this emanation is called מלכות, compare Rabbi  Moshe Cordovero chapter 23 of his פרדס רמונים Ed.]  You are aware that for practical purposes all the emanations are unified, there is no division within them. However, starting with the emanation עטרת, or מלכות  “downwards,” i.e. into the realm of the physical universe including the disembodied creatures such as the angels, “separations” are the order of the day. This is what the Torah means when it states that משם, i.e. from there on the “light” was divided into four categories. This is a reference to four separate “camps.” These “camps” provide “energy” for the four “rivers” or “lights” of Gan Eden. Thence this energy or different forms of energies are channeled to the four kingdoms on earth. May the Lord continue to enlighten us with the light of His Torah.
	
	2,15. לעבדה ולשמרה, “to work it and to preserve it.” The plain meaning of this phrase is that seeing that G’d had already assigned to man what he was to eat, i.e. vegetables and fruit, He now placed him in the garden so that he would practice the art of gardening and plant all manner of crops therein. He was also encouraged to plant all kinds of fruit (trees). He had been placed in that garden in order to enjoy it and to experiment therein at will. His daily food consisted of the fruit provided by the trees in that garden. He would drink from the rivers traversing Eden, whereas he would use the ענני הכבוד, “divine clouds of glory,” as his clothing. His position in that garden was most distinguished. His primary preoccupation was with spiritual delights whereas he spent relatively little time engaged in pleasurable physical pursuits. He enjoyed a most serene state of mind as both his mind and his body cooperated fully in being servants of the Lord.
	The reason that G’d had withheld from him the fruit of the עץ הדעת, was to spare him the mental and physical tension which he would experience once he experienced lust, greed, etc., all phenomena which are part and parcel of a true freedom of choice, בחירה. At that point, prior to Adam experiencing the need to eat from the tree of life, G’d had not had any reason to deny that tree to him as he was not going to die even if he did not eat from that tree.
	Once he had sinned, the fact that he had eaten from the forbidden fruit caused him to become far more preoccupied with concerns of the body at the expense of his pursuit of spiritual values. In short, he experienced the same limitations and handicaps when pursuing spiritual pursuits which we are familiar with nowadays. Seeing that he had reversed the order of priorities G’d had assigned to him as his purpose in life, G’d now reversed the order of what He had ordained for him so that his lifespan was reduced and the angel of death attained authority over him.
	You should know that in the future, after the resurrection of people who deserve to be resurrected, these people will once again experience the idyllic conditions which prevailed in Gan Eden. At that time man will once again be occupied primarily with spiritual pursuits and will devote only relatively little energy to matters pertaining to his body. At that time man will resume either very long life, or never-ending life, as the universe will then revert to its original state of perfection.
	The words לעבדה ולשמרה, “to work it and to preserve it,” refer to the soil of the garden. [The word אדמה, soil is feminine, hence the feminine endings in לעבדה ולשמרה .]
	Viewed from an homiletical point of view, you might well ask what possible “work” there was in such a perfect garden in which all the trees had already grown and produced fruit without any input by man? Moreover, G’d had even provided irrigation by means of rivers so that man certainly did not have to perform any “labour,” something always associated with the word לעבד? We therefore need to understand the wordלעבדה  as a reference to Torah study and the wordלשמרה  as a reference to observance of the Torah’s commandments. This is why such observance is referred to in Genesis 3,24 as לשמור את דרך עץ החיים, “to guard the path of the tree of life.” We have other verses in Scripture which refer to Torah and the observance of its statutes as the “tree of life,” such as Proverbs 3,18  עץ חיים היא למחזיקים בה, “she is a tree of life for those who take hold of it.”
	Another Midrashic explanation sees in the words לעבדה ולשמרה, a reference to the Sabbath, seeing that the Torah described the six weekdays as days on which we are to work; (compare Exodus 20,9 ששת ימים תעבד, “for six days you will work, etc.”).
	Still another Midrashic explanation sees in the words of our verse a reference to the sacrifices The word לעבדה paraphrases Exodus 3,12  תעבדון את האלוקים על ההר הזה, “you will offer sacrifices to G’d on this Mountain.” The word ולשמרה is also a reference to certain sacrificial rituals as it  paraphrases Numbers 28,2  תשמרו להקריב לי במועדו, “you will guard it to sacrifice for Me at its appointed season.” 
	A kabbalistic approach to our verse: We need to understand why the Torah used the letter ה each time at the end of these words. The normal grammar would have required the letter ו each time, i.e. לעבדו ולשמרו, seeing the words refer to the garden which is masculine in Hebrew. Actually, both the letters ה in this instance are an allusion to the two letters ה which are part of the four-lettered ineffable name of Gd. Concerning such considerations, the Torah wrote in Exodus 23,21 השמר מפניו, “take heed on account of the letters ו which have been replaced by he letters ה. The intelligent reader will understand to what I refer. [according to תורת חיים, the word in Exodus should be read מפני-ו, “on account of the ו.]

	2,17.ויצו ה' אלוקים על האדם לאמר מכל עץ הגן אכל תאכל , “the Lord G’d commanded Adam: “you may surely eat from every tree of the garden.” According to the plain meaning of the text, Adam was commanded two separate commandments here, a positive as well as a negative commandment. The positive commandment was spelled out in the words “you shall eat from all the trees of the garden.” The negative commandment was contained in the words ומעץ הדעת טוב ורע לא תאכל ממנו, ”but from the tree of knowledge of good and evil you must not eat” (verse 17).
	From an homiletical point of view these verses contain what are known as the seven Noachide laws, i.e. seven laws applicable to all mankind. [These seven commandments are enumerated in Sanhedrin 56]. They are: “the prohibition of idolatry, bloodshed (murder) incestuous sexual relations of certain categories; blasphemy; robbery; consumption of living tissue of an animal, and the institution of a judiciary to deal with violators of these commandments. These laws are alluded to in our text and are derived as follows: The word ויצו refers to idolatry as we have a verse in Hoseah 5,11 where the word  צוis synonymous with idolatry, viz: כי הואיל הלך אחרי צו, “because he has gone after futility.” The word השם alludes to blasphemy; the Torah states in Leviticus 24,16 ונוקב שם ה' מות יומת, “and he who curses the name of the Lord shall be put to death.” The word אלוקים in our verse refers to the establishment of a judiciary system. The parallel verse in Exodus 22,27 says: אלוהים לא תקלל, “you shall not curse a judge.” The words על האדם, are an allusion to the prohibition of bloodshed, murder. The parallel verse is found in Genesis 9,6 שופך דם האדם באדם דמו ישפך, “he who spills the blood of a human being shall have his own blood spilled by a human being.” The word לאמר alludes to forbidden sexual relations. The inference is based on Jeremiah 3,1 לאמר הן ישלח איש את אשתו והלכה מאתו והיתה לאיש אחר הישוב אליה עוד הלא חנוף תחנף הארץ ההיא?, “to say: if a man divorces his wife, and she leaves him and marries another man, can he ever go back to her? Would not such land be defiled?” The words מכל עץ הגן ככל תאכל, “from every tree of the garden you shall surely eat,” is an allusion to the prohibition of robbery, i.e. man requires G’d’s express permission to partake of matters in this world. Finally, the words  ומעץ הדעת טוב ורע לא תאכל ממנו, “but you must not eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil” are an allusion not to eat a living animal’s tissue. The lesson derived from the words of our verse is: “from a certain object you must not eat part thereof.” So you see that the basic seven Noachide laws are all alluded to in some form or other in our two verses.

	2,17. מות תמות, “you will surely die.” The words in this verse do not mean that Adam (or anyone else) would die immediately on the very day he would eat from that tree; rather the meaning is that as soon as he would eat from that tree man would become mortal, would forfeit his right to live on earth indefinitely. According to our sages in Shabbat 55 man had been meant to live forever just like the angels. Philosophers, on the other hand, believe that man was destined to die a natural death. They believe that it is axiomatic that any creature which is a composite of a number of raw materials is bound to disintegrate sooner or later and to break up into its constituent parts. According to the view of these philosophers-scientists the repeated מות תמות is a reference to the natural death that most people die from. They mean that even without the sin man would have died sooner or later. As a result  of man’s sin, premature death was decreed for him, i.e. death at the instigation of heaven instead of as a result of natural forces governing our terrestrial universe, whenever man would become guilty of specific sins which carry such a penalty. The reason the Torah repeats the reference to death, i.e. מות תמות is to tell us that from that moment on man would be subject to two kinds of natural death. We have a clear verse in Scripture detailing this. In Samuel I 26,10 we read: כי אם ה' יגפנו או יומו יבא ומת או במלחמה ירד ונספה, “and the Lord Himself will strike him down, or his time will come and he will die, or he will go down in battle and will perish.” When David spoke of “or his day will come,” he referred to natural death. 
	Seeing that death had now been decreed upon Adam (man), G’d had to prevent him from attaining an unlimited lifespan by means of his eating from the fruit of the tree of life. The tree was called “tree of life,” because eating from its fruit conferred freedom from death upon those who ate from it until their bodies would disintegrate through natural causes such as we have described. It did not protect the person who ate from it against natural forces in the universe, only against death from other than natural causes. If the Torah speaks in Genesis 3,22 of “man living לעולם, forever,” if he were to eat from that tree, this does not refer to infinite, eternal life. The word’s meaning is similar to Exodus 21,6 ועבדו לעולם, “he will serve him permanently,” where the word לעולם obviously also cannot mean literally “forever.” Another example where the word לעולם clearly does not mean “forever,” is found in Samuel I 1,22 where Chanah speaks about her son living in Shiloh under the guidance of the High Priest Eli לעולם.
	According to the view of these philosophers-scientists, if G’d had already denied the fruit of the tree of life to Adam originally, and he had ignored that prohibition and had eaten from it, how could G’d have warned Adam not to eat from the tree of knowledge on pain of death if he had already granted him an infinite lifespan through his having eaten from the tree of life? These philosphers claim to have proofs to support their opinions. I would have  recorded two or three of their “proofs” were it not for 
the fact that their approach to the text is totally different from that of our sages, and it is not appropriate for us even to consider an approach which is diametrically opposed to the view of our sages as the latter base their views directly on the pronouncements of our prophets (Avodah Zarah 5). Our sages state unequivocally that if Adam had not sinned he would have lived forever. This view is supported by Psalms 82,6 אני אמרתי אלוקים אתם ובני עליון כלכם, “I (G’d) said that you are divine beings and that all of you are sons of the Most High.” The remarkable thing in that Psalm is that Assaph did not quote G’d as saying: “you are like a divine being,” or like the sons of the Most High.” He referred to an actual divine quality possessed by Man (Adam) i.e. his immortality. Scripture contains many other verses along the same lines.
	According to the plain meaning of the text the words מות תמות, i.e. the repetition of the death threat, is nothing more than something stylistic. We find such apparent duplications throughout the Bible. Our sages have explained this when they said that “the Torah employs a syntax which is similar to that of human beings” (Bereshit Rabbah 19,8). When people want to emphasise something they repeat it. 
	Viewed from an homiletical approach, the Torah emphasises the word ביום. It is meant to refer to a day in G’d’s calendar, i.e. 1000 years in terms of our calendar. In order that G’d’s word when He created Adam should not have been wasted, He granted Adam a “day” of His  own calendar, and Adam lived close to 1000 years. He was only 70 years short of G’d’s day when he died, but in terms of our lives nowadays these 70 years represented a whole lifetime, so that he died on the day he ate, i.e. being deprived of a life span.
	A kabbalistic approach to our verse concentrates on the repeated appearance of the word “death” when the Torah spoke of מות תמות. It is understood as the warning of two deaths, a physical death of the body and a spiritual death of the soul. We find a repetition of the word “died,” when the Torah reported the death of the two older sons of Aaron, Nadav and Avihu in Leviticus 16, 1 אחרי מות שני בני אהרן וימותו. We find a similar repetition (implication) of the word “death” when Moses prayed for Reuven in his final blessing (Deut. 33,6) and said יחי ראובן ואל ימות, especially when you consider the translation of that verse by Onkelos. He translates: ומותא תנינא לא ימות, “let him not die a second death.”
	You may also view Avraham’s life and death as fulfillment of the warning מות תמות, “you will die twice.” Avraham is viewed by some of our sages as the reincarnation of Adam who bequeathed him 70 years of his life. He resembled Adam in that G’d called him אב המון גויים, “father of a multitude of nations” (Genesis 17,5), and, just like Adam he has been described in Joshua 14,15 as האדם הגדול, “the great human being.” He resembled Adam spiritually in that he spent the early years of his life as an idolater whereas he became a penitent just like his ancestor Adam. This is an alternative view to that of the Midrash (Yalkut Tehillim item 843) according to which Adam had bequeathed 70 years of his life expectancy to David whom G’d had shown him as destined to die at birth.

	2,18 לא טוב היות האדם לבדו, “it is not good for man to be by himself, etc.” [up until this point, the Torah had mentioned each time “it was good,” seeing that the “good” in question referred to the continued existence of the various species G’d had created. In the case of Adam, who was unable to procreate seeing he did not have a mate, the Torah had to describe his state of being as לא טוב, “not good.” The meaning of the verse is: “it is not good that man and woman remain attached to each other like Siamese twins”, i.e. one body with two faces (heads) This is what the sages meant when they said in Berachot 61 that the human species was created as a body with two heads seeing that the Torah testified that G’d had created them זכר ונקבה, “male and female” (5,2). Their body was so constructed that it possessed both male and female genitals. The second head assisted the first head in achieving the act of procreation. This is the reason that when G’d separated the bodies, He referred to the new body as the one which had previously been an automatic עזר, “helpmate,” to become עזר כנגדו, “a helpmate which corresponded to him (the male), i.e. an independent person with independent willpower. [The author’s description of this passage thus far is based completely on the commentary of Nachmanides. Rabbi Chavell].
	If we are to accept this interpretation (by Nachmanides), we would have to attribute to G’d a complete change of mind from what He had planned originally when He created Adam. It is quite unacceptable to attribute such a change of mind to G’d. The fact is that the words: “it is not good that Adam be alone,” reported in our verse were not “spoken” by G’d after He had created Adam, but already prior to G’d actually having created Adam when the plan to create man had been conceived by G’d. As soon as G’d entertained that thought He added that it was not suitable that man should be the only type of inhabitant of earth just as the angels are the only inhabitants of the celestial regions. Rather, just as the other creatures in our terrestrial universe were created in pairs and reproduced themselves, so Adam (man) too should have a partner and he and she would reproduce and be subject to death as are all the other creatures in our” lower world.
	At this point in the narrative the Torah reports on the creation of woman, the fact that her raw material was identical to that of Adam as G’d took one of Adam’s sides to construct her body. There is no question of reconsideration by G’d of His original design in planning man. In Berachot 61 Rabbi Avuhu addressed the apparent contradiction by the words “male and female He created them,” whereas  in Genesis 1,27 the Torah reported    “He created him.” The meaning is that originally G’d had planned to create man and woman separately whereas upon further reflection He created them with a single body. The fact is that we observe that ultimately G’d carried out His original plan of creating two separate human bodies, a male and a female one. This gives the impression as if Rabbi Avuhu thought hat G’d did indeed reconsider and change His  desire.
	My wise teacher Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet, may his soul rest in peace, wrote that this matter has to be approached from two separate aspects each one of which is true and accurate. When Rabbi Avuhu said that originally G’d planned to create man as two separate bodies, male and female, just like the animals, this  must not be taken at face value. All allegorical statements were never expected to be taken at face value but were meant to help us understand abstract matters by explaining them in terms of phenomena we are familiar with. Rabbi Avuhu wanted to illustrate that G’d planned to create the species of man in the most perfect manner possible  and this is why he spoke about G’d entertaining different thoughts at different times in order for the eventual translation of those thoughts into creative action to reflect that man’s creation had been well planned down to the last detail. When he spoke about G’d “originally” planning to create two separate human beings, he wanted to explain to us that G’d wanted both man and woman to be independent personalities who would at the same time draw on each other for support. He meant for us to picture the function of the male and the female of the species to be similar to the relationship between sun and moon, for instance.
	Having given due consideration to these factors, G’d decided that it was not good that man, the crown jewel of His creation, should be the only active factor in the universe whereas the woman should be no more than a receptacle, a servant, just like the moon which only acts as a receptacle for the sun’s rays. This is why Rabbi Avuhu said that on further consideration G’d decided to create man with a single body, i.e. the male. However, although the female eventually was separated from him and they became two bodies, the female is not considered as having been a separate act of creation as she was formed from matter which was peripheral to Adam seeing that he survived as an entity although the part woman was made of was removed from him. This is why some sages  (Berachot 61) have described woman as having been made out of man’s ”tail.”
	Another interpretation of Rabbi Avuhu’s statement goes as follows: When G’d contemplated creating man and woman as two separate bodies, His concern was that they should be male and female just like all the other animals. On the other hand, [what is termed as His “later” consideration], it was important to G’d that woman should be perceived as being made of the very same raw material as her husband, thus creating a natural affinity between man and wife [not like the animals]. As a result, woman would be viewed by her husband as if she were one of his very own limbs [and he would treat her with the same consideration as he treats his own organs. This may be why in Jewish law we have a saying אשתו כגופו, that even in legal terms very often “the wife is considered an extension of her husband’s body.” Ed.] Thus far the words of my revered teacher.

	2,19. וכל אשר יקרא לו האדם נפש חיה הוא שמו, “and whatever the man called each living creature that remained its name.” According to the narrative in Bereshit Rabbah 17,4 G’d paraded the various animals before Adam and he gave each one a name after he had studied their respective characteristics. By means of this ability to characterise each creature, he demonstrated his superior wisdom, i.e. that he was indeed a creature who had been created directly by G’d Himself, i.e. בצלם אלוקים. In light of this Midrash it s clear to me that the wisdom of Adam was reflected in the names he gave to the animals, each name alluding to its outstanding characteristic, that which made it different from other creatures. 
	Every single letter Adam chose in naming these animals reflected a special meaning. When the Midrash said: “due to his wisdom Adam recognised the nature of the lion, אריה,” this means that he was aware that the lion was the king of the animals due to its fearless posture. This concept was carried so far that eventually some of our prophets describe the greatness and fearlessness of G’d Himself in terms of a creature whose essence we understand, i.e. in terms of the lion (compare Hoseah 11,10) אחרי ה' ילכו, כאריה ישאג, “they will follow the Lord because He shouts like a lion.” The letters א-ר-י-ה which Adam selected when he named the lion were chosen by him as all these letters represent spiritual values. The letters א-ה-י are all letters which appear in one or the other names of G’d. or even in a single name of G’d such as the name א-ה-י-ה. The letter ר represents רוח, “spirit, i.e. “Holy Spirit.” So you will note that the prophet was not being irreverent when he drew a comparison between G’d and a lion, or vice-versa. A similar consideration prompted Adam to name the eagle נשר, as he recognised that the eagle amongst the birds was what the lion is amongst the mammals on earth. The eagle’s ability to fly higher than any other bird makes it the king amongst the birds.
	We have a tradition that when an eagle completes his tenth year he flies so high that he approaches the planet  which is the source of fire. Due to the excessive heat in that region he dives into the sea having already lost his feathers. Subsequently the eagle renews itself as before. This process repeats itself once every ten years until the hundredth year. At that point, the eagle flies even closer to the source of the fire and as a result drops into the sea and dies. This is what Rav Saadyah Gaon wrote (in connection with Psalms 103 5) 
	At any rate, Adam, who was aware of the nature of that bird, named it נשר, the letter ש representing the word אש, “fire,” the letter ר symbolising רוח, “Holy Spirit, and the letter נ symbolising נפילה, the fact that it “falls” into the sea. The eagle’s name in Hebrew therefore alludes to its role in history and its eventual demise; this is also what Adam is reported as having said (according to the Midrash we quoted) לזה נאה לקותו נשר, “this creature would appropriately be called נשר.” The reason why the Midrash quotes Adam as saying נאה לקרות, is that the word נאה is understood to mean נאות וראוי, “suitable.” When it came to naming the donkey, Adam called it חמור. Adam had recognised that that animal was extremely dull-witted, more foolish than all the other animals. This is why he chose a name which is closely related to the word חומר, i.e. “matter, material.” An additional reason for that name is the fact that the donkey is a beast of burden employed to carry sacks of grain. Grain is measured in terms of a weight called חומר, as we find in Hoseah 3,2  חומר שעורים “a chomer of barley.” When Adam had concluded naming the animals, G’d asked Adam: “what is My Name?” Adam replied: א-ד-נ-י. When G’d asked him what had made him decide on that name, Adam said: “because You are the overlord of all creatures.” This is what is meant when Isaiah 42, 8 writes: אני ה' הוא שמי “I am the Lord; that is My name.” The repetition of the words “that is my name,” is a reference to the time that Adam had “named” G’d. If you were to ask where we find that Adam applied the four-lettered name י-ה-ו-ה  to G’d, you will find it by removing the  ח [According to תורת חיים our author means that you only have to deduct the letter ח from the word חיה, and you are left with the letters י-ה. When you write these letters as words, i.e. יוד הא, the numerical value (26) equals that of the four-lettered name of G’d.]

	2,21. ויסגר בשר תחתנה, “He filled in flesh in its place.” With reference to the letter ס in the word ויסגר, Bereshit Rabbah 17,6 writes that as soon as Chavah was created Satan was created alongside her. We did not find the letter ס which symbolises Satan [the סיטרא אחרא, “the spiritually negative section of the emanations in kabbalistic language, Ed.] until we came to this word in the Torah. If you were to point out that the letter ס already appeared in 2,13 where the Torah speaks of the rivers flowing around  the whole land of Cush, סובב  את כל הארץ כוש, the letter was used there only in connection with the rivers, not in connection with the creation of either man or woman and their fates.

	2,22. ויבן ה' אלוקים את הצלע, “the Lord G’d built up the side, etc.” Both names of G’d are used to show that now the world was complete. When the Torah describes the creation of man in detail we also find the words וייצר ה' אלוקים את האדם. This was justified as Adam already incorporated within himself all the potential of the female of the species except that this potential had not become manifest. The potential capability of woman is hidden within the male, whereas the manifestation of man’s potential comes to the fore within woman. This is what is meant when the Torah wrote in Genesis 46,15  אלה בני לאה אשר ילדה ליעקב, “these are the sons of Leah which she bore for Yaakov.” In that verse the sons are attributed to Leah. Immediately following that statement the Torah adds: ואת דינה בתו, “and Dinah his daughter.” We see that the female children are attributed to the father. You will note that the Torah employs similar language in Leviticus 12,2  אשה כי תזריע וילדה זכר, “when a woman fertilises semen she will give birth to a male.” On the other hand, the Torah continues there ואם נקבה תלד וגו'. “and if she gives birth to a female, etc.”
	When you review the creation of man you will find that two of the ten directives (when you exclude the word בראשית as a directive) G’d issued when creating the universe pertained to the creation of man, i.e. the male and the female. The first directive is ויאמר אלוקים נעשה אדם. G’d said: “let us make Adam.” The second directive is ויאמר ה' אלוקים לא טוב היות האדם לבדו, אעשה לו עזר כנגדו, “it is not good for Adam to remain solitary, I shall make him a helpmate who corresponds to him.” Please remember that the tenth of the directives involving the creation of the universe was the directive to create Chavah.
	There are sages who count the 10 directives according to the following sequence: five directives were issued on the first three days of creation; another five were issued during the next three days. If so, then they could not have included the directive in 1,29: ”here I have assigned to you   all the grass which produces seed ...as food for you.” As far as we are concerned, the word בראשית itself is one of the ten directives whereas the directive “let us make Adam,” is the ninth directive and the directive “it is not good for Adam to be solitary, etc.” is the tenth directive. I do not consider either of the statements: ”be fruitful and multiply,” or the statement: “here I have assigned to you as food, etc.,” as one of the directives which form part of the ten directives which brought the universe into being.

	2,23. זאת הפעם, “this time, etc.” The plain meaning of these words is: “this is the only time bone is being taken from my bone.” From now on it will not be necessary to remove part of man’s bone or flesh to provide him with a mate. Henceforth regular procreation will provide a supply of males and females in the world. This is Rashi’s comment on our verse. [not in our editions of Rashi. Ed.] 
	From an homiletical aspect the words עצם מעצמי may refer to Adam having the feeling that the bones of his wife were harder than his own i.e. “her bones are more bony than mine.” The reason for this would be that they had been constructed out of bones whereas his own bones had been constructed out of the dust of the earth. This may also be the reason that the Torah wrote וייצר, when describing the formation of Adam as the word is similar to יוצר, “a potter,” someone who uses soft clay as his raw material. When the woman was formed however, the Torah used the expression  ויבן, “He built,” instead of וייצר, “He shaped like a potter.” The term ויבן reminds us of a builder who builds a solid structure, something made of hard materials, not of clay. Perhaps this is the reason that the psalmist in Psalms 103,13 speaks of G’d being merciful to His בנים, “sons” as a father is merciful, whereas when describing toughness, Proverbs 31,1 speaks of משא אשר יסרתו אמו, “a rebuke administered by his mother.” The mother, being made of sterner stuff, admonishes instead of displaying pity. This paragraph made it clear that Chavah was created within Gan Eden and that it was there that Adam’s side was taken from him. He himself had been created outside the garden and had been transplanted  there by G’d.

	3,1. והנחש היה ערום, “and the serpent had been sly, etc.” The reason that the words ואשתו in the last verse and the word והנחש in this verse appear side by side is that Satan had been created together with woman. Woman may be perceived as the body, the personification of the evil urge. [the evil urge is an abstract concept. In order for it to become effective it needs a “body.” Woman, or better the first woman, became that “body.” Ed.] Woman proved “easy” to mislead into sin. The numerical value of the letters in the word  הנחש is 364 after allowing 1 for the whole word, whereas the letters in the word  השטןadd up to 364.
	Vayikra Rabbah 26,2 quotes Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmeni as saying that when the serpent was asked: “why are you always found near the fences?” It answered: “because I was the one that breached the fences of the universe.” When asked further: “why are you constantly sticking out your tongue?”, It answered: “He makes me do it.” When asked: “why is the bite of any other free roaming beast not lethal whereas your bite is lethal?” The serpent answered: “do you suppose that I do anything of my own free will which has not been ordained for me from above?” [The latter question is reflected in Kohelet 10,11 אם ישך נחש בלא לחש ואין יתרון לבעל הלשון, “if there were to be found a snake which bites without being provoked (from above), what purpose is there to the art of the snake-charmers?” When the serpent was asked further: “why is it that when you bite a single organ all other organs are affected by that bite?” The serpent answered (angrily) “why are you asking me instead of asking why the people who merely speak evil are able to kill without biting? Such people open their mouths here (Palestine) and the lethal effect of what they said is felt as far away as Rome!”
	אף כי אמר אלוקים, “did G’d really say, etc.?” The very first word the serpent uttered was the word אף. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 19,2 commented on this: “four people began their remarks with the word אף, and all four of them perished through אף, divine anger. The four are: the serpent, the chief of the bakers (Genesis 40,16), the community who partook in Korach’s uprising (Numbers 16,14)  and Haman (Esther 5,12).

	3,5. והייתם כ-אלוקים יודעי טוב ורע, “and you will be like G’d, knowing good and evil.” From this it would appear that prior to his sin Adam did not possess the ability to distinguish good from evil. If that were true, then what happened here would violate a Talmudic principle, i.e. that a sinner should not be allowed to benefit by his sin. It is clear to me that one must not understand the verse to mean that Adam did not know the difference between right and wrong prior to his sin any more than do the animals. The meaning of the words: “you will be like G’d,” is appropriately translated by Onkelos who renders these words as: ותהון כרברבין חכמין בין טב לביש, “you will become possessed of superior wisdom knowing what is good and what is evil.” There can be no question that at the time G’d created man He had equipped him with a superior intelligence. This is the meaning of Genesis 1,27 “He created him in the image of G’d.” The word צלם in that verse is a reference to intelligence. If G’d commanded man not to eat from the tree of knowledge, the reason He did so was precisely because man was intelligent enough to distinguish between truth and untruth. G’d is not on record as commanding animals what to do as they have no intelligence.
	The problem is that knowledge of good and evil is not something within the realm of intelligence. When man is asked to define heaven he does not say “heaven is spherical and beautiful;” when asked to define earth he does not say: “earth is flat and ugly.” He would make statements which confirm or deny the truth of something, not its moral potential. Prior to his sin, Adam’s intellect was totally spiritually oriented; it was not concerned with matters of the body. He was not even familiar with such matters. He was completely unaware of the carnal implications of nudity, etc. He considered his genitals as organs  no different from all his other organs. Once he had sinned, and suddenly experienced the sex drive as an instrument of physical gratification, i.e. “he saw that the tree was good to eat and a pleasurable experience for the eyes,” he was immediately punished by being stripped of his ability to use his intellect objectively; from that moment on, considerations such as physical desire, appreciation of physical beauty or ugliness clouded his previously pure intellect. This is why the serpent spoke of “you will become intimate (an alternate meaning of ידע) with good and evil.” The serpent had been careful not to say: “you will know truth and falsehood,” or words to that effect.
	You should pay special attention to the wording of verse seven ותפקחנה עיני שניהם וידעו, “the eyes of both of them were opened, etc.” The Torah deliberately did not write that as a result of this opening of their eyes ויראו, “they saw,” but it wrote וידעו, “they knew”  that they were naked. What they suddenly “knew” they had already “seen” previously. The Torah wanted to emphasise that they now “saw” something they had been aware of previously in a totally new light. What had previously not been shameful had suddenly become something shameful. The reason was that they had overstepped the boundaries and displayed a tendency to derive physical pleasure from something G’d had denied them. They had displayed a desire to be more animal-like in their cravings. As a result, their punishment consisted in their being allocated animal-like food as we find in verse 18 “you will eat the grass of the field.” [Previously, as pointed out  in connection with 1,29, they had been allocated only the kind of herbs which produced self perpetuating seeds, as distinct from the food allocated to the animals.]

	3,6. ותרא האשה כי טוב העץ למאכל, “the woman saw that the tree was good as food, etc.” The sages (Berachot 40) disagree
as to the exact nature of this tree. Some say it was a fig tree and they base themselves on the fact that immediately after eating from the tree Adam and Chavah are described as covering their genitals with fig leaves (verse 7). They feel that this shows that the very thing which had become their downfall now had become the instrument of their rehabilitation.
	Other sages believe that the tree in question was the grapevine. This is why we read in Bereshit Rabbah 19,8 “Chavah squeezed the juice from the grapes and brought it to her husband. Seeing that its appearance was red like blood, their blood would be spilled and the blood of the whole universe, tit for tat, measure for measure, the punishment fitting the crime. The blood of the female of the species which would be spilled at regular intervals is the menstrual blood. This is also the mystical dimension of Deut. 32,14: “and the blood of the grapes you will drink as if it were delicious wine.” The Torah called the grape “blood,” seeing that grapes had brought blood into the world. Still another view is that of Rabbi Abba from Acco in Bereshit Rabbah 15,8 who believes that the tree in question was the Etrog tree, the citron fruit. Other scholars were aghast at all such suggestions, saying that there can be no question that G’d did not reveal  the nature of this tree to any man living or in the future. As proof for their view that the Torah deliberately concealed what tree it was they cite Leviticus 20,16 ואשה אשר תקרב אל כל בהמה לרבעה אותה והרגת את האשה ואת הבהמה. “And a woman who approaches any animal for it to mate with her, you shall kill the woman and the animal, etc.” To the question that if the woman has sinned why should the animal be killed also, what sin did it commit?” The answer given is that the animal must not be allowed to survive as otherwise people would point to it saying: “this is the animal which caused a certain woman to be executed.” If G’d had been so concerned with the honour or dignity of His creatures, would He not be equally concerned with His own honour and not reveal that He Himself had been the cause of man’s death by allowing man to point to that tree?
	When looked at from a kabbalistic point of view, the tree was indeed the Etrog tree something which is hinted at in the words  ונחמד העץ להשכיל, “and the tree was a desirable means to gain insights.”  Onkelos translates these words as:ומרגג , “that the fruit was exceptionally beautiful and desirable.” [You will note the similarity in the word מרגג and the word אתרג. Ed.] The nature of that fruit was that it excited and dominated one’s intellect. This is also the way the Targum translates the verse in Leviticus 23,40  ולקחתם לכם פרי עץ הדר, as פירי אילנא אתרוגין, again using the word אתרוג to describe an especially beautiful fruit  We may thus understand verse 18 where the curse (punishment) for eating from such a beautiful tree is that henceforth the earth will sprout forth thorns and thistles as another example of the punishment fitting the crime. [according to תורת חיים, our author may have intended to point out the numerical value of the combined words קוץ ודרדר as equaling the numerical value of the word אתרוג.] 
	וכי תאוה הוא לעינים, “and that it was a delight for the eyes, etc.” It is possible that the three characteristics טובה, תאוה, and חמדה, which are mentioned in this verse are all part of the sensory perceptions which when combined result in the gaining of new insights, i.e. להשכיל, a word which follows immediately afterwards. Considering the fact that original man was a totally intellectually oriented creature, the Torah wanted to remind us that at that stage (before the sin) whatever motivation prompted Chavah and Adam to eat from this tree was the desire to gain further insights, להשכיל. This would correspond to Psalms 38,10 ה' נגדך כל תאותי, “You G’d are aware that (nearness) to You is the objective of all my desire.” According to this interpretation it was the intellect which dictated to them to eat what G’d had withheld from them.
	Whatever his or her motivation, the fact remains that Chavah (and Adam) violated G’d’s will as expressed by His prohibition. Just as his intellect had told him that the fruit of that tree held promise of further insights, the same intellect had also told him that the acquisition of such insights was clearly against G’d’s will, else why would He have forbidden its fruit? The commentators who presented the view we quoted only wanted to emphasise that the sin was not due to an overpowering urge by the יצר הרע, the force within man which moves him to assert his independence. At this stage the יצר הרע tempted Adam in the shape of his wife Chavah. He was misled into believing that what he did was in order.
	After having eaten from the fruit of that tree Adam began to experience a new sensation altogether, a sensation which became an integral part of him from then on. This was  the sex drive which is a drive originally  nspired by the commission of a sin.
	Do not ask that if indeed this drive was and is responsible for sinning and Adam and Chavah did not yet have it before they ate from that tree, how did they come to sin? The fact is that even angels who most certainly do not have a sex drive and are motivated purely by intellectual considerations also sin on occasion. One example is found in Genesis 19,13 where the angels who had been commanded to destroy Sodom and to save Lot described themselves as if it were they who were destroying Sodom and not G’d. They told Lot: כי משחיתים אנחנו את המקום הזה, “for we are about to destroy this place.” We also find an interesting comment by our sages (Tanchuma Parshat Shoftim 18) that the line in Exodus 23,21 where the Torah speaks of an angel “who will not forgive your sin (if you commit it),” belongs to a group of angels which never sin. If so, there must be others who do sin on occasion. We also have a verse in Job 4,18 הן בעבדיו לא יאמין, ובמלאכיו ישים תהלה, “He cannot trust His own servants and casts reproach on His angels.”
	ותתן גם לאישה עמה, “and she also gave to her husband with her and he ate.” The word עמה in this verse teaches that Chavah had an evil intent in that she wanted her husband to become guilty of the same sin. [According to Rashi, she did not want to die and for Adam to marry another woman.]. 
	According to Bereshit Rabbah 19,5 the word גם teaches that she also gave to all the animals from the fruit of that tree. According to that Midrash there was only a single bird called חול which did not eat from the fruit of that tree. This fact is alluded to in Job 29,18 ואמר עם-קני אגוע וכחול ארבה ימים, ”I thought I would die together with my family (my nest), and be as long-lived as the bird חול, phoenix.” According to Rabbi Yudan this bird has a life span of 1000 years. At the end of that time  fire erupts in its nest and less than the size of egg of it remains before it regenerates itself. 
	ויאכל, “and he ate.” At this point Adam sinned seeing G’d had warned him previously ומעץ הדעת טוב ורע לא תאכל ממנו, “and you must not from the tree of knowledge of good and evil (2,17).” The one warning applied to earthly matters such as not to eat from the fruit in order not to ingest the source of the evil, carnal desires etc.; the other warning pertained to celestial matters, that as a result of eating from the tree and obtaining new insights he should not speculate about the origin and essence of G’d. From a practical point of view the word ממנו also included the prohibition not to use the branches of that tree to plant a duplicate, etc., etc. Philosophically speaking, Adam was not to make the mistake made later by  the generation of the Tower who thought that there was no one beyond in the heavens.
	By writing the single word ויאכל, the Torah described his sin on several levels. Eating something, consuming it, is equivalent to destroying it.  Adam destroyed two conditions which had prevailed on earth prior to his eating from that tree. He ate from the tree thereby destroying something of a terrestrial nature; he ate, i.e. he destroyed something of a spiritual nature, something the sages called קצץ בנטיעות, or something that our author calls here קצץ בדוגמתו למעלה, “he impaired his parallel spiritual image in the celestial regions.”
	Inasmuch as his spiritual image in the celestial regions received its input from the “left” part of the emanations, the seat of the attribute of Justice, it became necessary for him to offer an ox with only a single horn as expiation after he had done  תשובה, repentance, in order to demonstrate that he recognised the Unity of G’d and did not believe that G’d had partners, i.e. that there was a power-sharing arrangement between the various מדות, “attributes” of G’d. In order for Adam to learn this lesson G’d especially made available to him an ox which had a unicorn on its forehead. The word קרן, “horn” in Hebrew is equivalent to כח, “power.” The strength of an ox is concentrated in its horns. The unicorn was in the centre of that ox’s forehead, the centre of its body, in order to symbolise  the קו האמצעי, “the centre line,” [a kabbalistic concept pertaining to the diagram of the emanations, Ed.] The purpose of that  “line” is to unify the “lower” and the “higher” regions. This is the meaning of the enigmatic though well known Midrash based on Psalms 69,32 ותיטב לה' משור פר מקרין מפריס, “that will please the Lord even more than the ox, i.e. bull whose horns protruded beyond its hooves.”
	The verse from Psalms we quoted contains a double entendre as the word מקרין though spelled with the letter י , is read as if it were written without the letter י.The first (regular) spelling would symbolise the strength radiated from the animal, whereas the defective spelling, i.e. the way we read the word suggests that the ox in question had only one horn, mi-keren. When the Israelites sinned in the desert and they made the golden calf they had to sacrifice an ox in atonement for their sin as we know from Leviticus 9,3  קחו שעיר עזים לחטאת ועגל וכבש...ושור ואיל לשלמים, “take a he-goat for a sin-offering; a calf and a lamb,...and an ox and a ram for a peace-offering, etc.”  From that time on, the Israelites were commanded to take the four species including the Etrog in the month of Tishrey,  the month in which man was created, in order to combine all these species. These four species were a symbolic offering atoning for the first sin man had committed around that time of year. In all other instances of publicly paid for sin-offerings on the festivals, a bull or bulls are included in the Torah’s list of such offerings. The same applies to the sin-offerings on New Moon. All of this was to teach that when doing penance it is appropriate to use the instrument with which one had sinned to effect forgiveness. This is also the reason why the Torah repeats the otherwise unnecessary word הפר a second time in Leviticus 4,4 והביא את הפר אל פתח אהל מועד, ושחט את הפר לפני ה'. “He (the priest) shall bring the bull to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, and he shall slaughter the bull in the presence of the Lord.” Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 5,6 explain the extra word הפר instead of simply אותו in this vein. The matter may be illustrated in the form of a parable: when a friend offered a gift to the king, the king told him to display the gift at the entrance of his palace so that everybody would become aware of the valuable gift that his friend had given him. The ”gift” in the parable is the תשובה, repentance, which consisted of the same category of item with which the friend had previously offended the king.

	3,14. מכל הבהמה ומכל חית השדה, “more than any domestic beast or free-roaming animal in the field.” According to the plain meaning of the text G’d said to the serpent that inasmuch as “you used to be more wily than all the other beasts, now you will be downgraded to a level even lower than all  other beasts, having to crawl on your belly, etc.”
	Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 19,1 also approached the verse from this angle when they said: that what had been ערום מכל, now became ארור מכל, “the most wily became the most accursed.” Following an homiletical approach, the sages claim that the serpent’s time of gestation is seven years. The Talmud Bechorot 5 claims that the words “more than any other beasts, etc., and more than any free-roaming animal,” are  basically superfluous as if the serpent is more cursed than the  domestic animals it is only logical; because of this they concluded that the time of gestation of a serpent is seven years. [Rashi on that statement in the Talmud explains that a domestic animal such as a goat requires seven months of gestation whereas a cat requires only fifty-two days of pregnancy. The relative ratio of domestic animal to free-roaming animal therefore is one of seven to one. [If the serpent is proportionately more cursed than even the regular free-roaming animals under normal circumstances (or at least the ones with the longest period of pregnancy), this means that the serpent has to carry its egg for seven years. Ed.] Actually, the Torah should have first mentioned categories of animals which are relatively little cursed, i.e. which have a short period of gestation followed by those animals which have a longer period of gestation. The fact that the Torah reversed this pattern indicates that it wishes to stress something. The matter sounded so hard to believe that we have Rabbi Joshua who indulged an heretic who refused to believe all this by making an experiment which proved that our sages were correct in their assessment. 
	על גחונך תלך ועפר תאכל, “you will crawl on your belly and eat dust, etc.” The punishment matched the crime. The serpent had been instrumental in bringing man down from his lofty heights. As a penalty the serpent itself experienced being demoted when compared to its former stature. Whereas the Torah mentions the loss of height by the serpent and the fact that it would henceforth subsist on dust, an inert material, it did not mention the fact that henceforth the serpent would be deprived of its ability to speak. Actually, the loss of that ability would have constituted the most severe part of its curse. If the serpent was not punished by loss of communicative powers there must have been a special reason for this.
	The fact is that the serpent was predestined for trouble and retribution. The very fact that it was introduced by the Torah as being the most crafty of all the animals of the field predestined it to become Satan’s partner. It manifested visible superiority over the other animals but at the same time also concealed its propensity for evil. When G’d downsized it from its previous lofty and upright posture, He also reduced the power for evil it possessed at the same time. In kabbalistic terms, He reduced it  by three times three levels of emanations. For we know from Psalms 5,5 כי לא קל חפץ רשע אתה לא יגורך רע, “for You are not a G’d Who desires wickedness; evil cannot abide with You.” As a result of such considerations, the serpent was expelled from three regions of three encampment each. [The encampment of the Israelites in the desert consisted of three distinct areas of relative sanctity. Similarly, in the higher regions there are other such groupings of three, each representing different levels of holiness. Our author speaks more about this at the end of his commentary on Parshat Ki Tissa. Ed.]
	The expulsion of the serpent from such regions may be compared to the expulsion of the person afflicted with the dreaded צרעת, “a skin eczema due to anti-social behaviour,” from the three encampments of the Israelites in the desert. The serpent suffered expulsion from parallel regions in the celestial regions.
	You are familiar with the concept that the power of speech enables those who possess it to spread slander about its Creator. It is only logical therefore that if the punishment were to fit the crime, such creatures had to be deprived of their ability to repeat their sin. This would be accomplished by banning them from areas of sanctity. Our sages have coined the phrase that anyone who tells untruths or gives patently unsound advice, is considered as having dust in his mouth. We find that the Talmud Baba Batra 16 labeled the mouth of Job as consisting of earth as he too slandered his Creator.
	כל ימי חייך, ”all the days of your life.” The Torah tells us here that this curse would continue throughout the serpent’s lifetime. It would continue even during the messianic era when the enmity between man and beast would subside and, according to Isaiah 11,8 “an infant would play over a viper’s hole”, the serpent would still not become rehabilitated. The punishment of having to eat dust also continues beyond the messianic era as we read in Isaiah 65,25 זאב וטלה ירעו כאחד ואריה כבקר יאכל תבן ונחש עפר לחמו, “the wolf and the lamb shall graze together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; but the serpent’s food shall be earth.” This is the reason the Torah stresses here that the serpent will eat dust כל ימי חייך, “for all the days of your life.” This expression alludes to messianic times. It is similar to Deut 16,3 למען תזכור את יום צאתך ממצרים כל ימי חייך, “in order that you may remember the day that you went out of Egypt all the days of your life.” Our sages interpreted that expression as also applicable to the time of the arrival of the Messiah and beyond, by stressing that if the Torah had not included the word כל “all,” the messianic period would not have been included (Berachot 12).
	3,15. ואיבה אשית, “and I will put enmity, etc.” Actually, we do not hate the serpent more than any of the other reptiles and creepers. The verse only hints that the body [the very existence, Ed.] of the serpent was already predestined to harbour within it calamity for man, as we indicated in our commentary on the previous verse. This manifested itself when the serpent seduced Chavah and through her death was decreed on the whole species of mankind. This is the deeper reason of the ongoing enmity between human beings and the serpent. We see in the serpent the cause for our eventual death. This is also alluded to by the fact that on another occasion the Torah called the serpent שרף, a name also applicable to the angel of death who is referred to as the angel שרף, in Isaiah 6,6. Another verse where the serpent is referred to as  שרף is in Numbers 21,6 את הנחשים השרפים. The reason the snakes were called by that name was that they were direct descendants of the original serpent about which we read here.
	הוא ישופך ראש ואתה תשופנה עקב, “he will strike your head, and you will strike at the heel.” In this instance the Torah permits man to attack the animal even if it did not pose an immediate threat to him. The word עקב need not be understood literally, but is an allusion to man’s final day, his death. You are already familiar with what we learned in Baba Batra 16 that serpent-Satan and death are merely different sides of the same coin.
	3,16. הרבה ארבה עצבונך, “I will greatly increase your pain, etc.” Actually, the Torah should have written  עצבון הרונך“the pain associated with your pregnancy.” It is possible that the two words represent two different experiences. The meaning of the word עצבונך, may be the normal menstrual pains, something that women experience regardless of their being pregnant. Our sages in Niddah 40 have said that at the time of her menstrual cycle a woman’s head and limbs feel exceptionally heavy. Seeing that this is a recurring phenomenon which occurs month after month may have prompted the Torah to repeat the word הרבה ארבה, as if to say “I will make it occur many times.” On the other hand, the word הרונך, “your pregnancy,” includes the pain associated with pregnancy. The pain associated with the actual birth of children is described by the words בעצב תלדי בנים, “you will experience pain when giving birth to children.”
	ואל אישך תשוקתך, ”and your craving will be for your husband.” The unusual thing here is that normally, when someone is in a subordinate position such as a slave to a master, the slave tends to use every opportunity to flee from the master. G’d decreed here that the natural orientation of a woman would be the reverse. She would pine for her husband, seek out his presence and nearness. She would be his willing subordinate.
	והוא ימשול בך, ”and he will rule over you.” This punishment that the husband would be the dominant figure in the husband-wife relationship and that he would issue instructions to her was decreed as the fitting response to the fact that she had ordered him to eat from the fruit of the tree.
	Chavah (woman) was cursed in five different ways. 1) the pain accompanying menstruation. 2) The discomfort experienced during pregnancy. 3) The pain experienced when giving birth. 4) The feeling of being dependent on and having a craving for her husband. 5) Having to accept instructions from him. Our sages also said in Niddah 19 that there are five different kinds of blood which originate in a woman’s body which are ritually unclean. They correspond to five parts of desire which were involved in the sin of eating from the tree. They are 1) looking at the tree and its fruit with her heart; 2) the desire inspired by the eye; 3) the desire to acquire additional intelligence; 4) the actual eating of the fruit; 5) giving of the fruit to her husband. These five parts of the sin are clearly spelled out in verses six and seven. “The woman saw that the tree was good as food, and that is was desirable for the eyes (to behold); that it was designed to obtain insights. She took from its fruit and she ate; she also gave to her husband to eat with her.”
	An homiletical approach to the words הרבה ארבה is found in Bereshit Rabbah 20,13 where it is stated כל שישנו בהרבה ישנו בארבה; we may understand this as follows: “whenever an embryo spends an extended period of time within its mother’s womb it will likely become a viable baby.” The numerical value of the letters in the word הרבה add up to 212. If an embryo has been carried by the mother for no less than 212 days it may survive birth unassisted. Actually, 212 days are three days more than seven months. They are accounted for by the three days before true pregnancy commences, i.e. sometimes it takes up to three days for the male sperm to fertilise the female ovum The third day is included in the count of seven months, i.e. 210 days. The word בארבה hints at the differential between these two periods of time. The day when the ovum is fertilised is included in the calculation of the pregnancy.

	3,17. אשר צויתיך לאמר,”which I had commanded you to say, etc.” The addition of the word לאמר is a reminder to Adam that he was supposed to also have cautioned the animals against eating from that tree.

	3,19. אל עפר תשוב, “and to dust you shall return.” The deeper meaning of this verse is reflected in the words of Elihu to Job in Job 34,36 The intelligent reader will understand what I mean. [Rabbi Chavell, in his annotations, understands the whole return to dust as a preliminary for man’s total rehabilitation from sin, a popular concept in all kabbalistic literature. Ed.]
	Bereshit Rabbah 20,26  emphasises that instead of the Torah writing תבא, “you will come,” it wrote תשוב, “you will return.” This is a reference to the eventual resurrection seeing that the words עד שובך אל האדמה already mentioned the first return to dust, original death. We may also see in this wording an allusion to Avraham who had said of himself that he was עפר ואפר, “dust and ashes,” and to whom Adam bequeathed seventy years of his allocated time  on earth.

	3,20. ויקרא האדם שם אשתו חוה, “Adam called the name of his wife Chavah.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word חוה means “talking,” based on Job 15,17 אחוך שמע לי, “I will hold forth, listen to me.” This was another example of Adam displaying his great wisdom when naming creatures. He immediately realised that woman was prone to talk a lot. The fact that most women are very talkative may have been inherited from the first woman. When Adam added the words כי היא היתה אם כל חי, “for she had become the mother of all חי”, this was a reference to all living creatures equipped with the power of speech. He meant to exclude all the living creatures which did not possess intelligence
	Bereshit Rabbah 20,11 sees in the word חוה something analogous to חויא, “serpent.” Seeing she was named thus we can understand why the נחש, the male of the species copulated with her. Based on this our sages have taught s that a person’s name has far ranging influence on what happens to the bearer of that name.
	3,21. ויעש ה' אלוקים לאדם ולאשתו כתנות עור. “The Lord G’d made leather coats for man and his wife.” According to the plain meaning of the text, G’d made superior kinds of garments for them, garments which would cover their entire bodies and which would make them look distinguished. This had become necessary as their inherent dignity had turned to shame (compare Psalms 4,3  עד מה כבודי לכלמה, “how long will my honour be shamed?”) as long as only their genitals were covered by the fig leaves.
	Perhaps this leather was made from the animal called Tachash  which the Jewish people used as a covering for the Tabernacle in the desert . According to Tanchuma on Parshat Terumah 6, the Tachash had been created only for that purpose at the time. Possibly, here too, the animal out of whose hide these coats of Adam and Chavah were made had been created only for that purpose. According to Shabbat 28, the Holy Ark and other vessels of the Tabernacle were wrapped in the skin of the Tachash when they were being transported. Afterwards, these covers were hidden, never to be found again. Apparently this skin was multi-coloured. This would  help to make anyone dressed in it look very distinguished.
     Onkelos translates עור תחש as ססגונא “a multi-coloured skin.” The opinion of our sages appears to be that these garments had pictures of all the birds of the world and that Adam bequeathed them to his son Cain. When Cain was killed, they passed over to Nimrod; this is the meaning of Genesis 10,9 והוא היה גבור ציד “he was a very prodigious hunter.” At the death of Nimrod, these garments became the property of Esau. When the Torah speaks of these valuable garments which Esau entrusted to his mother (Genesis 27,15), the word חמודות, “desirable,” means that Esau (also a hunter) had long desired to obtain these garments from Nimrod.
    Now to an homiletical approach. In Bereshit Rabbah 20,29 the copy of the Torah in the possession of Rabbi Meir, had the word “OR” כתנות עור   spelled אור, “light.” The meaning of this comment is that G’d dressed Adam and Chavah in clothing consisting of different degrees of “light.” This “light” was a derivative of the  אור העליון, “light in the celestial spheres,” similar to the rays of light which Moses’ forehead emitted when he came down from Mount Sinai (Exodus 34,29). In Gan Eden such light still prevailed. The quality of the clothing given to the person so clothed relates in some degree to the quality of He who provides such clothing, in this instance G’d Himself. It was G’d’s intention for this clothing to exist indefinitely and for the wearers to be similar in stature to the angels.	
     וילבישם, “He clothed them.” It would have been more appropriate for the Torah to write כתנות עור ללבוש, ”coats of leather to serve as clothing.” This is the way Yaakov described it when he asked G’d for בגד ללבש, “clothes to wear” in Genesis 25,20. According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah simply wanted to relate the fact that they were being clothed to G’d Himself to show G’d’s loving concern and His pity for His creatures. Even though they had sinned, this did not mean that G’d no longer related to them with feelings of fondness. He, personally, engaged in the act of dressing them. We find that G’d related similarly to the Jewish people in the desert when He personally provided them with manna. G’d is on record with these words that he Himself made the manna rain down from heaven. We read in Exodus 16,4 “Here I will make manna rain down for you from the heaven.” This was in spite of the fact that the Israelites had committed a sin similar to that of Adam and Chavah He did not cease to relate to hem lovingly. He never stopped providing them with manna during all the forty years in spite of grievous sins committed at one time or another. This is what Ezra referred to when he said (Nechemiah 9,20) ומנך לא מנעת מפיהם, “and You did not withhold Your manna from their mouths.” From this we learn that legally speaking, G’d would have been entitled to deny them the manna. We find that G’d performed the miracle of splitting the sea to save the Israelites from the pursuing Egyptians even though there were idolaters among them. This is the meaning of Zechariah 10,11 ועבר בים צרה, “he crossed the sea with an idol.” (Sanhedrin 103 understands the word צרה in that verse as a reference to the idol used by the fake Levite Micah hundreds of years later). 
	All of the items mentioned reflect the love of G’d; this is the meaning of Daniel 9,7 לך ה' הצדקה ולנו בשת הפנים, “Yours, O Lord is the righteousness, and ours is the shamefacedness.
	From an homiletical  point of view, the word וילבישם refers to the priestly garments worn by the High Priest. We have the identical expression in  Leviticus 8,13  where Moses is reported as dressing the sons of Aaron in the clothing they wore when performing their priestly functions. It is a well known fact that the High Priest wore eight garments when on duty. When you count the number of words in our verse you will find that it contains eight words. You will appreciate the allusion in this. The word וילבישם is the eighth word in that verse.
	Looking at our verse from a rational-investigative point of view, this paragraph contains definite allusions to the Torah and its commandments for the sake of which man was created. There is also an allusion to body, soul, and the evil urge. We also find in this paragraph allusions to resurrection of the body and to the whole subject of reward and punishment as it applies to both body and soul. There is even an allusion to the eventual removal of the evil urge from the world. Let me now deal with these various allusions in general and you will be able to apply these rules in detail to specific situations.
	The paragraph begins with  ויקח ה' אלוקים את האדם ויניחהו בגן עדן לעבדה ולשמרה. “G’d took Adam and placed him in Gan Eden in order to work it and to preserve it.” The words גן עדן are an allusion to the Torah. Just as the garden had its origin in Eden, so the Torah has is origin in the regions of celestial wisdom which is called Eden. The principal reason man was created was in order to preoccupy himself with Torah, i.e. to study it and to observe it. It follows that the two trees in the centre of the garden, the tree of life and the tree of knowledge, refer to the positive and the negative commandments which are rooted in the Torah. The word האדם is an allusion to intellect an abstract part of man. G’d did not consider it good for this intellect to be alone as it needed an instrument by means of which its achievements could become manifest and which would be his assistant when performing the commandments of the Torah. This instrument would be matter rather than something abstract like the intellect. Seeing that man had been created as a combination of body and spirit it needed a partner in order to ensure the continuity of the species by means of offspring. This is similar to the body being a partner to the intellect in matters pertaining to intellectual pursuits. The helpmate in question was woman. The very name of woman contains an allusion to גוף, body. Solomon compared matter to woman when he said in Proverbs 2,16 להצילך מאשה זרה, “to save you from the alien woman.” He meant that matter by definition is not part of the intellect, but it is necessary in order to become the receptacle of the intellect’s activity. Woman is such an instrument. Matter reflects the form and accepts the shapes the intellect dictates to it. The serpent i.e. נחש, represents an allusion to the evil urge, as we find the word מ-נחש which expresses an attempt to seduce and to put man to a test. The serpent began the dialogue with the woman, i.e. it addressed itself to חומר, matter. It began with the word אף, anger, seeing that anger and wrath are derivatives of the power of Satan.
	Now to explain what it was exactly that the serpent was saying: :אף כי אמר אלוקים לא תאכלו מכל עץ הגן, “if G’d has said that you must not eat from any of the trees of the garden, this is equivalent to denying you any physical gratification at all. You would not benefit from all the good things to be found in the world. How could G’d have commanded something like this?” This was typical of the tactics of seduction employed by the evil urge, by Satan. The reason that he serpent spoke with woman and not with man is simply that the evil urge always addresses the physical side of man, i.e. the חומר, the material. It never tries to match wits with the power of the שכל, man’s reason.
	Woman said to the serpent: “we may eat from the fruit of the trees of the garden.” This was the reply of the material side of man to its potential seducer; in other words: “we have not been denied gratification of the body by means of the senses when this gratification serves the purpose of maintaining our health by eating and drinking.” She continued: “however, G’d warned us concerning some specific gratification which we are to indulge in only in order to assure the continuity of the species. If we were to transgress that commandment both our body and our soul would die.” Thereupon the serpent said to the woman in the classic words of the evil urge which appeals to the physical part of man :לא מות תמותון, “you will surely not die on account of indulging in a physical pleasure as the body cannot exist without such pleasures. G’d knows full well that on the day you eat from this tree your eyes will be opened;” the serpent meant that every time Chavah would indulge in physical pleasures she would grow in intellectual power also and she would experience free choice between good and evil.
	At this stage, the serpent became even more seductive and said: ”try  only a single time to enjoy the fruit of this tree and you will immediately experience its beneficial effects for your eyes will be opened to new vistas. As soon as you will be able to distinguish between good and evil you will turn away from everything which you have recognised as evil and will pursue only what is good.”  What the serpent was hoping for, of course, was that once man would know to separate good from evil, he would also choose evil on occasion. When the Torah continues ותרא האשה וג', ”the woman saw, etc., ”this does not refer to “seeing with the eyes,” but to “seeing with the heart.” Woman, who was predominantly חומר, matter, naturally “viewed” matters from a physical, material perspective following the inclines of her heart. As a result she concluded that the tree was good as food, i.e. that it was worth while to preoccupy oneself with the pursuit of physical gratifications. The word מאכל, “food,” in the verse includes gratification of the body through the act of mating. When Solomon describes the temptress in Proverbs 30,20 he writes אכלה ומחתה פיה, “she ate and wiped her mouth, saying: I have done no wrong.” This verse is merely a euphemism for sexual intercourse. The meaning of the words וכי תאוה הוא לעינים, “and it is a source of desire for the eyes,” means that heart and eyes always collaborate before a sin is committed. The eyes are “the brokers” of sin. This is why the Torah warned in Numbers 15,39 ולא תתורו אחרי לבבכם ואחרי עיניכם, “and do not explore after your hearts and after your eyes after which you stray.”
	ותקח מפריו ותאכל, “she took from its fruit and ate.” This means that woman, i.e. חומר, engrossed herself in physical pleasures until she obtained the new insight and then she gave to her husband. The meaning of the words: “she also gave her husband with her and he ate,” is that just as the serpent had seduced woman it had also seduced man. According to the plain meaning of the text it was Chavah who seduced Adam. After all, we are not allowed to use homiletical material to change the plain meaning of the text, אין מקרא יוצא מידי פשוטו (Shabbat 63). Nonetheless, what the Torah describes here is not only what happened between Adam and Chavah but it describes a blueprint of any future seduction instigated by the evil urge. The first stage of such seduction involves an appeal to the physical part of man to enjoy the pleasures offered by the physical universe. Once the physical part of man has been won over, it will then entice the intellectual part of man to rationalise what the seducer has said. 
	ותפקחנה עיני שניהם, “The eyes of both of them were opened, etc.” The Torah simply describes a customary process, involving the intellectual faculties of man, i.e. that after body and soul have sinned they become aware of the wrong they have done, that because of the wrong they have done they have lost stature. They realise that they have allowed their cravings to dominate them. This is the process described here as “their eyes were opened.” This “opening” does not refer to their gaining of additional insights. On the contrary, they now became aware of a failing. When their eyes were “opened,” they realised that they had actually lost something, that instead of achieving something new they had lost something they had previously possessed. They realised how fortunate they had been when they were not enslaved by various physical desires, whereas now they had to struggle to become free of these cravings which had become as indispensable for them as clothing. This  is the deeper meaning of the word וידעו, they were drawing on the powers of the עץ הדעת, “the tree which communicated this intimacy with good and evil.” A wealthy man usually does not appreciate all the advantages he enjoys but he takes them for granted. It is only when he is deprived of them that he realises in retrospect how fortunate he had been while he possessed what is now lost to him. This is precisely what happened to Adam and Chavah. Their “eyes were opened,” they now appreciated what great stature they had possessed prior to their sin.
	כי ערומים הם, “that they were naked.” The very power of desire which now “clothed them,” made them condemn a certain state which previously they had not seen fit to condemn. As a result of their sin both their bodies as well as their intellects felt exposed, bereft of the protective cover provided by knowledge that one has lived meritoriously.
	At that point they understood that G’d’s warnings had been justified and they felt ashamed for having transgressed it. Their feelings of shame were like those of a thief who has been found out (compare Jeremiah 2,26).Their feeling of shame and embarrassment included the fact that they had not observed the prohibition of the Torah’s commandments, seeing the Torah was comparable to a garden. This is the meaning of “they heard the sound of the Lord G’d moving about in garden in the breeze of the day; and man and his wife hid himself  on account of the Lord G’d.”
	The word האדם here refers to man’s intellectual powers. The “sound of the voice of the Lord G’d” which the Torah mentions here is a reference to the heavenly tribunal to which all creatures will have to answer after death when they are ordered to appear before the King of Kings. This is the meaning of G’d asking in this verse איכה, “where are you?” G’d referred to the moral level which man had sunk to. In the future, when examining man after his death on earth, He will want to know to what level of Torah study and observance man had risen to during his life on earth. The additional letter ה at the end of the word איכה, is an allusion to the five Books of Moses. We find a similar construction in Psalms 139,8 ואציעה שאול הנך, “and when I descend to Sheol You are there too. The extra letter ה at the end of the word ואציע is a hint that man will be examined for how he related to the five Books of Moses.
	When the Torah reports Adam (man) responding  את קולך שמעתי  בגן, “I have heard the sound of Your voice in the garden,” this was a response by man’s intellectual faculties and is to be understood as if he said “I have understood Your intention when You called out my name and I have heard the warnings which are written in the Torah.” The word ואירא, “I was afraid,” refers to the fear of the Day of Judgment. When Adam added כי עירום אנכי, “for I am naked,” this was an admission that he felt inadequate, had not fulfilled the Torah’s commandments. He had neither Torah study nor Torah-observance which he could cite in defense of his actions. This is the deeper meaning of why he said אנכי  instead of אני. [The word is a reference to the first word in the Ten Commandments.] When he added ואחבא, “I hid myself,” it means “I was ashamed.” It is natural for a person who is ashamed of something to hide from the one he is ashamed of.
	מי הגיד לך, “who has told you?” G’d wanted to know who was the cause that he felt exposed, bereft of merits. 
	המן העץ אשר ציויתיך, “did you by chance from the tree which I commanded you, etc.? “Did you violate My command- ment and did what I prohibited you to do?” Adam answered: “the woman that You have given me, etc.” Adam’s intellectual faculties responded to the question saying: “indeed I did violate Your commandment. As to he reason? It was the woman You gave me, i.e. the חמר, the material part of me which violated Your commandment.” She was supposed to be my helpmate and instead Your intention was foiled. She (the חומר, the material part), is the cause that I have experienced this terrible pain.” The reason the Torah added the letter ה at the end of the word נתתה, “You have given,” is an allusion to the five senses which comprise the perceptive powers of the physical part of man, the חומר. In other words, Adam (man) blamed the addition of powerful physical material for his failure. He (his wife, also part of “man,”) added further that the serpent had seduced him (her, respectively). This simply meant that Adam and Chavah blamed the seductive powers of Satan for having been seduced. Their argument was that חומר, physical material, without the addition of the seductive powers of Satan would not be something harmful at all.
	Thereupon G’d first of all cursed the serpent, read “evil urge,” condemning it to henceforth crawl on its belly; this was a tremendous demotion as up until then the serpent (read Satan) had conducted itself like a king, and even Solomon referred to him a מלך גדול in Kohelet 9,14. It is a mark of a king that he walks upright holding his head erect. The serpent now lost this ability. This brought in its wake a greatly reduced ability of the serpent (read evil urge) to seduce man as it could no longer give itself airs fooling man about its true nature.
	ועפר תאכל כל ימי חייך, “and you shall eat dust as long as you live.” The period of which the Torah speaks is the period of the resurrection when the serpent will no longer be allowed to feed on other creatures as it does nowadays. It was sort of a challenge. We had explained that “to eat means to destroy.” G’d told the serpent, the seducer, Satan, that in the days of the resurrection it would have to restrict its activities to he dust, if indeed it were able to seduce dust to sin. It would no longer be allowed to seduce living creatures.
	ואיבה אשית, “and I will put enmity, etc.” When you hate someone you keep your distance from that person. The purpose of G’d making enmity between man and Satan (serpent) a natural state of affairs was to ensure that they would keep apart as much as possible. This state of affairs would not be achieved until the days of the resurrection The message is that at that time even the חומר, the material side of man, would be totally pure, not accompanied by any input from Satan. This idyllic state of affairs has been forecast in Kings I 5,18  when Solomon sent a message to Chirom in which he said  (amongst other things) ועתה הניח ה' אלוקי לי מסביב, אין שטן ואין פגע רע, “But now the Lord my G’d has given me respite all around; there is no adversary and no one to cause harm.” Our verse is an allusion to the distant future forecasting the destruction of the power of the seducer, the evil urge. Another scriptural reference to that distant future is found in Isaiah 25,8 בלע המות לנצח, “He will destroy death forever.”
	Next G’d punished the חומר, the representative of everything material, in this instance Chavah He said הרבה ארבה עצבונך וגו' “I will greatly increase your pain, etc.” This means that “because you were not careful to resist the seduction of the evil urge I will punish you. Just as you had had indulged in bodily pleasures and increased your enjoyment of vain values, now you will experience pain even when engaged in fruitful activities such as having children.” This is the reason the words הרבה ארבה appear twice. Again we see the punishment fitting the sin, i.e. you indulged in too much pleasure only in order to suffer too much discomfort.
	ולאדם אמר כי שמעת לקול אשתך, “and to Adam He had said: “because you listened to the voice of your wife, etc.” G’d meant: “you are being punished because you preferred to heed the call of the physical part of man over My commandment.”
	ארורה האדמה בעבורך, “the earth has now been cursed for your sake.” This was an additional form of cursing the חומר, physical matter, which reflects the productivity of man’s intelligence. This חומר is now being called אדמה, “earth,” G’d added: בעצבון תאכל לחם, “through pain or suffering will you eat bread.” Adam’s punishment was that his intellectual prowess could no longer make the חומר, the physical matter, do its bidding without his encountering opposition. even in the days of resurrection. This was indeed a very harsh curse, and we have already been told in Daniel 12,2 that even during the days of the resurrection not all people will enjoy the same privileges. Some will be resurrected in order to lead a life of infinite duration, whereas others will be resurrected in order to face everlasting shame and abhorrence. This is the meaning of the words: ורבים מישיני אדמת-עפר יקיצו, אלה לחיי עולם ואלה לחרפות ודראון עולם.
	When G’d added כי עפר אתה ואל עפר תשוב, this was an explanation to Adam that seeing he had allowed the physical part of himself to dominate him it was natural that in the end his intellectual part would share the fate of his חומר and he would die and disintegrate.
	As far as the concluding words of the entire episode i.e. כתנות עור וילבישם are concerned, they are needed seeing that the Torah had spoken about the future generations during the resurrection who would enjoy infinite life. [Seeing that this generation, i.e. Adam and Chavah, had now forfeited their right to infinite life on earth, these words were reassurance for that future time. Adam and Chavah had repented, hence G’d related to them  accordingly. Ed.] 
	It pays to look closely at the verses in which G’d’s punishment for Adam and Chavah are described. Whereas G’d’s name is mentioned in connection with the curse of the serpent, the Torah refrains from mentioning G’d’s name in verses 15-19 when the punishment meted out to Adam and Chavah is described. G’d is referred to repeatedly only in the third person as “He.” This teaches that G’d makes every effort to prove that evil never originates with Him. Hence He is careful to dissociate His name from it. By contrast, when it came to describing infinite life in the future as symbolised by the last verse in the paragraph, the Torah makes a point of attributing theseכתנות עור  to ה' אלוקים, to G’d personally, directly. This whole verse, although phrased in the past tense, actually is a reference to the future as we find in connection with many prophecies.
	[According to Nachmanides, the reason for this is to lend emphasis to the prophecy, to assure the reader it is so certain to come true that it may be described as if it had happened already.]
	I believe that the appropriate translation of the word ויעש in the verse ויעש ה' אלוקים לאדם ולאשתו כתנות עור וילבישם, is: “He made something entirely new; He created a new concept.” The words אדם and אשתו are not to be understood literally but refer to the שכל and to the נפש respectively. It is quite possible to think of man and woman in terms of שכל, and נפש respectively, the former the innovative enterprising active force symbolising the male, whereas נפש is a more passive responsive spiritual force and therefore symbolises woman. The נפש accompanies the שכל just like a woman accompanies the male. My revered teacher Rabbi  Shlomoh Aderet may his light continue to shine, has similarly explained  the matter of Leviathan and its mate, i.e. that these terms are similes for the concepts of שכל and נפש.
	The verse introduces a vision of a future life on earth after the resurrection. G’d goes on record that when that time arrives He will make a new creation for שכל and נפש. This will be known as כתנות עור, i.e. as “bodies,” The word וילבישם “He dressed them,” means that at that time G’d will provide a body for שכל ונפש who are the first part, the intangible part, in man’s resurrection. We find a parallel concept in Job 10,11 עור ובשר תלבישני, “You will clothe me with skin and flesh.” In our verse too, G’d envisages a future when שכל ונפש will be clothed with a body, as a result of which he will become a new kind of human being. Isaiah 15,22 speaks about a “new earth” in those days. I have found support for my view in Tanchuma on Parshat Lech Lecha where G’d’s promise in Genesis 12,2 ואעשך אותך לגוי גדול, “I will make you into a great nation,” is interpreted as G’d saying to Avraham: “I am going to create for you a new creature.” The word ויעש as describing a new creation has been used already at the very beginning of Genesis (1,7) when the Torah describes the creation of the heavens in these words: ויעש אלוקים את הרקיע, “G’d created the heaven.”
	A further meaning of the words כתנות עור, “leather coats”, is the exchangeability of the letters ע and א. When we mentioned earlier that the text of Rabbi Meir’s Torah scroll had the word עור spelled with the letter א, the allusion contained in that statement was that אור , “light,” may be a fitting substitute for עור, “skin” as a garment. In the future G’d would clothe שכל ונפש, intelligence and the emotional part of man soul, in a variety of rays of light all derived from the celestial regions. In connection with Moses’ skin radiating light from the celestial regions, our sages interpret the word אהל in Exodus 33,7 ומשה יקח את האהל, “and Moses would take the Tent , etc.” as being analogous to Job 29,3  בהלו נרו עלי ראשי, “when His lamp shone over my head.” This corresponds to my first explanation of the words האדם ואשתו, that the entire paragraph is full of allusions to  נפש and גוף, “body and soul,” respectively. This is why the Torah did not write simply ויעש...כתנות עור ללבוש, “He made...leather coats to wear,” but it wrote ויעש...כתנות עור וילבישם. Only G’d Himself is able to bring about this combination of body-soul-intellect as proven by the words “He clothed them.”

	3,22. הן אדם היה כאחד ממנו, “now that man has become like one of us; etc.” according to the plain meaning of the text the word  ממנו, “of Us,” is a reference to the angels. However, if that were the only true explanation the Torah should have written “like one of you.” However, due to G’d’s humility, He wrote “like one of Us.” The real intention of the verse is to say that originally, היה, “he had been,” like one of Us due to his superior intellect and due to this intellect not being hindered by the evil urge. Now, that he had sinned and become possessed of the desires of the flesh, however, he was no longer like “one of Us.” 
	ועתה פן ישלח ידו, “and now lest he put forth his hand, etc.” G’d meant that now that He had decreed for man to be mortal there was concern that he would try and neutralise this by eating from the tree of life and assure himself of living forever.
	From an homiletical approach the words הן האדם היה mean “he was like a twenty year old;” [we have a tradition that although man becomes accountable to a human tribunal already at thirteen years of age, he does not become accountable (is not considered mature) to a celestial court until he has attained the age of twenty]. This is the reason that of the generation of Israelites in the desert who had sinned by accepting the majority report of the spies only people over the age of twenty were condemned to die in the desert (Numbers 14,29). Adam’s case was different. Although he had been less than a day old when he ate from the tree of knowledge G’d had punished him as if he were already twenty years old. The Torah therefore tells us here that he had been created with the maturity of a twenty-year old so that he qualified for punishment immediately. Incidentally, the very word היה has a numerical value of 20 so that we have an allusion in the text that Adam was considered at creation as if he were fully mature, the equivalent of a human born by woman after 20 years.
	According to the views of Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Shimon in Bereshit Rabbah 21,5 the words כאחד ממנו, “like one of Us” mean “like the Unique One in the world.” The word אחד in Deut 6,4 שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד, means “the One, the Unique One.” The other Rabbis quoted in that Midrash believed that the word אחד in our verse refers to the archangel Gavriel seeing we have a verse in Ezekiel 9,2 where that angel is referred to as אחד. The full text there is ואיש אחד בתוכם לבוש בדים וקסת הספר במתניו, “and one man amongst them clothed in linen with a slate of the scribe at his hips, etc.” According to Shabbat 55 the man referred to in that verse is the archangel Gavriel. This is based on the emphasis of the verse in Ezekiel on that angel’s “clothing.” Bereshit Rabbah  21,8 understands this as something which is integral to that angel, not something peripheral such as when we describe a human being’s clothing. It is similar to a certain insect called קמצא, snail, whose clothing is an integral part of it. Similarly, Adam’s original clothing (the divine rays of light) were an integral part of him.
	It is well known that the meaning of the word אחד when spelled with the vowel segol is different from the same word when spelled with the vowel patach. The former is intransitive whereas the latter is transitive, i.e. it is always a genitive, a possessive form. An example of the latter is found in Daniel 10,13 אחד השרים הראשונים, “one of the foremost princes.” Daniel describes the angel Michael as one belonging to the hierarchy of the other angels. We have a similar verse in Genesis 32,23 where the Torah speaks about Yaakov taking his  eleven children across the river Yabok. The wording is אחד עשר ילדיו. There are many other examples of the word when spelled with the vowel patach meaning that the “one-ness” of the word אחד is really only relative. In the verse in Ezekiel where the word אחד appears with the vowel segol, however, Rabbi Yehudah views this as justification to compare the angel Gavriel in some respects to the “Unique One of the world,” i.e. G’d. Rabbi Yehudah was of course aware that the Torah scrolls from which we read do not distinguish in the spelling of the word Echad and the word Achad, seeing that there are no vowels shown in the text. It is therefore possible to read our verse as “here man has become like echad of Us,” i.e. “like the Unique One amongst us,” instead of as achad of Us.” The other sages who understand the word “of us,” as referring to the angel Gavriel simply base themselves on the fact that the traditional reading of the verse has the word אחד read as achad, and not as echad. There could not therefore be an allusion here to G’d the Unique One. This still requires that these sages deal with the vocalisation of the verse in Ezekiel where even the angel Gavriel seems to be accorded a status of being “unique,” seeing the word אחד there is vocalised with the vowel segol. We must conclude that they saw in this wording only something metaphorical. They understood the word as symbolising the clothing of the snail we mentioned previously. Just as that clothing is integral to the creature, so, even though the angel Gavriel represents the punishing agency of G’d both when he went to destroy Sodom, as well as in the story in Ezekiel, he has attached to him least a smattering of the attribute of Mercy. This attribute is alluded to by mention of the white linen he is garbed in. The important lesson in all this is that the attribute of Justice even when predominant is always tempered by the attribute of Mercy.
	A kabbalistic approach to our verse: The word  היה in הן היה האדם is similar to the wordsהיה  ומשה in Exodus 3,1, or to איש היה at the the beginning of the Book of Job. In both those instances the word היה (as distinct from ויהי) indicates that what is being reported here is not something original, something the like of which had never existed before. This is the reason that the birth of Chavah’s children is reported as the result of והאדם ידע את חוה, “Man had been intimate with Chavah.” This intimacy had occurred previous to the children being born, or better, he had already known how the mechanism of procreation works and had acted accordingly. When Rabbi Yehudah had interpreted the כאחד ממנו as if the word אחד had been vocalised with the vowel segol, he may have seen in the verse an allusion to the קו האמצעי the emanation which combines the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy. This is something unique to G’d, the יחידו של העולם. This may also be the hidden meaning of Song of Songs 3,10 עמודיו עשה כסף, רפידתו זהב מרכבו ארגמן.“ Solomon meant to describe a variety of light (colours). This is also an allusion to the various components which make up a human being, i.e. the יצר הטוב and the יצר הרע, the spiritually positive urge and the spiritually negative urge. Our sages described this by another metaphor when they said in Shabbat 119 that when man returns from the synagogue on Friday night he is accompanied by a “good” angel and by a “bad” angel. The former is on his right side, the latter on his left.
	3,24. את הכרובים ואת להט החרב המתהפכת ’”the cherubs and the flashing blade of the sword.” After G’d had expelled man from Gan Eden He placed the “cherubs,” i.e. angels (according to Rashi based on Shemot Rabbah 9,10) in the direction of the tree of life. In this verse the fear of the Lord is expressed by the metaphor להט החרב המתהפכת. The purpose of this was to create a barrier between the tree of life and man. It is noteworthy that the Torah wrote ואת להט החרב instead of simply ואת החרב המתהפכת. It is a well known fact that להט is something intangible, but it is an attribute of חרב, “sword” something very tangible indeed. The combination of the two is something which inspires great fear. Everyone who looks at that spectacle is reminded forcefully of death when he beholds this spectacle. G’d’s intention was to create an atmosphere which would discourage  the pursuit of the tree of life and the attainment by man of an infinite life span on earth. G’d did not want His decree that man would be rehabilitated only through the death of his body to become null and void.
	Another way of understanding the word הכרובים is that it symbolises the seven angels who preside over the various compartments of Gehinom, hades. The word כרובים is in the plural and the minimal plural is two. The extra letter ה in front equals 5 so that 2+5=7. Based on such an approach, the entire verse may be explained as follows: “The angels who have been placed in charge of Gehinom, the fiery regions where the wicked keep turning themselves over like meat on a spit, i.e. המתהפכת.” Our sages have explained this in similar terms  i.e. that the word להט is another word for Gehinom, the place where justice is meted out to man after death. The word appears in that sense in Maleachi 3,19. We have a tradition that both the angels and Gehinom were created on the second day. On the other hand, the Gan Eden on earth was created on the third day. Although man has been created later, he possesses the potential to defeat  the forces that were created on the second day through his observance of the Torah’s commandments. When that is the case, there is no barrier between man and the tree of life. On the contrary, then he may approach the tree of life and live forever (compare verse 22)
	We also learn from this verse, especially the words, את הכרובים, that these angels are the ones we refer to in our prayers as חיות הקדש. These names of the angels are mentioned in Ezekiel 10,20 היא החיה אשר ראיתי....ואדע כי כרובים המה. “This is the Chayah which I have seen,...and I realised that they are the cherubs.” It is a fact familiar to kabbalists that every Chayah has 16 facets,  four in each direction of globe, as it is written in Ezekiel 1,6 וארבעה פנים לאחת, “one of them had four faces (facets). Seeing the word פנים consists of the singular פן, the rest is merely a plural ending. Hence four times פן in four directions each time totals 16. These cherubs are something intangible which flashes from the sword which seems in constant motion, turning over and over. This is what is meant by the words ואת להט החרב המתהפכת i.e. G’d’s angel Chayah, the one with 16 facets. This angel symbolises His attribute of Justice. You must understand how it is possible that this angel is called להט, suggesting it is a great power, whereas according to our verse here this להט appears as something subordinate, an adjective, something “carried” by the sword. This is always the case with the angels called חיות הקדש. Although they appear to be carriers of the glory of G’d, the fact is that the glory of G’d carries them.
	You have also learned already that the four letters of the Ineffable name of G’d which represent the pinnacle of all intelligence are alluded to here, i.e. the highest of the ten emanations is represented by the letter י at the beginning of G’d’s name and the remaining letters ה-ו-ה correspond in their numerical value (16) to the 16 facets of the חיות הקדש that we have discussed. The Torah which is called עץ החיים, “the tree of life,” has been given to us by means of 16 covenants, 13 of them are mentioned in connection with the ritual of circumcision, whereas the word ברית, covenant, appears three more times in connection
with the Torah’s report of the revelation at Mount Sinai where we received the Torah.

	4,1. והאדם ידע את חוה אשתו, “and man had been intimate with his wife Chavah, etc.” After Adam had realised that he had been expelled from Gan Eden, that death had been decreed for him, and that he would not live indefinitely, it became necessary for him to have sexual relations with his wife in order to assure himself of children for posterity. You should remember that the Torah usually calls the act of marital union ידיעה, “(carnal) knowledge.” The reason for this is that the seminal fluid of man originates in the brain, the seat of his wisdom and knowledge. In addition to this, the desire to engage in sexual intercourse was the result of man having eaten from the tree of “knowledge.” Hence the use of the word ידיעה, “knowledge,” to describe such relations is most appropriate.
    
    4,2. וקין היה “and Kayin had become, etc.” We would really have expected the Torah to write ויהי קין עובד אדמה, similar to the Torah’s describing Hevel’s vocation as ויהי הבל רעה צאן, “Hevel became a shepherd of sheep.” The reason the Torah changed its style in describing the respective vocations of the two brothers was that there was a cardinal difference between the vocation of the one and the vocation of the other. Hevel was a righteous person whereas his brother Kayin was a wicked person. The whole episode teaches that good and evil have the same root. The root by itself is totally good; after all when Adam was created he was totally good. Nonetheless we observe that from such a good “root,” two sons with totally different personalities emerged.  Seeing that both wicked people and good people developed out of the same root is proof that there was only One Creator, that evil and good are not separate domains, that there are no two competing deities in this world, one promoting the source of all that is good and promoting it, and one which is the root of all that is bad and promoting same. In fact, if you look at Isaiah 45,7 עושה שלום ובורא רע, אני ה' עושה כל אלה, “Maker of peace, Creator of evil, I the Lord am doing all this,” G’d realised that unless He, personally, took responsibility for being the originator of anything good and evil, people would believe that there must be two totally separate domains, two totally diverse prime causes. An additional reason why the Torah had to write  וקין היה עבד אדמה is because the potential of a personality such Kayin had preceded his birth; he had not invented it. [Rabbi Chavell quotes an interesting numerical value of the combined words עבד היה is the same (96) as that of the planet מאדים, Mars, which stands for bloodshed, for war. This would be an additional reason for the Torah having written קין היה, instead of ויהי קין וגו'..]
    
    4,3. מפרי האדמה, “from the fruit of the earth.” He should have brought of the first ripe fruit of the trees (of one or all of the seven species for which the land of Israel is famous instead of fruit grown in the earth). The Torah reveals Kayin’s avarice, his stinginess. This is why the Torah refrains from mentioning that the fruit he brought were from the first ripe fruit of the earth. The manner in which the Torah describes his offering is meant to convey that he selected the poorest type of produce, flax, rather than the best. Our sages in Tanchuma claim that he brought flax-seed. They derive this from the text seeing that the Torah mentions Kayin’s offering only briefly while devoting more space to describing the offering of Hevel. The Torah also stresses that Hevel brought from the firstlings of his sheep and their most perfect ones. Hevel brought firstlings from a category of product which was fit to serve as an offering for G’d. Kayin, on the other hand, offered produce which is not even fit to serve as an offering. Moreover, even the fruit which he did bring were the poorest quality of that category he could find. Bereshit Rabbah 22,8 compares Kayin to a bad land tenant who consumes the best produce of the owner’s land himself, giving the owner only the inferior part.
   מנחה לה'., “as a gift for G’d.” This offering was presented on the fiftieth day after the world had been created. Both Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Eliezer who had disagreed as to the date on which the world was created, agree on this. They agree that Hevel lived for no more than fifty days. Seeing these two scholars agree on the number fifty on which the first “gift-offering” was presented to G’d, we can understand why the Torah legislated that the Jewish people offer a similar public gift offering on the fiftieth day after the Passover and why it is called מנחה חדשה “a new gift-offering.” We are to commemorate the date on which Kayin and Hevel offered a gift to G’d. This offering which we offer on Shavuot is like an acknowledgment of the truth of the Torah’s report of what happened to early man. G’d’s prediction and promise to Kayin that he (or any human being) could regain good standing in the eyes of G’d if they complied with G’d’s rules for proper conduct was borne out by the history of the Jewish people. The entire episode teaches that G’d directs and supervises the world and that there is a system of reward and punishment. The Jewish people received the Torah on the fiftieth day after the Exodus at which time they became G’d’s most favoured nation. Kayin, who murdered  on the fiftieth day was cursed whereas Hevel received his reward for good conduct in that his soul was reincarnated in Moses’ body and he was even instrumental in bringing the Torah to the Jewish people. In due course, the power of the evil urge will be broken on the fiftieth day (in terms of G’d’s calendar, after 7 times 7.000 years in terms of our years.) [The author elaborates on this in his commentary on Parshat Behaalotcha and in his commentary on Parshat Behar.]  Everything G’d does is based on the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, that “the punishment (or the reward) is appropriate to the nature of the sin.” Everything G’d does is based on justice as we also know from Proverbs 16,11 פלס ומאזני משפט לה', “Honest scales and weights are the Lord’s.” This is also the reason that the Torah prohibits the presence of leavened dough as part of the gift-offering as leavening is an allusion to the evil urge. Leviticus 6,10 states specifically that gift-offerings must not be baked in such a manner that their dough has time to rise. The only time the Torah specifically commands such a gift-offering to consist of dough which has been leavened, has been allowed to rise is in Leviticus 23,17 where this offering of the שני הלחם “the two breads” of the Shavuot festival is legislated. The reason is that this offering looks forward to the יובל הגדול, “the great Jubilee year,” when the evil urge will no longer be part of this universe.
    
    4,4. וישע ה', “G’d turned, etc.” He turned His personal attention to Hevel and His sacrifice with the result that heavenly fire descended and consumed it. This reminds us of Psalms 20, 4 יזכור ה' כל מנחותיך ועולתך ידשנה סלה, “May the Lord receive the tokens of all your meal-offerings, and approve of your burnt- offerings, Selah.” He did no such thing for Kayin’s offering.
    
    4,5. ויחר לקין מאד ויפלו פניו, “This annoyed Kayin very much and his face fell.” Kayin and Hevel were both familiar with the mysticism underlying the ritual of offerings to G’d. They both offered their respective sacrifices in honour of the Lord G’d and Him only. Up until this point in the Book of Genesis we have only encountered two names for G’d; either He was called אלוקים, or ה' אלוקים. Now, in connection with the offering, we encounter the Ineffable four-lettered Name by itself for the first time. The Torah refers to the destination of the offering as מנחה לה'. When each the brothers had offered his respective sacrifice, it turned out that Hevel’s offering  had been accepted by G’d whereas Kayin’s offering had not. At that point, Kayin began to develop doubts about the whole system of reward and punishment. This is why G’d saw fit to explain the system to him, i.e. that the entire universe is run and judged by this system of reward and punishment. This is why G’d saw fit to explain the system to Kayin by addressing him personally as we see in the next verse.
    
    4,7.הלא אם תיטיב (מעשיך) שאת, “surely if you improve (your deeds) you will be forgiven.” The word שאת is similar in meaning to Numbers 6,26 ישא ה' פניך, “may the Lord lift His countenance toward you.” G’d chose this expression as it is the reverse of ויפלו פניו, “his face fell.”  
   ואם לא תיטיב, “but if you fail to improve (your deeds) you will find the sin at the very entrance of your grave.” G’d told Kayin that though in this life punishment may not be immediate, as you as you die you will be punished for the sins you committed and have not been punished for while on earth. This punishment will take place in the world of the souls.
    An alternative meaning of the words לפתח חטאת רובץ, may be that it is an allusion to the physical pain inflicted upon sinners even while they are in their grave. The words ואליך תשוקתו mean that you will have a natural disposition for listening to the evil urge; however, ואתה תמשל בו, “you are able to rule over it, control it.” If you want to listen to the voice of the יצר הטוב, “the urge to be good and to do good,” G’d promises that you will be able to counter the influence of the evil urge. This is what Solomon said in Kohelet 9,15: ומלט הוא את העיר בחכמתו, “and he saved the city through his wisdom.” He also said two verses previously that עיר קטנה ואנשים בה מעט ובא אליה מלך גדול וסבב אותה ובנה עליה מצודים גדולים ומצא בה איש מסכן חכם ומלט את העיר בחכמתו. “There was a small town with only a few inhabitants, and a mighty king came and surrounded it, and built great fortifications against it. Within that town there was a poor wise man who by his wisdom saved the town.” Solomon describes man‘s body as “a small town,” seeing man is perceived as a microcosm. The “few inhabitants” are a metaphor for the various cravings of man, both of his body and his animalistic life-force, נפש. The reason Solomon refers to these cravings as מעט,” is because though man has many cravings only a few of them will be satisfied. The “mighty king” is a reference to the evil urge who has at his command many assistants, i.e. the many and variegated cravings of man. These cravings are for the evil urge what an army with many troops is for a king. The words: “he surrounded it,” are a metaphor describing how the evil urge surrounds the entire body invading even our thought processes. The great fortifications are the wicked deeds already performed by man. The “poor wise man” is a simile for the יצר הטוב, the urge to be good, the שכל, intelligence; seeing that this urge has relatively few “assistants.” he is described as מסכן. He is generally very unpopular as we know from Proverbs 19,7 כל אחי רש שנאהו, “all the brothers of a poor man hate him.” This is why Solomon continues in Kohelet 9,16 ואדם לא זכר את האיש המסכן ההוא; “and no one remembers that poor man.” Solomon is also on record as saying there וחכמת המסכן בזויה ודבריו אינם נשמעים, ”the wisdom of the poor man is despised and no one listens to what he has to say.” When Solomon said that nonetheless this poor man saved the town by means of his wisdom, this is because a little truth sometimes goes a long way and is able to outweigh the efforts of the many wicked all of whose efforts are devoted to perverting the truth and to make the lies appear as if they were the truth. The matter is similar to a little light driving out darkness from a vast area which had previously been totally dark.
    I believe that Kayin’s sin was threefold. 1) He did not believe G’d when He told him in a prophetic vision that the system of reward and punishment was indeed applied truthfully throughout the universe. This is why the Torah continues  ויאמר קין אל הבל אחיו, “Kayin said to Hevel his brother.“ The Torah did not spell out what Kayin told his brother. According to the Targum Yerushalmi  on this verse he told him that he did not believe in the system of reward and punishment and that there was no judgment in the hereafter The second sin Kayin committed was that he slew his brother as reported in the Torah ויקם קין אל הבל אחיו ויהרגהו, “Kayin arose against his brother Hevel and killed him (4,8)”. Kayin’s third sin was when he responded to G’d’s question “where is your brother Hevel?” by saying: “I do not know; am I my brother’s keeper?” He spoke as if it were possible to fool G’d. Because of these three sins Kayin was cursed with three curses.
   ארור אתה אשר פצתה את פיה, ”you are cursed more than the ground which opened its mouth, etc.” The meaning may be “you are cursed (separated ) from the ground (which was your source of sustenance (which has opened its mouth, etc. From now on the earth would not yield its produce to you voluntarily. The second curse was that even if Kayin would labour mightily to make the earth yield its produce the way it had done previously. This is why the Torah said in verse 12: “when you will work the ground it shall no longer yield its strength to you.” The third curse was נע ונד תהיה בארץ, “you shall become a vagrant and a wanderer on earth.” He would suffer exile, be banished from place to place. His punishment was not dissimilar to that of a murderer who had not even killed intentionally but has to move to a city of refuge until the death of the High Priest.
    Looking at our verses from a rational-investigative point of view, we note that even in the names of  קין והבל we already find allusions to the subject of existence and destruction (loss), respectively. They were brothers, closely related. The name קין hints at worldly possessions, whereas the name הבל suggests somebody who is extremely humble, almost despising worldly goods. This may have been why he offered sheep, the most humble and undemanding of animals, something that reflected his own philosophy. This is also why G’d took a liking to him. The Torah expresses this with the words וישע ה' אל הבל ואל מנחתו, ”G’d turned to Hevel and to his gift-offering.” The gift-offering of קין on the other hand was מפרי האדמה, “from the fruit (products) of the earth.” This reflected his own preferences, i.e. earthly possessions. He was totally absorbed in working with his body, concentrating on matters of only transient value, matters destined to disintegrate. He was addicted to earthly pleasures and this is the reason G’d did not turn to his offering. The Torah expresses this by writing ואל קין ואל מנחתו לא שעה, “and to Kayin and to his gift-offering He did not turn.”
    The self-effacing Hevel was murdered because he did not concern himself worldly concerns, not considering life on this earth as a supreme value. The one who loved worldly possessions wound up being cursed when G’d said to him: “be a vagrant and a wanderer on earth.” He was told not to consider worldly possessions as something permanent. Kayin was to learn this lesson by his not being at home anywhere on earth. His lifestyle reflected what we read in Kohelet 5,9  אהב כסף לא ישבע כסף, “the one who loves silver will never feel satisfied even when he possesses it.” Solomon already alluded to this syndrome of the wanderer in Kohelet 2,23 where he wrote (concerning man’s role on earth) כי כל ימיו מכאובים, “for all his days are painful.” There are numerous other references in Kohelet to this unsatisfactory state of affairs for people who consider the be-all of their existence as being merely תחת השמש, in the regions under control by the sun. All of such statements [which I did not choose to quote in detail. Ed.] are addressed to people of the mentality of Kayin. Every time Solomon speaks about vanities and return to dust, this is the type of human being he has in mind. In Kohelet 2,11 Solomon spells out in detail how futile all the energy he spent on the acquisition of worldly goods had proven to be. Finally, when he concludes his preaching he teaches us that the only true values to be acquired in this life is reverence for G’d and His Torah. It was only Adam’s third son שת who represented what the Torah considers a balanced view of life on earth. This is why basically speaking, the species of mankind was really carried on by that son. It is worthwhile noting that only when Sheth was born does the Torah describe him as reflecting his parents in that he was conceived and born בדמותו וצלמו, “in his likeness and his image (Adam’s). It was quite appropriate that these philosophical considerations should have been alluded to already in the respective names of Kayin and Hevel.
    
    4,10. קול דמי אחיך, “the sound of your brother’s blood, etc.” Our sages (Sanhedrin 37) understand the reason the word דמי, “blood of” is in the plural as reminding us that not only Hevel’s blood was spilled when he was murdered but also that of the offspring which he never had. on account of being murdered so early in his life. This Midrash is actually to be viewed as an allusion to the time of the resurrection. After all, seeing that his offspring at the time of his death had only been something potential, how could the Torah speak of actual blood of his unborn children and grandchildren? The answer therefore must be that it refers to human beings that should have been brought back to life at the me of resurrection. Kabbalists, on the other hand, see in the plural of the word דמי here an allusion to the reincarnation of souls in other bodies. In the case of Hevel, he was “reborn” in the body of Sheth as the Torah adds the words תחת הבל  “in place of Hevel,” when Sheth’s birth is reported for the first time in 4,25. Kayin’s punishment was another example of מדה כנגד מדה, the punishment fitting the crime, as all his descendants perished at the time of the deluge. He who had tried to deny his brother Hevel a place on earth forfeited his own place on earth. [according to the view that Naamah the wife of Noach was descended from Kayin, this latter statement is hard to reconcile with that view. Ed.]
    
    4,14. ומפניך אסתר, “and I have to hide from Your countenance.” It is possible to understand the meaning of the word ומפניך, as “from Your presence” i.e. from the place where Your presence is manifest, from Mount Moriah This would prove that Adam lived near Mount Moriah and that his children lived there also. In that event, we would have to understand the words of our verse as follows:  הן גרשת אותי היום מעל פני האדמה הקדושה כדי שאסתר מפני“ here You have expelled me this day from the holy site on earth in order that I have to hide from Your presence.” Anyone who has been expelled from the presence of G’d is considered as נסתר, “in hiding,” as he is under the domain of other forces (horoscopes, etc.). David mentioned this in Samuel 26,19  כי גרשוני היום מהסתפח בנחלת ה' לאמר לך עבוד אלוהים אחרים,  “for they have driven me out today, so that I cannot have a share in the Lord’s possession but am told: ‘go and worship other gods.’”
    Another way of explaining the above words by Kayin is this: “seeing You have decreed upon me that You hide Your face from me when You told me “be a vagrant and a wanderer on earth,” this mean that exile of either an individual or a nation is an indication that G‘d has turned His countenance away from such an individual or such a nation. It means that such an individual or nation is no longer under the supervision of the Creator. Kayin’s anguished outcry was: “if this is so, what hope is there left for me? I am now at the mercy of every single creature!”
   והיה כל מוצאי יהרגני, “and anyone who will find me will feel free to kill me.” Kayin was terrified of G’d’s curse and he was aware that those who praise the Lord would inherit the earth whereas those that curse Him would be cut off. This is why he was afraid for his own life both regarding any obstacles that he might encounter or regarding a plague that might strike him. He was also afraid that even animals would kill him. 
    
    4,17. ויהי בונה עיר, “he became a city-builder.” He did not build the city for himself but for his son, seeing that he himself did not have a fixed abode on earth. Seeing that he was cursed and whatever he undertook did not succeed, the Torah uses the expression ויהי בונה עיר in the present tense instead of saying “he built a city,” to show that he kept on building the same city, never completing it successfully.
    Kayin’s descendants and their occupations are recorded to show that G’d is very patient and allowed Kayin to live a long time during which he became a father, a grandfather and a great-grandfather many times over. This is Nachmanides’ view of this paragraph
    
    4,22. וצלה גם היא ילדה, “and even Tzilah too gave birth.” The strange formula about Tzilah giving birth is to indicate that she was actually not meant to bear children as her husband preferred to bask in her “shadow” (as her name indicates) all the time. Nonetheless she contrived to bear a child against her husband’s wishes. This was because G’d wanted her to have offspring and that is why Lemech did not have success with the contraceptive devices he employed. Tzilah became the mother of Tubal Kayin, the first human being who knew how to sharpen metal instruments made of copper or iron. He was a true craftsman. At this point in time the word נחושת means steel (acero in Spanish) which combines very well with iron. Proper copper is called alambre in Spanish and does not make a good alloy when combined with iron. In Jeremiah 6,28 the prophet speaks about the incompatibility of iron and copper when he writes  כלם סרי סוררים הולכי רכיל נחשת וברזל כלם משחיתים המה  “They are copper and iron; they are all stubbornly defiant, they deal basely all of them act corruptly.” The prophet was chastising the people who for committing slander and character-assassination. He compared their conduct to the relationship of copper to iron. Even when you combine them such a combination will not stand the test of time. The end of the verse in Jeremiah emphasises that true co-operation between people who practice slander is no more possible than alloying copper and iron. In the end, both metals will become useless. Another anomaly that you will find after you have combined iron and copper is that you can never separate these two metals again. This is the reverse of what we find with alloys containing silver and gold, for instance. The verse in Jeremiah therefore uses the example of these two metals to demonstrate the totally negative fallout of anything involving slanderous statements. The very name of the word נחשת which is derived from נחש, a word suggesting experimentation, putting something to a test, is already an allusion to its meaning. Lavan told Yaakov in Genesis 30,27 נחשתי ויברכני ה' בגללך, “I have learned by means of experimentation [in an idolatrous fashion. Ed.] that G’d has blessed me on your account.” No craftsman in the world can tell if a certain alloy contains steel or iron unless he has made an attempt to separate the component parts of the alloy. If the metal breaks, he knows it must contain steel. If it hardens and does not break this is proof that it is iron. [I have translated the text using a Spanish dictionary to describe the word אציי'ר found in the text, though it seems obvious to me that the “steel” the author speaks of is not the steel we know today. Ed.]
   ואחות תובל קין נעמה, “and the sister of Tubal-Kayin was Naamah.” Bereshit Rabbah 23,4 claims that Naamah became the wife of Noach. It is claimed that the Torah calls her Naamah to reflect her lovely disposition, her good deeds.
    There is a different tradition (compare Zohar Chadash Midrash Ha-neelam 19,2) which claims that Naamah was the wife of the demon Ashmadon if the demons Ashmadai and others were born by her. We have a tradition that four women (compare Nachmanides) became the mothers of demons. They were Lilith, Naamah, Igrat, and Machalat. Each one of them disposes of whole camps of followers and a spiritually negative aura emanates from them all. It is said that each one of these is dominant during one of the four seasons of the year and that they gather at the mountain Nishpeh (a simile for a high mountain mentioned in Isaiah 13,2.) This mountain is located near mountains called חשך, and each one holds sway during one of the four seasons of the year from sundown until midnight, they and all the members of their respective camps (entourage).
    Solomon alluded to all these עבדים ושפחות servants and servant maids. What he referred to was that he had made these demons subservient to him. The four women we enumerated were the four wives of the שרו של עשו the spiritual counterpart of Esau in the celestial regions. Esau on earth also married four wives corresponding to the number of wives of his celestial counterpart. These four wives are mentioned in Genesis 26,34 and 36,2 respectively; their names are יהודית,בשמת,עדה אהליבמה 
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 24,6 elaborated on the subject when they said that during the 130 years after the death of Hevel when Adam did not cohabit with his wife  he produced all kinds of demons and destructive agents as a result of seminal emissions. It is one of the “advantages” of the superior being called man that he could “beget” intangible offspring, forces which inhabit the atmosphere. He also produced abstract intellectual beings which inhabit the celestial spheres. [the author refers to the “angels” created by good deeds performed by man which have been mentioned repeatedly. Ed]
    
    4,23. כי איש הרגתי לפצעי, “for I have slain by my wound, etc.” Lemech introduced the sword and murder into the world. It is a case of the deeds of the fathers being re-enacted by the children After all, Lemech was the son (descendant) of the first murderer, Kayin. Lemech sired three sons. His oldest son taught him the art of grazing, i.e. to understand the nature and needs of the animals. His second son taught him all about music and musical instruments. His third son taught him how to use metal implements to make war both aggressively, i.e. by the sword and defensively by means of the shield. His wives were afraid that he should not die as a penalty for having brought instruments of murder and killing into the world. This is why he said to them: ”for have I killed a man by inflicting many wounds upon him (as Kayin did to Hevel) or a child (Hevel had only been 50 days old) and nonetheless G’d did not kill Kayin?” He meant to say that the sword is not what murders. Murder is the result of other considerations. The fact that I have perfected the art of war by making swords is not by itself punishable. [It is the use to which people put such instruments that may or may not be punishable. Ed.]
    
    4,25. כי שת לי אלוקים זרע אחר תחת הבל, “for G’d has provided me with another seed to take the place of Hevel.” She said to Adam: “Look! Another seed in replacement of Hevel.” Chavah meant that if Hevel had not been slain, Sheth would not now have been born. This is the true meaning of the words תחת הבל, “a substitute for Hevel.” The Torah was careful not to say נפש תחת נפש, i.e. “another soul in replacement of the soul of Hevel.” Had the Torah written words to that effect, Sheth would not have been a true replacement of Hevel. You are aware already that all matters connected with the מעשה בראשית, the report of the creation, are in the realm of special “wisdoms.” This is why the Kabbalists saw themselves forced to look for all these allusions that we have mentioned thus far. Especially did they see allusions concerning משה רבנו, our great leader Moses, when they interpreted the word בשגם as a reference to Moses seeing that the numerical value of the letters in that word (345) is equal to the numerical value of the letters in the name משה. Moreover, the life span of 120 years accorded to man prior to the deluge which was introduced by the word בשגם (Genesis 6,3) is viewed as a reference to the life span of Moses. The word משה itself comprises all three, i.e. שת, הבל, משה (by re-arranging the letters) The fact that this “seed” is attributed by Chavah to G’d (instead of to Adam), was due to the fact that Sheth resembled Hevel extraordinarily. In fact  the whole description of his birth indicates that he did not only appear to be a duplicate of Hevel but a duplicate of Adam himself who had been created in the image of G’d. For all these reasons Chavah credited G’d directly with giving her this third son. When she said: “whom Kayin had slain,” she meant that but for this murder she would not have merited to bear Sheth.
    
    5,1. ספר תולדות אדם, “the book relating the descendants of man.” According to Nachmanides this is an allusion to the entire Torah which is perceived as the ספר תולדות אדם. If it were not so, the Torah should not have used the expression ספר, “book,” but should simply have written אלה תולדות אדם, just as we find in Genesis 25,12 when the descendants of Ishmael are enume-rated, or in Genesis 25,19 where the descendants of Yitzchak are listed.
    Maybe the meaning of the word ספר in this instance is חכמה, “wisdom,” just as we find it in the ספר יצירה where the expression is ספר וספור as we already mentioned on a previous occasion. The “wisdom” referred to is not ordinary human wisdom but celestial wisdom, a wisdom which would have been man’s had he not sinned. The thrust of our verse then would be: “this book contains the wisdom which should have been an integral part of every human being.” The true descendants of man are not his biological children but his accomplishments in the field of Torah knowledge. The tasks that need to be performed on earth which require a human population could be carried out by someone other than man if need be. This is what Ben Azzai had in mind when he explained that he would not preoccupy himself with marrying and begetting children as his longing was concentrated solely on Torah (Yevamot 63). The complete verse therefore means: “for this book which represents the celestial wisdom, something that ought to belong to every human being seeing he had been created בדמות אלוקים עשה אותו, in the likeness of G’d He made him on the very day that G’d created man.” You will now understand why the Torah saw fit to mention the word אדם twice in this verse. 
    5,2. זכר ונקבה בראם, “He created them male and female.” The words “male and female” refer to the שכל, intelligence, and נפש, emotional life-force, respectively. These two components are major factors in the acquisition of wisdom, the body is quite peripheral, serving only as receptacle, a repository for the former.
   ויברך אותם, “He blessed them.” G’d blessed them with the ability to absorb additional wisdom.
   ויקרא את שמם אדם, He called their name “Adam (Man).” The only reason a human being is entitled to the description אדם is due to his שכל ונפש, to his intellect and emotional life-force, not because of his body. Were it not for שכל ונפש he would be indistinguishable from the animals as we know already from Psalms 49,13 נמשל כבהמות נדמו, “he is like the beasts that perish.” Seeing that man had been created “in the image of G’d,” he should have reproduced children which fitted the same description. This is indeed what happened when Adam and Chavah begat Sheth. Sheth represented a combination of שכל וחכמה, “intelligence and wisdom,” seeing that intelligence is the foundation of everything. The expression אבן שתיה, which our sages applied to the stone in the second Temple which replaced the original Holy Ark on that site, was so-called because that site was the foundation of the universe (Yuma 53). The name שת which Chavah gave to her third son symbolised that he was to be the שתיה, the foundation of mankind. He became the founding father of all righteous people in the world [seeing the Torah does not relate anything about him that is negative. Ed.]
    Another meaning of the words זה  ספר תולדות אדםmay be that these words are a direct reference to שת seeing he is mentioned by name in this paragraph. Inasmuch as the two first sons of Adam having been disappointments, one being killed, the other becoming a murderer, it is this son who truly represented the descendants of the first pair of human beings The very fact that the Torah had already enumerated a list of Kayin’s descendants makes this statement doubly important. Kayin’s descendants were not regarded as the תולדות אדם, at best they were regarded as תולדות קין, Kayin’s descendants. Actually, Kayin’s descendants could be perceived as partially Adam’s and partially the serpent’s, viz. Samael’s, Satan’s. (compare what we wrote on 3,15 as well as what the author wrote on Exodus 2,12). These descendants were Chanoch, Iyrad, and Lemech. Others bore names which trace them to angels such as Mechuyael, Metushael. The latter were what are called later in our portion  (6,2) בני האלוקים, “the sons of G’d,” whereas the former are referred to here as בנות האדם, “daughters of man.” Concerning these descendants of Kayin the Torah says (6,2) “when the sons of G’d saw that the daughters of man were good, etc.” These “sons of G’d” were not children of Adam. Concerning this phenomenon our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 24,6 have said: “this is the book of the descendants of Adam, i.e. the ones which have been listed by the Torah up until this point were not true descendants of Adam.” What then is the meaning of the verse which appears to attribute some of the descendants of Kayin to a divine origin? They were called thus as they were descended from Chavah who had mated with כח אל נכר, with the life-giving potential of an alien deity. (the serpent, i.e. the potential of Satan having had intercourse with her.)
    There is another noteworthy comment by the Midrash: “the words: ‘this is the book of the descendants of man on the day the Lord created man;’ as soon as man was created he already produced offspring.” “He created them male and female,” “He called their name Adam.” This teaches that woman too was called ‘Adam,’ seeing she too is part of the human species and she has important offspring. There is an even more specific comment to this effect in Isaiah 44,13 where the prophet writes concerning G’d making man and woman that she is כתפארת אדם לשבת בית, “like the beauty of Adam to dwell in a shrine.”
    You will do well to pay especial attention to the words זכר ונקבה בראם, “male and female did He create them,” seeing that in 2,7 the Torah had described the formation of Adam and Eve by writing the words וייצר ה' אלוקים with the letter י appearing twice in succession in the word וייצר. There is also a verse in Chronicles I 4,23 according to which human beings are described as היוצרים, as progenitors, i.e. that the power to procreate is not exclusively that of the male but that whereas the male soul receives its input from a male origin the female soul receives its respective input from a female source. This explains that Chavah’s soul received input from the serpent, as she herself was the product of the “left” emanations, the “female” ones. It was natural therefore that the serpent should mate with her and not with Adam. The affinity between the origin of Chavah’s soul and the origin of the serpent made her a more likely victim to instant seduction.
    5,3. ויחי אדם שלושים ומאת שנה ויולד בדמותו כצלמו, “Adam had lived for one hundred and thirty years when he begot in his likeness, in his image.” This verse is proof that Kayin did not beget someone fit to be described as אדם, and that his offspring did not correspond to what the Torah described as בדמותו כצלמו, “in his likeness, in his image.” The reason that Adam had separated from his wife for such a long time was that he waited until they were capable (spiritually fit) of begetting regular children, children that reflected the image of G’d. According to Bereshit Rabbah 24,6 up until that time they produced only demons, etc. During those 130 years Chavah produced male spirits whereas Adam produced female spirits seeing they had been brought to erotic stimulation by female and male stimuli respectively. We find something not dissimilar when the Torah told us that Noach did not beget children in the regular sense until he was 500 years of age (Genesis 5,32). The reason was that if he had indulged in regular sexual activity with his wife say at 70 years of age, all his offspring would have perished prior to the deluge. G’d prevented him from being able to produce children until he had reached that age [so that a righteous person such as he should not have to bury his children. On the other hand, G’d would not have saved his children if they had been corrupt already. Ed.]. Similar considerations were at work in the case of all the various people who lived for so many hundreds of years; G’d did not see fit to reveal the reasons for each.
    You should know that the Torah divided the life spans of the early generations into three periods. First, the Torah informed us as to the number of years that had passed before a person became a father. Then the Torah revealed how many years elapsed after a certain person had been born before the father died. Finally, the Torah reported the sum total of the years of the individual in question. The reason the Torah made such a division was to distinguish between three periods in the lifetime of the individual. 1) his  childhood. 2) His youth, the period when he was vigorous. 3.) His old age. 
    You should note that in the case of all the generations from Adam to Noach the Torah concludes its report about their lives with the comment וימת, “he died.” There was really no need for this as we are all aware that death had been decreed upon each individual as a result of Adam’s sin. It is no more than natural that the branches die off if their trunk had to die. The reason the Torah nonetheless mentions death as an individual occurrence was that among the people during those years there were some righteous people such a Metushelach, for instance. Had the Torah not listed the individual deaths we would have thought that all these people died as a result of the deluge instead of their having died in bed like ordinary people. This is why the Torah described their deaths uniformly. By contrast, the generations between Noach and Avraham were not accorded such a special mention of their deaths as the deluge had already passed and there was no reason to assume that they did not die from natural causes.
    
    	5,23. ויהי כל ימי חנוך חמש ושישים שנה ושלש מאות שנה, “and all of Chanoch’s years were three hundred and sixty five years.” The number of his years on earth corresponded to the number of days in a sloar year, no more and no less. This righteous person was familiar with the power of the sun and he understood the tremendous power exerted by the sun; he reaisled that this was due to a celestial input which remained active within the sun. I have already mentioned earlier (1,14) that there are celestial luminaries which guide the luminaries in our world. and that all of them draw on the original light which this righteous person Chanoch merited to enjoy. This is the reason the Torah used the word ויהי in connection with Chanoch.[The other people whose life and death are mentioned in this chapter are simply described as ויהיו ימי פלוני וגו', “so and so lived, etc.” Ed.] The word ויהי is meant to take us back to the days of creation when the Torah spoke in terms of יהי אור,”let there be light,” followed by ויהי אור “light came into being.” We find the expression ויהי applied to Moses when he was on Mount Sinai (Exodus 24,18). At that time Moses was granted the illumination of the Torah, in fact so much so that when he descended the second time his forehead emitted rays of physical light.
    
    	5,24. ויתהלך חנוך את האלוקים, “Chanoch walked with G’d.” The virtue of “walking with G’d” is one which occurs only in connection with righteous people, i.e. with Chanoch, Noach (Genesis 6,9) and Avraham (Genesis 17,1). All of these people realised that there is a supreme power “behind” the sun, the apparently primary energy in our solar system. Their concept of G’d the Creator was based on their observation of nature in action. I hope to explain this in greater detail whenwe discuss 6,9 את האלוקים התהלך נח, “Noach ‘walked’ with G’d,” i.e. he had made himself appreciate G’d. At any rate, Chanoch cremained attached to the supreme light which was the source from which the luminaries in our world had been created, and made manifest on the fourth ay of creation. The light was mentioned five times in connection with the narrative of the creation (see our comments on 1,31 יום השישי). It had “split” into seven lights, (virtues). This is why the five Books of the Torah have been split into seven books, as the paragraph ויהי בנסוע הארון in Numbers 10, 35-36 is bracketed by 2 inverted letters נ, to indicate that these two verses are to be considered a book by itself, thus making the Book of Numbers into three Books, and the Torah into seven Books. This number of seven lights is also symbolised by the lampstand in the Holy Tabernacle which had seven arms each one of which supported a separate light. G’d had insisted that this lampstand be constructed out of one single chunk of gold, in order to remind us that all these lights had a common origin. These combined lights are known as צרור החיים, “a bundle of life,” as we know from Samuel I 25,29. The righteous individual Chanoch held fast (spiritually speaking) to all of them seeing he had found favour in the eyes of the Lord. [according to Rabbi Chavell our author extrapolated by using the fact that Noach who also walked with G’d is described as having found favour in the eyes of the Lord (6,8). He was entitled to such consideration seeing that he was the seventh generation of mankind.] His existence corresponded to the seventh day, the Sabbath, a day which symbolises life, a day which in its ideal form is free from all tensions and contradictions (compare Rosh Hashanah 31). As a result, Chanoch merited eternal life. The first two letters of his name, i.e .ח-נ (numerical value 58) are tied to the  first half of the letters in the name of the angel מטטרן, [the angel administering G’d’s universe, for Him, Ed.], seeing Chanoch had ever been anxious to gain greater insights into how nature operates the universe. He had gained sufficient insights so that his name reflected these intellectual accomplishments. As a result of these insights both his body and soul underwent changes by becoming unified. As a result, there was no need for his body to die and G’d was able to remove him from earth without the body having to be left “behind.”
    
    As to the Torah’s expression ואיננו, “and he ceased to be,” or words to this effect, the sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 3,4 interpret it as a combination of א-ל אין, an acknowledgement of something, confirmation of its continued existence. Some versions of Onkelos have a similar translation of that word. The version runs as follows: ואיתוהי אריה לא אמית יתיה, “and this ‘taking’ was in compensation for a great achievement, an incomparable accomplishment.” The entire episode provides a hint of the continued existence of Gan Eden and the survival of the soul after death indefinitely. It is also clear proof that had it not been for Adam’s sin he would have lived indefinitely in body and spirit. We find the same word לקח used in the Book of Kings where the prophet Elijah’s removal from this earth as a living entity is described (Kings II, 2,11).
    
    5,28. ויחי למך שתים ושמונים שנה ומאת שנה, “and Lemech lived for one hundred and eighty two years, etc.” When you calculate from the creation of Adam until this point you will find that Noach was born 1056 years after Adam had been created. This number is arrived at by adding the 130 years which elapsed before Sheth was born, 105 years until Sheth fathered Enosh, 90 years until Enosh fathered Keynon; 70 years until Keynon fathered Mahalalel; and 65 years until Mahalalel fathered Yered. Add another 162 years until Yered fathered Chanoch; then it took another 65 years until Chanoch fathered Metushelach and 187 years until Metushelach fathered Lemech. This was followed by another 182 years until Lemech became the father of Noach, a total of 1056 years. When you consider that Adam died at 930 years of age it is clear that Noach never saw Adam, having been born 126 years after the death of the first human being. However, Noach’s father Lemech had still known the first human being, Adam, seeing he was 182 years older than his son Noach. Adam had been 874 years old when Lemech was born.
    
    5,29. ויולד בן ויקרא את שמו נח, “he fathered a son and he called his name Noach.” The number 10 is crucial to the world and its continued existence. Noach was the tenth generation of the human species. It was therefore appropriate that he became instrumental in assuring the continued existence of the world, and, more specifically, mankind. Seeing that the rest of mankind was slated to perish during the deluge and none of them proclaimed the name of G’d you do not find the word בן, “son,” or the word שם, “name“ (allusion to the name of G’d) mentioned in connection with the birth of any of the other people listed in the Torah since Sheth. In Noach’s case, the word בן is not so much a description of his being a son,” but it is related to בנה, “built,” i.e. this person rebuilt the world after the deluge and assured its continued existence. In other words: this “son” was a “builder.”
    We find further that the very word שם refers to maintaining something, preventing it from decaying.  When Solomon said in Proverbs 10,7 ושם רשעים ירקב, that the “name of the wicked will rot,” this may strike us as strange at first glance seeing that שם, “name,” is something abstract and if so how could something abstract be subject to decay? However, Solomon referred to the actual subject of the שם, “name,” he spoke about.
    There is another question in connection with Noach. According to what Lemech, Noach’s father is reported to have  exclaimed when his son was born, he should have called him מנחם, “comforter.” Perhaps the letter מ in the word מנחם was somehow “swallowed,” and Noach’s real name was נחם. We have a similar construction in Zechariah 11,7 where the prophet says  לאחד קראתי נעם ולאחד קראתי חבלים, “one I named Favour, the other Unity.” According to the normal rules of grammar the word should have been מנעם. However, we find frequent instances when a word is slightly abbreviated. In this instance, the reason may have been to make the name נח also spell חן (with the letters reversed) ,as it was he who found חן in the eyes of G’d.
    The reason Noach’s father Lemech said of this son זה, “this one,” may be that he was part (maybe the first) of the tenth generation of mankind, and, as we pointed out earlier, any “tenth” is holy. There is a similarity here to Exodus 15,2 זה א-לי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I will  enshrine Him.” Lemech meant hat there were two reasons why he called “this one” Noach. This is reflected in the two cantillations on that very short word, i.e. it has both the tone-sign telisha and the tone-sign geresh. Do not be flippant about this as the entire Torah is full of all kinds of hints and allusions which have been written at the command of the Supreme Intellect. Anyone who delves into unraveling the secrets hidden in the text pays attention to every detail. This is why the sages said (Nedarim 37) that the cantillations also originated at Mount Sinai. When Nechemiah 8,8 speaks of ושום שכל ויבינו במקרא, “with careful analysis so that they could understand it,” he referred to 1) the text itself, 2) the cantillations.
    
    6,2. ויראו בני האלוהים את בנות האדם, “The sons of G’d saw the daughters of man, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the בני האלהים are the sons of the judges and the elite of society. which are called “elohim,” just as in Exodus 22,27 where the Torah forbids us to curse a judge by writing אלוהים לא תקלל.  This is the way the Targum translates that verse. The Torah means that the very judges who should have meted out justice committed legal violence instead with the “daughters of man,” i.e. the common and therefore underprivileged people, by raping these women against their will. Sometimes these women were willing partners in illegal sexual relations. When the Torah writes inter alia in verse 4 אשר יבואו בני האלהים אל בנות האדם, “when the sons of the rulers would consort with the daughters of the common people,” these were the instances when the women were willing partners in such relationships. Such relationships usually did not come to light until these women had given birth to children from illicit sexual relations with the male elite of society.
    When the Torah (verse 4) speaks about the גבורים אשר מעולם אנשי שם, “the mighty men of former times who had always been very prominent,” this is a reference to the children from such unions who could be seen to be different from children produced by unions between members of the lower classes of society. The words מכל אשר בחרו, “from among all that they freely chose,” are an allusion to use of the same expression by Isaiah (Isaiah 66,3) where the prophet describes the abominations which people were guilty of in his time.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words בני האלוקים has been discussed by us already in connection with 5,2 and the name אדם.
    
    6,3. לא ידון רוחי באדם לעולם, “My spirit will not contend evermore concerning Man, etc.” Actually, the word ידון is derived from נדנה, a word which we encounter in Daniel 7,15 אנא דניאל בגוא נדנה, “I, Daniel, my spirit was uneasy in its sheath;”  the sheath of a sword is called either נדנה or תיק. In a similar manner the body is the sheath of the soul. What our verse means is that “My Spirit,” i.e. the soul, will not ever find a permanent home within the body of Man. The composition of Man’s body after it had become corrupt is simply not fit to be a permanent home for such a lofty intelligent spirit as the soul.
   בשגם הוא בשר, “since he is but flesh.” The Torah states that also Man is but flesh, just as the animals which roam the earth, be they mammals, birds, or whatever. G’d laments the fact that His spirit, the soul has, allowed itself to be enslaved by the physical aspects of life.
   והיו ימיו מאה ועשרים שנה, “and his life span shall be one hundred and twenty years.” G’d explains that on account of the condition of the soul within man having become dominated by worldly considerations, He will extend His patience and allow Man  one hundred twenty years within which to repent before decreeing a deluge when they would perish.
    Rabbi David Kimchi, quoting his father, understands the word ידון as derived from מדון, “strife, contention,” and G’d would be saying: “My spirit shall not be in contention with Man forever, seeing that My spirit is not subject to the temptations of the flesh as is Man’s.”
    I believe that in that case the reason for the number of 120 years mentioned here  is the fact that the world was created with the letter ה and G’d wants it to continue to exist He decided to wait 120 years before bringing on the deluge as the number 100 is one fifth of the distance (in terms of years of travel) which Man is removed from the tree of life. Man is to be given a period of time during which to reflect on his conduct. Similarly, the number twenty is one fifth of 100 and we have a tradition that G’d does not punish man until he has attained the age of twenty
    In the distant future G’d will not punish  Man until he has reached the age of one hundred as we know from Isaiah 65,20 where the prophet describes a picture of a rosy future when  כי הנער בן מאה שנה ימות והחוטא בן מאה שנה יקולל “for the lad will (only) die when he has attained the age of one hundred years, and the sinner will be cursed when he is one hundred years old.” In other words, youthful immaturity in those days will last for one hundred years. We may understand the words והיו ימיו in our verse as “that his years [regarding culpability for his sins, Ed.] will be considered as if he had only just been born.” We find an allusion to such a concept in Job 33,25 where Elihu told Job רטפש בשרו מנוער, “”let his flesh become  healthier than during his youth.”
   בשגם הוא בשר, these words contain an allusion to Moses as well as to the total number of his years (when you re-arrange the sequence of the letters).
    We read in in Bereshit Rabbah 28,9 that Noach did not really deserve to be spared from the deluge as the Torah says (6,7) [concerning the whole of mankind] כי נחמתים כי עשיתים, “for I have reconsidered having made them.” The only reason that he and his family were spared was that Moses would become his descendant in the future and G’d did not want to forego a human being of the calibre of Moses. The numerical value of the letters in the word בשגם=345 as does the numerical value of the name משה.
    
    6,6 .וינחם ה' כי עשה את האדם בארץ,“G’d reconsidered having made man on earth, etc.” The word עשה refers to the צורה, the divine image G’d had fused with the “golem,” the inarticulate body of Man. This צורה was none other than the צלם, “the divine image” the Torah had mentioned when it reported the creation of the first human being.(1,27) whereas in the report commencing with the words זה ספר תולדות אדם, the expression used was בדמות אלוקים עשה אותו, “in the likeness of G’d He had made him.” In respect of בריאה, the initial stage of the creation of Man, the Torah used the expression צלם or צורה, respectively. In respect of Man’s robot-like body, inarticulate Man, the Torah used the expression דמות as if to tell us that once the צורה became part of the “golem,” it was no longer a צלם אלוקים but merely דמות אלוקים. Seeing that the word דמות does not describe something integral but something external, just as when we speak of עבד אלוקים we mean that the “G’d-serving person” is nonetheless not an integral part of G’d but is “outside” of G’d, G’d reconsidered this part of the arrangement. saying it would have been better if the צורה, the divine aspect of Man, had not become integral to the body. Our sages illustrated this brilliantly when they said in Eyruvin 13 נח לו לאדם שלא נברא, “it would have been more comfortable for man if at the initial stage of his creation he had not been fused with the body.” In our verse the Torah did not say וינחם ה' כי עשה את האדם על הארץ, “G’d reconsidered having made man on the earth,” but וינחם ה' כי עשה את האדם בארץ, “G’d reconsidered having made Man composed of integral earthly desires.”
    Consider a statement by Solomon in Kohelet 4,2-3  ושבח אני את המתים שכבר מתו מן החיים אשר המה חיים עדנה. וטוב משניהם את אשר עדן לא היה. “So I consider more fortunate the dead who  have already died, than the living who are still alive; but better than either of them is he who has not yet been.” Philosophers described the statements made by Solomon in these two verses as referring to the three different stages we may encounter the צורה, the divine image, as undergoing at different times. The first stage, and in Solomon’s view preferable the preferable one, is  when it had not yet been  introduced into the body of mortal man; and he praised that condition of man (at the end of the second verse). The second and relatively tolerable condition of the צורה occurs after it has been removed from man when his body has died. This is a stage which Solomon describes as משבח אני את המתים “I praise the dead.” The third and least tolerable situation he considers the state of the צורה while it is imprisoned within man’s body. The philosophers describe this in terms of three parables. 1) A king who sits in his palace. 2) A king who has recently been released from prison. 3) A king who is still serving a sentence in prison. There can hardly be a question that the king in the first parable enjoys greater stature than any of the other two. 
    In view of all these clever comments why then did the Torah describe the completion by G’d of His handiwork at the end of the sixth day in such glowing terms, i.e. וירא אלוקים את כל אשר עשה והנה טוב מאד, “and G’d saw all that He had made and here it was very good?” Did not that praise also include the fact that G’d had fused body, i.e. “golem” to soul, צורה, when He made Man?  Not only that, but how could Solomon come hundreds of years after Moses and praise the Lord for not having fused body and soul when Moses gave G’d “excellent marks” when He praised Him for having fused the two?
    The answer is that although the original condition of the צורה prior to its having become fused to a body is superior to the other two conditions listed, seeing it had not yet been fused to a body and had not suffered pain or damage, once it had been fused to a body and had accomplished its mission and left that body in a state of purity, it would be far superior to what it had been prior to being fused to a body. At that point such a צורה will have made a name for itself that sparkles like pure gold. This is the reason that the souls of the righteous are forever anxious to return to their holy origins. Seeing that Moses had presupposed that the צורה would accomplish its mission within the body he saw fit to praise the Creator for having placed such a soul within man and he described G’d’s reaction to His handiwork as “very good.”
    The proper interpretation of our verse then is exactly what the text says: האדם בארץ, “man,” while he is still attached to earth in an integral manner.” G’d reconsidered the status of such a human being seeing that this arrangement had resulted in sinfulness as the צורה had allowed itself to be dominated by the body. We find an analogous use of the expression בארץ in Isaiah 62,7 עד יכונן ועד ישים את ירושלים תהלה בארץ, “until He establishes Jerusalem 
and make her renowned on earth.” What the prophet meant was: “until He will make the glory of Jerusalem which is on earth manifest.” [as opposed to the Jerusalem in the celestial regions.] Another verse which spells out the meaning of the word בארץ even more clearly is found in Psalms 122,3 כעיר שחוברה לה יחדו. The psalmist speaks about the Jerusalem on earth and the Jerusalem in the celestial regions which have been fused together.
    A kabbalistic approach understands the words וינחם ה', כי עשה את האדם בארץ as: “G’d’s attribute י-ה-ו-ה reconsidered.” The reason this attribute of G’d reconsidered was related to ארץ, “earth;” it was the cause G’d had to reconsider having employed this attribute when making man. The word י-ה-ו-ה in our verse is a reference to the first of the 13 attributes listed in Exodus 34,6. In other words, it was not “man” who was responsible for any reconsideration by G’d of having created him but something connected with “earth.”
   ויתעצב אל לבו, “and His heart felt sadness.” In terms of the plain meaning of the words the term “heart” when applied to G’d is, of course, only a figure of speech. The same is true whenever the Torah speaks of other organs and appears to attribute them to G’d Who is totally abstract, devoid of any such organs. The reason that the Torah nonetheless employs such terms is to convey to us that our actions may or may not please G’d, may even elicit reactions that if they had been observed in humans would be described as “joy, anger, frustration, happiness and the like.” Such reactions when expressed by human beings usually involve human organs also. When the psalmist (Psalms 104,31) speaks about ישמח ה' במעשיו, “G’d rejoices in His works,” on the one hand, and in this instance we read ויתעצב ה' אל לבו, ”G’d was saddened in His heart,” both descriptions are of necessity anthropomorphisms, i.e. approximations of G’d’s reactions in terms which we humans can understand. They do not reflect the objective reactions of Someone Whose Essence we have not been privileged to understand. 
    It follows that when the Torah wishes to give us an inkling of G’d’s reaction to man’s behaviour it uses the word “heart” in order to help us understand. Seeing that the human heart is a major vessel in his thinking process, the Torah chose to attribute G’d’s feelings in reaction to human aberrations as reactions by “His heart.”
    You find that if a person wants to concentrate he isolates himself and bends his head so as to exclude distracting intrusions into his thinking. The reason for this is that the brain, i.e. the head is where his ability to form thoughts originates. This thought process is then relayed to the heart. Granted, that this metaphor sounds somewhat far-fetched, the fact remains that ideas, thoughts travel in a downward direction from the brain to the heart.. When the Bible speaks about a messenger from G’d, such a messenger is usually described as פי ה', the “mouth” or “mouthpiece” of G’d (compare Isaiah 34,16) כי פי הוא צוה, “for My mouth (He) has commanded.” The prophet describes himself as G’d’s messenger (agent, or angel) who acts as G’d’s mouthpiece. The spirit of G’d is described as פי the spirit of the angel known as פי,“my,” resp “His mouth.” Yonathan ben Uziel therefore translates our verse here  not as “G’d was saddened to His heart,” but as “His angel was saddened to his heart.” [Our editions of Yonathan ben Uziel do not have this wording;  Ed.]  According to our author the אורים ותומים, the parchment with the Holy name of G’d inside the breastplate of the High Priest which served as a source of communication from G’d to him, was also known as פי ה’, “the mouth of G’d, i.e. as an angel named “mouth of G’d.” Another example of such a reference to פי ה' is found in Joshua 9,14 where the acceptance of the Gibeonites as allies of the Jewish people is described. The failure of consulting G’d on that issue is described there as ואת פי ה' לא שאלו, “they did not consult ‘the mouth of G’d.” When we read in Numbers 11,1 ויהי העם כמתאוננים, רע באזני ה', “the people were as if looking for something to complain about, it was evil in the ears of G’d;” here to the word “in the ears” may be understood as the “ear” in question being one of G’d’s angels. Whenever the function of G’d’s angel is passive, i.e. he is to be an instrument of receiving G’d’s instructions, such a function of the angel is described as his being the “ears” of G’d. When he is supposed to be active in a supervisory manner, he is called “the eyes of G’d.” A very interesting example of this approach is found in Zechariah 3,9 where the prophet describes G’d’s supervision of the Jewish people in revolutionary terms, saying על אבן אחת שבעה עינים, “a single stone enjoying a variety of no less than seven supervisory “eyes,” i.e. agents of G’d.”  When David speaks of אזנים כרית לי , “You assigned an ear [in order to listen to You ] “to me” [rather than the commandment to offer sacrifices, Ed.], he refers to his ear as the organ, or in this case G’d’s instrument, which helps to make him tune in to G’d’s “wavelength.” Whenever the term “ear or ears” is used for celestial beings the meaning is that these ”ears” are listening to Israel’s prayers. When G’d dispatches an angel to fight against Israel’s adversaries such an angel is usually described as יד ה' “the hand of G’d,” i.e. His executive arm. One of the examples of such a meaning of the term יד ה' is found in Samuel I 5,11 כבדה מאד יד האלוקים שם, “for the hand of the Lord had been very heavy there.” There are, of course, numerous similar quotations in Exodus when the Torah describes the plagues G’d inflicted upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians. When G’d’s agents are about to reveal a previously unknown manifestation of the Lord, the angel performing this task is often described as “the feet of G’d.” We find an example of this in Zechariah 14,4 ועמדו רגליו ביום ההוא על הר זיתים, “and on that day His feet will stand on Mount Olives, etc.” The prophet refers to G’d’s “soldiers.” There are numerous other examples of that nature.
    From a Midrashic-homiletical aspect we may approach the words ויתעצב אל לבו, “His heart was saddened,” as follows: Rabbi Ami (Bereshit Rabbah 27,6) told the parable of a king who built a palace having employed an architect. When the palace was completed the king was not satisfied with it. Who should the king be angry at if not the architect? Rabbi Ami related another parable illustrating this when he told about a king who had entrusted a sum of money to a broker instructing him to invest this on his behalf. The broker failed and the king lost his money. Who would the king be angry at if not at the broker? We have to understand why Rabbi Ami saw the need to illustrate our verse by means of two parables. In the parable with the architect it was possible to err and to conclude that there are two separate prime causes in this world  People might have said that granted the king is king and wields authority, nonetheless he employed the architect seeing the architect’s wisdom was superior to his own. It follows that there are things in this world which are beyond the “king,“ read “G’d.” This conclusion would be totally mistaken, of course. However, in order to forestall such a mistaken conclusion Rabbi Ami related the second parable. In that parable he spoke about a broker who did not own anything at all and was simply an agent of the king. In both parables Rabbi Ami wanted to emphasise that the role of the broker and the architect are interchangeable. None is privy to any knowledge or power not possessed by their employer, i.e. G’d. The “architect” is none other than a sub-contractor, and we find that the Targum translates the words בוני שלמה, “Solomon’s builders,” (Kings I 5,32) as אדריכלי שלמה, “Solomon’s architects.”
	A kabbalistic approach to the words ויתעצב אל לבו, understands the subject of “He was saddened” to be the very “architect” or the “broker” mentioned in Rabbi Ami’s parables. The conversation described in the Torah reflects what G’d said to the architect. When He said: אמחה את האדם אשר בראתי..... כי נחמתי כי עשיתם, we must pay attention to the switch between the word בראתי at the beginning of the verse and the word עשיתם at the end of that same verse. [G’d was never saddened about the בריאה aspect of man only about the עשיה aspect, i.e. that He had completed the creation of man by fusing earth to spiritual matter. Ed.] Moreover, we must also pay attention to האדם בארץ, in verse five and in verse six. In the first verse the words האדם בארץ refer to what was written immediately before that, i.e. רבה רעת, “the great amount of evil,” whereas in the second verse the words האדם בארץ refer to what follows, i.e. ויתעצב אל לבו. so that the word ויתעצב refers back to האדם, to “man.” It is a reference to the concept of “Man the glorious,” the reason why G’d created the entire universe (ארץ) as we explained already in connection with the word בראשית, very first word of the Torah. Unfortunately, it had now become “ארץ” which had become responsible for this sad state of the universe. The meaning of the full verse in its profounder meaning  is: G’d reconsidered having made man not because of man, but because of the earth , i.e. the architect and the broker who had not carried out the assignment G’d had entrusted to them.
	The reason that the Torah mentions such “feelings” as ויתעצב, “He was saddened,” is only because at the time of the completion of His handiwork at the end of the sixth day the Torah had seen fit to describe G’d’s “joy” when it stated that “G’d saw all that He had done and it was very good,” i.e. “He was very pleased.” You should not be bothered by the fact that at this point the Torah speaks abou  ”G’d experiencing sadness;” nor should you be bothered by such statements as ויקרא א-דני אלוקים צבאות ביום ההוא לבכי ולמספד “on that day My Lord of Hosts called for weeping and lamenting, etc.” The Talmud in Chagigah 5,2 [in response to the statement of Rabbi Papa that no sentiments of sadness are to be attributed to G’d, Ed.] explained that what is meant  is הא בבתי גוואי והא בבתי בראי, that although we distinguish between externally visible manifestations of sadness and only internal manifestations of such feelings. When it comes to the destruction of the Temple, even angels were allowed to display such sentiments. [The impending destruction of mankind certainly also warranted a display of such sentiments. Ed.] The term בתי בראי “an external house,” i.e. a manifestation that is visible to outsiders refers to emanations from גבורה closer to מלכות, whereas the term בתי גוואי refers to emanations from the emanation גבורה “upwards.” When the Torah speaks here about a visible display of G’d’s sadness as occurring in internal terms, i.e. “G’d was saddened to His heart,” we find the equivalent of this a few chapters later after Noach had presented an offering of thanksgiving (8,21) when the Torah describes G’d’s reaction as “G’d said to His heart, I will not continue to curse the earth for the sake of man.”

	6,8. ונח מצא חן בעיני ה', “and Noach had found favour in the eyes of the Lord.” This means simply that the wicked deserved to be wiped out whereas righteous Noach deserved to be saved as he had found favour in the eyes of G’d All the Torah does here was to explain the principle of reward and punishment. This is also what Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 22,1 נבחר שם מעושר רב מכסף ומזהב חן טוב, “A good name is to be chosen rather than riches, grace is better than silver or gold.”



פרשת   נח

	מתהלך בתומו צדיק, אשרי בניו אחריו, “The righteous man walks in his integrity; happy are the children who come after him.” (Proverbs 20,7) Solomon told us in this verse that a person cannot be considered as righteous until he has walked in integrity when serving the Lord. What is this “integrity” which Solomon talks about here? It means that one performs G’d’s commandments because of love and reverence for Him, not because one hopes to benefit by this in the eyes of one’s peers and by attaining honour in their eyes. It is appropriate for man to perform good and kind deeds to the best of his ability without bragging about them. In fact he should endeavour to refrain from even mentioning that he has perfomed such deeds. Anyone who does tell about this and claims credit for such good deeds is actually considered as a sinner. If one does claim credit for such good deeds this is liable to result in two kinds of negative fallout. 1) Firstly, he enhances his own standing compared to others in the eyes of those who believe him when he tells them about his deeds of piety. 2) He puts to shame and embarasses those who have been the recipients of his kindness. It is the mark of a righteous person who walks in integrity with his G’d that he does not boast about his virtues and the good deeds he has performed. Such a person is described as איש אמונים, “a man of true integrity.” Solomon connects the verse we have quoted with the one immediately prior to it in which he said רב אדם יקרא איש חסדו, , ואיש אמונים מי ימצא”he calls most people ‘true friend,” but who can find a loyal man?” In mentioning איש אמונים, “a loyal man,” Solomon took his cue from Proverbs 11,13 where such a “loyal” person is described as ונאמן רוח מכסה דבר, “a faithful spirit keeps his confidence.” In fact, Solomon discusses the same theme also in another context (Proverbs 10,8) where he said חכם לב יקח מצות, ואויל שפתים ילבט, “the wise in heart will accept the commandments, whereas the one who speaks foolishly will be afflicted.” What Solomon meant was that the person who is truly wise gets hold of G’d’s commandments with his hands and performs them without speaking about this with his lips. The foolish persion is the exact reverse of the wise man. Not only does he not endeavour to perform the commandments which he has a chance to perform, but even when he violates the commandments he makes a point of talking about this. This is why is referred to primarily as a ”fool.” So we are faced with two totally opposite behaviour patterns. The one type of person hides the fact that he actually does perform G’d’s commandments, whereas the other person makes a point of broadcasting the fact that he does not. Concerning the latter type of individual Solomon says ילבט, meaning he will become troubled by his words. The word ילבט is found in Hoseah 4,14 where it means “he will fail.” Yonathan ben Uziel translates the word as וסכלא בשפוושיה מתאחד “and the fool will become enmeshed by his own words.”
	As to the second half of the verse in Proverbs 20,7 which we quoted in our introduction, אשרי בניו אחריו, “happy are the children who come after him,” Solomon refers to the ability of parents to confer merits on their children after them. This is analogous to G’d saying in Exodus 20,6 ועושה חסד לאלפים, that “He (G’d) will perform kindness to thousands of generations of descendants of the righteous.” This is applicable in the event that their ancestors performed the commandments from a sense of love for G’d, whereas a different statement in Deut 7,10 in which G’d is portrayed as extending such kindness to one thousand generations refers to ancestors who performed G’d’s commandments only out of a sense of awe and fear of the consequences if they would fail to do so. The basis for this interpretation is the fact that the word לאוהביו “to those who love Him,” is written next to the words לאלפים, “for thousands of generations,” whereas the word s לאלף דור “for one thousand generations” appears next to the words ומשלם לשונאיו “and He repays those who hate Him“ in Deut.7,10. Solomon has explained this in a similar fashion in Proverbs 14,26 where he said: ביראת ה' מבטח עז ולבניו יהיה מחסה, “through his reverence for G’d man has a fortress; his children will have a place of refuge.” In other words: “the accumulated merits of the fathers are a source of benefit for their children in the eyes of G’d.”
	It is entirely possible that the opening verses in our portion are intended to praise Noach in three stages, each stage being superior to the preceding one. The Torah mentions last that Noach “walked with G’d.” This virtue of walking with G’d is a very great virtue indeed, a virtue which is superior to what is called תמימות, “perfection.” The virtue תמימות, on the other hand, is superior to the virtue described as צדיק; the Torah reports that Noach had attained these three levels of moral achievements progressively until he had qualified for the description את האלוקים התהלך נח, “Noach walked with G’d.”

	6,9. אלה תולדת נח, נח איש צדיק, תמים היה בדורותיו את האלוקים התהלך נח. “These are the generations of Noach; Noach was a righteous man, perfect in his generations; Noach walked with G’d.” The word תולדות refers to “happenings” (compare the comments by Ibn Ezra and David Kimchi); it is what is described in Proverbs 27,1 as כי לא תדע מה ילד היום, “for you do not know what the day will bring.” The explanation of these commentators is based on the verse following in which Noach is described as ויולד נח, “Noach begot.” These words are read as belonging to what the first verse told us i.e. the three virtues which Noach practiced as opposed to his peers. Being a צדיק, a righteous person, meant not engaging in violent means to gain one’s objectives. The Torah reported in verse 11 that his generation was guilty of random violence. His second virtue was that he was תמים, “perfect,” that he was consistent and thorough in the way he practiced his virtues. The Torah applies the term תמים to the red heifer, i.e. a cow that has uniformly red hair. Even two hairs of a different colour disqualify such an animal from fulfilling its designated purpose. In other words, an animal אשר אין בה מום,”which is without blemish” (Numbers 19,2). In the case of human beings, the term מום describes a character defect. This is why the Torah describes Noach as תמים “free from blemish.” Psalms 119,1 lauds such people by referring to them as אשרי תמימי דרך,”hail to those whose way is blameless.” In order to contrast Noach’s virtues with those of his contemporaries the Torah writes כי השחית כל בשר על הארץ, “for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.” Noach’s third virtue is described by the words את האלוקים התהלך נח, “Noach walked with G’d.” This virtue of “walking with G’d” is something so exceptional that we find it mentioned only very rarely. Nonetheless, it is one of the imperatives G’d (Moses) commanded the Jewish people (Deut. 13,5) when He said: אחרי ה' אלוקיכם תלכו, “You shall follow the Lord your G’d, etc.” Interestingly , in our verse the Torah does not describe Noach as having walked behind G’d, i.e. אחרי האלוקים, nor does it use the normal conjugation kal i.e.  הלךwhen describing Noach’s relationship to G’d. The Torah uses the reflexive conjugation התהלך, “he made himself walk.” This was not a construction that can be applied to an entire nation and this is why Moses did not phrase his imperative as אחרי ה' אלוקיכם התהלכו,”make yourselves follow (in the footsteps of) the Lord your G’d.” Only select individuals ever attain such a lofty spiritual level and only after having become outstandingly righteous people. (in the words of our author “people who have attained the levels of the sun and the various forces of energy in outer space and who are familiar with how these forces of energy influence what goes on in our terrestrial world.”) The very attainment of that level of comprehension of the forces at work in our universe reveals that the person who commands it has an appreciation of G’d and His Majesty. This is what David meant when he said (Psalms 19,2) השמים מספרים כבוד א-ל ומעשה ידיו מגיד הרקיע, “the heavens declare the glory of G’d , the sky proclaims His handiwok.” This is also why our sages (Shabbat 75) have said: “anyone who knows how to calculate the various seasons and horoscopes correctly and fails to use his ability is the subject of the verse (Isaiah 5,12) “and he fails to take note of what He is designing.” We have another scriptural verse (Psalms 82,5) לא ידעו ולא יבינו בחשכה יתהלכו, “they neither knew nor understood, they make themselves walk in darkness;” this verse too describes people who, though able to comprehend the mysteries of nature, fail to pay attention to this and to draw the appropriate conclusions regarding their conduct on earth. In order to highlight Noach’s achievements in this sphere the Torah testifies to this with the words את האלוקים התהלך נח, that “Noach indeed walked with G’d.” This “walking with G’d,” meant that after he had gained insight into the existence and supervisory activity of G’d through his study of astronomy enhanced by his virtuous lifestyle, he drew the proper conclusions. He did not believe in astrology, i.e.he knew that all these phenomena do not represent independent forces in the universe. In this way he was poles apart from his peers who all believed in the sun, i.e. the solar system as a supreme cause.
	When the Torah speaks about the corruptness of mankind, this is a refernce to idolatry. In Sanhedrin 57 the term השחתה is used to describe paganism and sexual licentiousness based on Exodus 32, 7 where G’d informed Moses with the words שחת עמך, “your people has become corrupt,” that the Israelites had made for themselves a golden calf. This is also why the idolater Jerobam is called איש משחית “a man causing corruption” (based on Proverbs 28,24). The Talmud describes this corruption as taking place לפני האלוקים, something which corresponds to the basic prohibition of idolatry in Exodus 20,3. where the Torah writes לא יהיה לך אלוהים אחרים על פני, “You shall not have other deities in My presence.”
	The first person who is credited with having attained this level of perfection was Chanoch, and the Torah wrote of him (Genesis 5,24) ויתהלך חנך את האלוקים, “Chanoch walked with the Lord.” This was remarkable because he lived during a time when Enosh had introduced idolatry and all the people of his time had begun to worship the sun and other planetary constellations. Chanoch investigated the laws of nature and concluded that there must be a primary cause which is responsible for the regular orbits of the stars, the sun, etc. The very fact that he is descrbed a having spent 365 years on earth, a number which corresponds to the number of days in the sun’s orbit, is the Torah’s way of hinting to us something about the nature of his superior knowledge. As a result of his investigations of nature Chanoch cleaved to G’d, i.e. to the primary Cause. The next time we find the Torah mentioning the concept of “walking with” or in front of” G’d, is in connection with Avraham in Genesis 17,1. There too the expression התהלך לפני, “walk in front of Me,” is followed by the words והיה תמים “and become perfect,” to show that walking with G’d is an indication of one’s “perfection.”
	From all we know Avraham was constantly engaged in religious disputes, trying to convince people that there was only one G’d and that He supervises the fates of every individual on earth. He engaged in arguments with the powers of his time concerning the laws of the states. People confronted him trying to prove that the sun was a deity. Avraham did not deny the powers of the sun and its direct influence on what goes on in our world. However, he tried to convince the people of his time that the sun was only an instrument wielded by G’d just as certain tools with which an artisan fashions wonderful furniture is not a deity as it could not produce anything unless the hand of the craftsman guided it. This is why he was prepared to die for his belief when he chose to be thrown into Nimrod’s furnace rather than to deny his true beliefs. The Torah referred to this in Genesis 15,7: “I am the Lord who has taken you out (saved you) from the fire of the Chaldaens.”
	בדורותיו, “in his generations.” We would have expected the Torah to write בדורו, “in his generation” (sing). However, at the beginning of the deluge Noach was six hundred years old and he had already survived members of several generations. By writing בדורותיו, the Torah wanted to inform us that all those generations had been corrupt already and that there was no individual amongst them that merited saving.
	According to the plain meaning of the text the reason that Noach’s name is mentioned three times in this verse is because of the three levels of perfection he had attained, i.e. he was righteous, perfect, and he walked with G’d.

	6,10. את שם, את חם, ואת יפת, “Shem, Cham and Yaphet.” Yaphet appears to have been the eldest of the three brothers seeing that in 10,21 the Torah refers to אחי יפת הגדול,”brother of the senior, Yaphet.” Cham appears to have been the youngest seeing the Torah writes in 9,24 וידע את אשר עשה לו בנו הקטן, “and he became aware of what his younger son had done to him.” The reason the Torah mentions Shem first was because he was the most outstanding of Noach’s children. This is why Yaphet had to be mentioned only after Shem

	6,12. וירא אלוקים את הארץ, ”G’d saw the earth, etc.” At this point the Torah reverts to G’d’s name אלוקים to indicate that the attribute of Justice enters the picture at this stage. Seeing that the sins of that generation were so great the attribute of Justice was poised over them.
	והנה נשחתה, “and here it had become corrupt, etc.” What precisely did this “corruption” consist of? כי השחית כל בשר את דרכו על הארץ, “for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.” They were all destroying their own seed. They did not want to procreate and used sexual union for pleasure only. This is what is meant by Isaiah 57,5  שוחטי הילדים, “the ones who slaughter the children.” Our sages (Niddah 13) comment on this that a preferable reading to the word שוחטי would be סוחטי, i.e. they squeezed out their semen before impregnating their wives. Seeing that they had become guilty of destroying semen which becomes a fetus after forty days, they were punished with a deluge which poured rain on them for forty days (based on Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 22).
	Actually, the people of that time were guilty of four sins: 1) idolatry; 2) sexual licentiousness including incest; 3) murder; 4) gratuitous violence. The reason for the forty days of rain may be broken down as follows: thirty days of continuous rain descended because of their idolatry, i.e. the worshiped the sun for thirty days; however seeing the sun’s influence on earth commences already five days before it becomes visible to us and it continues for five days after it has ceased to be visible, it was proper hat they be punished on account of sun-worship for forty days. Whatever is true of the visible effect of the sun as well as its invisible effect, applies equally to the stars so that in respect of every form of worship of celestial constellations the number forty represented מדה כנגד מדה, “the punishment fitted the crime.” Similar considerations apply to the sin of sexual licentiousness and murder as in both instances the gestation period of the human being was forty days before it became a real fetus. As to the violence, their fourth sin, the number forty is appropriate for the duration of the days of rain as the Torah containing this legislation was given to Moses after he had spent forty days on Mount Sinai.
	This sin of corruption did not only include human beings but it had also corrupted the behaviour of the animals. This is why our sages (Sanhedrin 108) explained ברותחין קלקלו וברותחין נדונו, “the ones who had become guilty of wasting hot semen were punished by a deluge of hot water.” This fact is based on a similarity of the words וחמת המלך שככה, and the king’s anger “cooled off,” and the words used at the end of the deluge in 8,1 וישכו המים, “and the waters cooled off.”
	As to the line ותשחת הארץ לפני האלוקים, “the earth had become corrupt in the presence of G’d,” this is a reference to the idolatry practiced by man. The Torah alluded to then fact that the sins of mankind included both trespasses against G’d as well as trespasses against society. They corrupted religion and they corrupted the basics of procreation. These latter sins also included indiscriminate robbery amongst the people. The Torah refers to this by writing ותמלא הארץ, “the earth became filled with violence,” and the repetition כי מלאה הארץ חמס. Seeing that the Torah reports G’d’s decision to bring on the deluge in connection with the report of the violence it is clear that this sin weighed most heavily and that the decree to destroy mankind was not sealed until G’d had reviewed the indiscriminate violence on earth ( compare Sanhedrin 108). We find support for this view in two verse in the Book of Isaiah. In Isaiah 54,14 we read רחקי מעושק כי לא תיראי וממחתה  כי לא תקרב אליך. “You shall keep away from oppression (do not engage in it) and you shall have no fear, and from ruin and it shall not come near you.” The same prophet had said a few verses earlier (verse 9)  כי מי נח זאת לי, “that this is like the deluge to Me, etc.” In other words the prophet (in the name of G’d) warns the people that the deluge had been due to  the violence and oppression practiced by people against each other. The reason that this was the “straw that broke the camel’s back,” i.e. the most critical sin was that it is a trespass against common sense. If there were no G’d at all, mankind would have to legislate laws controlling violence as otherwise civilisation would collapse of its own. A society which did not even observe such a code f laws could not expect to endure.
	The very occurrence of the deluge is proof positive that the universe was a creation and that a Creator presides over it and watches it; it proves that the same Creator punishes those who are guilty and saves the ones who deserve to be saved such as  Noach and his family. It proves further that G’d’s supervision is not limited to the celestial spheres but that it extends to our “lower” world also. Just as Adam was the ancestor of all human beings after him, so Noach became the ancestor of all human beings after the deluge. Just as Adam had three sons, Kayin, Hevel, and Sheth, so Noach had three sons, Shem, Cham, and Yaphet. Just as two of Adam’s sons were his mainstay whereas the third one was cursed, so you find that one of Noach’s sons was cursed. Just as Adam’s third son was the one who became the link to posterity so Noach’s third son is the true link to posterity as only the descendants of Shem are the ones who will qualify for resurrection. [According to Rashi, Shem was indeed the third, i.e. the youngest son of Noach. Ed.]

	6,14.עשה לך תבת עצי גופר ,“make for yourself an Ark of gopher wood, etc.” “Gopher” is an especially light-weight kind of wood, known as kadros according to David Kimchi. Onkelos translates the word as דאעין-דקדרום, a kind of cedar-wood. G’d instructed Noach to make for himself an Ark out of this well-known wood and to bring into it two specimens (male and female) of all the domestic and free-roaming animals in order to keep these species alive as  well as seven pairs of each of the pure species of birds in order for some to serve as sacrifices after the deluge. G’d informed Noach beforehand that he was going to bring the deluge in order to wipe out all flesh on earth which had the breath of life in it.
	At this point, an intelligent child must surely ask how it is possible that a man whom the Torah described in the most glowing terms as a righteous and perfect individual did not turn to G’d in prayer in order to help save the members of his generation and give them a chance to repent and rehabilitate themselves?. Why did he not engage G’d in a dialogue as Avraham did after him when G’d had informed him that He was going to destroy the city of Sodom and its inhabitants? Avraham had prayed repeatedly and almost insistently as we know from the report of the Torah in Genesis chapter 18.
	The answer to this question is that Noach did not “neglect” to pray for his contemporaries either because he did not care or felt that they deserved to perish. He knew that there was a need for only ten righteous people in order to ensure the survival of the world as it was. He based this tradition on the ten directives G’d employed to create the universe. He reasoned that if there were indeed ten righteous people alive at that time G’d would not have instructed him to prepare for the deluge by building the Ark. Under the prevailing circumstances, only eight people had been commanded to enter the Ark, ( Noach and his wife, his three sons and their respective wives) i.e. proof that at that time there were already no ten righteous people left on earth. [Avraham had also stopped praying when he realised that there were fewer than ten good people in Sodom. Ed.] Seeing there were no ten good people left on earth it was clear to him that the generation did not merit survival on account of the remaining eight good people. Under the circumstances,  the most that G’d was willing to do was to save Noach seeing he was the first member of the tenth generation of mankind. G’d accommodated Noach by also saving his immediate family. The fact that Avraham himself did not bother to implore G’d to save the city of Sodom for the sake of fewer than ten righteous people proves that Noach cannot be faulted for not having prayed when told to take only seven additional human beings into the Ark with him. In fact, Noach was not even allowed to pray when he knew there were fewer than ten good people. In addition, as opposed to the people of Sodom, the people at the time of Noach had been given 120 years warning The people of Sodom had not been given any kind of warning by G’d prior to Avraham being informed of their impending doom. G’d is not in the habit of decreeing doom unless the potential victims had been warned (Yuma 81). 

	6,15. וזה אשר תעשה אותה, “and this is how you shall construct it, etc.” G’d commanded Noach the measurements of the Ark. When one considers the many types of species Noach had been asked to bring into the Ark, these measurements appear to be totally insufficient. In fact, according to the number of species of animals and birds in our world today, even ten times as many Arks of that size would not be able to accommodate them all. There can therefore be no doubt that the entire operation was possible only by means of G’d’s miraculous intervention. G’d demonstrated to Noach and his family that even a physically small space can accommodate a great number of creatures when G’d so decrees it.
	You may be inclined to ask that seeing G’d was able to save all these people and animals by working a miracle, why did He bother to command Noach to spend 120 years of his life to build the Ark altogether? Surely, G’d had a number of other alternatives once He had decided to invoke miracles! For instance, He could have enabled the people and animals who were meant to survive to walk on water, or some other miracle not involving 120 years of Noach’s time.
	The answer to such questions is that the Torah always instructs man to do all in his power to achieve his objective by natural means. If, for reasons beyond his control, man cannot complete his task, G’d will supply the amount of miracle needed to bring man’s deserving endeavour to a successful conclusion. If you will examine other miracles reported in the Torah you will always find that though G’d intervened in the most miraculous manner, there were always elements in what happened which were based on the laws of nature being made full use of. For instance, when the Torah commanded the two and a half tribes of Reuven, Gad, and Menashe to join their brethren in war by donning arms and uniforms and marching at their head (Numbers 32,27), this was not because they did the actual fighting. The actual fighting was done by G’d. Nonetheless, man has to do or to appear to do whatever is within his power to try and achieve the task set for him by G’d. Similarly, we find in Joshua 8,2  that G’d commanded Joshua to set an ambush against the city of Ai and take with him his entire army although G’d Himself says “here I have already given the King of Ai and his people and his city into your hands.” Seeing that all the wars fought by the Israelites on their march from Egypt to the Holy Land were won by means of miracles you would be justified in asking why they needed to be recruited as an army at all? The reason is, as we have stated, that G’d does not intervene by means of a miracle until man has done his duty by trying to help himself. 
	In our situation, i.e. the building of the Ark, there was an additional reason why G’d had commanded Noach to build it. He had hoped that when people would watch the vast amount of time and energy which Noach (and his sons) put into constructing this huge Ark that he must have known what he was doing, and that at least some people would take his warning of the impending deluge to heart to repent and change their lifestyle. If they would nonetheless ignore such warnings they were obviously irredeemable sinners and would deserve whatever G’d decreed for them.

	6,18.והקימותי את בריתי עמך , “and I will maintain My covenant with you, etc.” The covenant G’d speaks about is the one he now concludes that He would wipe out life on earth and would save only Noach  and those in the Ark with him. Alternatively, G’d may have been speaking about the covenant involving the rainbow, the details of which  appear later on in our portion (view of Ibn Ezra).
	Nachmanides writes that based on Kabbalah the covenant G’d speaks about here is not one G’d concluded with Noach at all, but it s a covenant G’d made with mankind or the universe at the time of creation. The word ברית, “covenant,” is actually derived from the word בראשית, the time when G’d began the work of creation. You may read the word בריתי as if it had been spelled ברייתי, related to “My creation,” i.e. the Hebrew word בריתי is similar to a possessive form of the word or words בראשית עולם, “at the beginning of the universe.” Accordingly, G’d stated that this original covenant would be maintained with the righteous of all generations, at this point with Noach. Nachmanides quotes Genesis 9,9 ואני הנני מקים את בריתי אתכם, “and here I will keep My covenant with you,” as an example of what he has in mind. Another example he quotes is Maleachi 2, 5 בריתי היתה אתו, “My covenant has been with him.”[that G’d always maintained His covenant with the tribe of Levi.] The intelligent will understand what I refer to. Thus far Nachmanides To summarise what he meant: The covenant which has existed and extended from on high to man on earth is that G’d employs His attribute of Mercy as the guiding principle in His relation to human beings. This covenant will endure and the partner to G’d in this covenant is the righteous f each generation seeing the righteous is the foundation upon which the universe id founded. Due to this covenant man is the recipient of G’d’s bounty. This is the real meaning of the word אתכם ”with you” (pl) in 9,9.

	6,19. מכל החי, “and from all living creatures, etc.” Or sages in Bereshit Rabbah 31,13 this expression is meant to include demons (disembodied spirits). G’d commanded them to enter the Ark [Noach would not be able to locate them on his own. Ed.]
	It is possible to explain this strange phenomenon by recalling that these spirits might not have been able to remain in their regular habitat, i.e. the atmosphere, due to the changes in the earth’s atmosphere during the period of the deluge when even the atmosphere underwent radical changes. The reason for this can be seen from the wording of G’d’s decree לשחת כל בשר אשר בו רוח חיים ,”to destroy all flesh which has the spirit of life in it.” The emphasis appears to be on the words “spirit of life.” According to this wording the decree that living creatures would perish applied to all moving creatures including disembodied spirits. It was necessary therefore to bring these demons or spirits into the Ark as they too would have perished during the forty days of hot rain.
	When the Torah speaks about Noach (personally) bringing all these creatures into the Ark,  i.e. תביא אל התבה, this need not be understood literally. After all, we find in the very next verse that the Torah writes יבואו אליך להחיות, “they will come to you in order to survive.” Surely this means that they will come of their own accord. What then did the Torah mean in our verse where it writes “bring to you into the Ark?” The meaning of these words is that Noach was to assist these animals once they had come to him and to provide them with suitable accommodation. He was to make every effort to ensure their survival. This was a commandment. Where do we actually find a mention of the fact that the demons came to join Noach in the Ark together with all the other species of living creatures? The Torah writes some apparently superfluous words in verse fourteen where the Torah writes וכל העוף למינהו כל צפור כל כנף, “and every bird after its kind and every bird of any kind of wing.” The words כל העוף למינהו, refer to the impure birds; the words כל צפור, refer to the pure birds; the additional words כל כנף “any kind of wing,” refer to the demons. They fly through the air. These words are followed immediately by the statement ויבואו אל נח אל התבה, “they came to Noach to the Ark.”
	6,22.ויעש נח, “Noach did, etc.” These words refer to Noach constructing the Ark. The next words i.e. כן עשה, “so he did,” refer to Noach bringing in the various species in pairs as well as stocking the Ark with the necessary food supply, the appropriate food for each species.

	7,2.מכל הבהמה הטהורה תקח לך שבעה שבעה, “from every species of pure domestic animal take for yourself seven pairs each.” In order to keep the species alive it would have been sufficient to take a single pair of each species. The reason G’d commanded Noach to take seven pairs of each of these species was to ensure that he would have sufficient animals to offer some as a sacrifice. There is a mystical connotation for this number seven which our author discusses in connection with Numbers 23,4 where we read about the number of animals Bileam offered before he hoped to curse the Jewish people.
	Why did the Torah add the words זכר ונקבה לחיות זרע על פני כל הארץ, “male and female in order to keep seed alive  on the face of the whole earth? Did Noach really require seven pairs of each of these species in order to prevent them from dying out? If he only needed one pair each of the impure animals, why did he need seven pairs for the same purpose in the case of the pure species?  After all the Torah had already specified that Noach was to take of each species איש ואשתו “man and its wife,” i.e. a pair which were suitably matched to enable them to produce offspring! In order to understand these verses correctly we have to translate them as follows: “of all the pure domestic animals take for yourself seven, seven i.e. each one with its mate; also from amongst the birds seven each, male and female; (all of this in order to offer a sacrifice) however, from the impure domestic animals you take two, i.e. the male and its mate in order for these to be able to keep seed alive on the face of the whole earth; for in another seven days I am going to bring a deluge upon the earth. This is why you have to take these animals in order to preserve the species.”
	There is a  reason why the Torah employs the unusual phrase איש ואשתו, “man and his wife,” and applies it to the four-legged animals although they are in the habit of mating at random, changing partners at will, and in the case of the birds the Torah speaks only about the need to take זכר ונקבה, a male and a female specimen. The mating habits of the four-legged animals are different from the mating habits of the birds. The mammals give birth to live young ones, similar to humans, whereas the birds merely lay eggs, i.e. something in an early stage of development. Our sages in Sanhedrin 108 have said that seeing that it is not the habit of the mammals to try and mate with other species G’d honoured them by describing their mating habits as similar to those of “man and his wife.”
	You should also be aware that in the previous paragraph where G’d informed Noach for the first time that He would bring a deluge upon earth, He employed the name applicable to the attribute of Justice, i.e. ויאמר אלוקים, “the attribute of Justice spoke to Noach,” and the paragraph also concludes by referring to G’d as “the attribute of Justice.” In chapter 7,1 when G’d speaks about who is going to be saved (and hinted at the thanksgiving-offering), the Torah changes its syntax and reports ויאמר ה' לנח, “the attribute of Mercy spoke to Noach,” and the same applies at the end of that paragraph when the Torah tells us that He closed the door of the Ark from the outside. This is intended to teach us that sacrifices are always directed at G’d in His capacity as the attribute of Mercy. Our sages in Menachot 110 have stated that whenever the Torah speaks about sacrificial offerings the only name of G’d mentioned in that connection is the attribute of Mercy, i.e. the name י-ה-ו-ה. One of the reasons for this is so as not to allow anyone to think that there is another deity to whom it is appropriate to offer sacrifices.

	7,4. כי לימים עוד שבעה, “for in another seven days.” In addition to the 120 years which G’d had given mankind to repent and to mend its ways, He now gave them another seven days. Our sages in Sanhedrin 108 say that these seven days were the days of mourning for Metushelach (who had died at 969 years of age). He had lived the life of a righteous man (Noach’s grandfather) and G’d had held back with bringing on the deluge on his account. This is why the Torah (7,10) wrote the apparently superfluous words ויהי לשבעת הימים ומי המבול היו על הארץ, “it was after these seven days that the waters of the deluge were upon the earth.”

	7,11.נבקעו כל מעינות תהום רבה וארבות השמים נפתחו, “all the fountains of the great ‘deep’ were opened and the ‘windows’ of the heavens were opened.” Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write: “on this day the windows of the heavens were opened as well as the all fountains of the “deep.” The Torah should first have mentioned the waters from the “higher” regions before mentioning the waters from below the earth. It is possible to explain the unusual order of recording the origin of these waters as a sign that the Torah wanted to stress the punitive nature of what occurred as being something that could be felt immediately. We find that whenever the waters originating in the heavens are mentioned as a source of blessing the Torah mentions those waters before referring to moisture on the ground. For instance, when Moses blessed the people in Deut. 33,13 he speaks of ממגד שמים מטל ומתהום רובצת תחת, “with the heavenly bounty of dew from above and with the deep waters crouching below. We may deduce that this is why the Torah did not write: “G’d brought the deluge upon earth,” but “the waters of the deluge were found on earth” (verse 11). The Torah did no wish to associate G’d’s name with a statement which may lead the reader to conclude that  G’d  initiated what is perceived as evil. You will observe that even in verse 23 where the Torah writes וימח את כל היקום, “He blotted out all existence,”  the Torah does not identify the subject of “he,” although G’d’s name had not appeared for several verses previously. All of this is part of the Torah’s policy not to associate G’d with initiating disaster if it is at all avoidable. As soon as the force of the deluge abated somewhat and the waters cooled off, the name of G’d, albeit His attribute of Justice, אלוקים, is mentioned in 8,2 when G’d is reported as making a beneficial wind blow over the earth. Even in Genesis 3,16 where the Torah narrates what G’d said to Chavah when He decreed her punishment, the Torah refers to G’d only in the third person, i.e. impersonally, writing אל האשה אמר וגו', “to the woman He had said, etc.” The same applied in 3,17 where G’d is reported as telling Adam about his punishment. As soon as G’d provided man and his wife with clothing, however, (3,21) we find that all of a sudden the Torah refers to G’d again as ה' אלוקים.
	A close look at the structure of the verses detailing the narrative of the deluge makes it plain that G’d found it very difficult to carry out His decision to wipe out mankind. At the beginning (7,12) the Torah wrote ויהי הגשם על הארץ, “the rain remained on earth,” whereas later on in verse 17 the Torah referred to the fact that this was in reality not mere rain but a deluge by describing it as a מבול, “a deluge.” This indicates that originally this rain descended in a regular manner to give people a chance to still repent when they observed that Noach’s prediction was about to come true. Had they done תשובה even at that stage the rain would have proven to be beneficial. Only their failure to respond even to this phenomenon turned this rainfall into disaster. Moreover, G’d first killed the animals before the Torah reports that even man perished too (verse 21). Just as man had been the last of G’d’s creatures during the creative process, he now was the last creature to perish as a result of the deluge.

	7,13. בא נח ושם וחם ויפת בני נח ואשת נח וגו' , “Noach, Shem, Cham, and Yaphet, Noach’s sons and his wife entered, etc.” By rights the Torah should have written: בא נח ושם וחם ויפת בניו ואשתו ושלשת נשי בניו, in that order.[Had the Torah written the verse in that way it could have avoided mentioning the name Noach three times in that verse. Ed.] However, Noach was so beloved of G’d that G’d wanted to mention his name repeatedly in order to convey this to us. It is a common practice amongst people that when they are especially fond of someone they look for opportunities to refer to such a person by his name.

	7,15. ויבאו אל נח אל התבה, “they came to Noach, to the Ark.” This verse is a continuation of the words בעצם היום הזה, “on this same day,” in verse 13, where the Torah had mentioned first that Noach and his family entered the Ark before going on to say that the animals arrived in pairs. All this occurred on the same day. The Torah was at pains to describe the miraculous nature of what happened, i.e. that this was a manifestation of G’d’s will.

	7,22. כל אשר נשמת רוח חיים באפיו, “all in whose nostrils was the breath of life, etc.” From here we have proof that when man dies his soul departs via his nostrils. It leaves the same way it entered as we have been told that when G’d provided man with the soul, He “blew” it into him through his nostrils (Genesis 2,7). I have dealt with this subject at length at that point.
	A kabbalistic approach to the words כל אשר נשמת רוח חיים באפיו understands the word כל, “all,” as an allusion to the emanation כל with which G’d had blessed Avraham (Genesis 24,1). This is the tenth emanation, the region where the souls “grow.” Our sages who instituted the prayer we recite on Sabbath morning commencing with the words נשמת כל חי had this emanation in mind. This is also the mystical dimension of Exodus 31,17 where the Torah says of G’d כי בו שבת וינפש, “for on it (the Sabbath) “He ‘rested’ and concentrated on the regions of the souls.” This emanation or “celestial region,” is the source of all blessings and the source of “life” as we understand it. This is why the Torah said of the original Sabbath ויברך אלוהים את יום השביעי, “the Lord blessed the seventh day.” This is why here the Torah refers to “life” as אשר נשמת רוח חיים באפיו. The difference between man and the other living creatures is that whereas the latter have a רוח חיים, they do not possess a נשמת רוח חיים. The cantillation pazer gadol on the word כל in our verse is designed to draw our attention to the fact that the word does not mean simply “all” as it does usually, but that it refers to the emanation כל which we have mentioned. The wordכל  does not appear with the cantillation pazer gadol anywhere else in the Bible. It is important to take note of this and to realise its implication.
	מכל אשר בחרבה מתו, “of all the creatures whose habitat is on the dry land, they died.” This teaches that the fish in the rivers and in the oceans did not die. They were able to escape the destruction by fleeing to the oceans as the deluge had been decreed only on earth. This is the meaning of the words (verse 12) “the rain was on the earth.”

	7,23. וימח את כל היקום , “He obliterated all existence.” The Torah here includes all living creatures on earth as having been killed by the boiling waters which covered the earth. The additional words: וימחו מן הארץ, “they were blotted out from the earth,” mean that whereas they themselves were blotted out on earth, their כוחות, “the various forms of power providing their energy on earth” were wiped out from the heavens. You are aware already that all forms of energy that exist in the higher regions exert influence on what happens in our terrestrial world. The reason that sources of energy in the terrestrial world ceased was that their celestial counterparts, their “home base,” had already ceased to perform their task. G’d had put a stop to their ability to exert influence on earth “below.” They did not even receive any celestial input anymore from what is known as the קו האמצעי, the central emanation which exerts its influence on all phenomena subject to celestial input. Since all these celestial sources had already ceased to provide the terrestrial phenomena with their beneficial contributions, the only source which still remained at the time of the deluge and which was capable of providing beneficial energy was this קו האמצעי. David referred to this when he said (Psalms 29,10) ה' למבול ישב וישב ה' מלך לעולם, “G’d had remained seated all alone; G’d sits enthroned as King forever.” The word yashav in that verse refers to G’d’s remaining ‘isolated’ at that time.” We find a similar expression in Psalms 9,8 וה' לעולם ישב, “and G’d will be seated forever, etc.” This too refers to G’d “alone,” i.e. at a time when He has not assigned agents to disperse their G’d-given energies to the terrestrial world. This helps us to understand the statement by our sages in Zevachim 113 that the deluge did not include the Holy Land. They meant that the rain did not descend upon ארץ ישראל from the sky and that this was a compliment to the Holy Land and its elevated status. The windows of heaven were not opened in order to flood ארץ ישראל from above, nor were the fountains of the “deep” opened in order to flood it from below as ארץ ישראל is the equivalent on earth of the קו האמצעי in the celestial regions. 
	[Personally, I have always understood that statement by the sages to mean that inasmuch as ארץ ישראל is under the direct supervision of G’d as opposed to the other countries which receive their divine input only through G’d’s agents, there was no call for imposing such a deluge on a country which had not been allowed to deteriorate as it had been under the constant supervision of G’d personally. Ed.].
	A Midrashic-homiletical approach to the apparent repetition in our verse is that the first statement refers to wiping out these people’s future on earth, whereas the second statement records that their lives in a future more idyllic world had also been denied them on account of their present corruption.

	8,1. ויזכר אלוקים את נח, “G’d remembered Noach, etc.” It would have been more appropriate for the Torah to write that “G’d remembered Noach and his sons, etc.” After all, we know that they too were beneficiaries of His presence since the Torah wrote in 9,8 “G’d spoke to Noach and to his sons, etc.” Why then did the Torah here mention only Noach as the one to whom G’d spoke? It is possible to understand the word את in front of the word נח as a reference to his sons. This would certainly not be the first time that the word  את is used as a רבוי, a word which alludes to something additional which the Torah had not spelled out in detail. Seeing that Noach’s sons were extensions of his own self, the Torah did not see fit to mention them separately at this stage. We find a similar occurrence in Exodus 1,1 where the Torah mentions את יעקב, and Shemot Rabbah interprets the word את as a reference to all the people who descended to Egypt because they were “extensions” of Yaakov. This meant that sons and wives were automatically included in the people whose fate G’d had “remembered.” As to the fact that the Torah specifically refers to the animals and all other creatures in the Ark with Noach,  something which at first glance makes it appear as if their fates were of greater concern to G’d than that of Noach’s wife, his sons and their wives, this is not so. We distinguish between השגחה כללית, and השגחה פרטית, G’d’s general overall concern and supervision of their fate, and G’d’s specific individual supervision of someone’s fate. Whereas the animals, etc., qualified for G’d’s general concern, Noach and his family qualified for G’d’s specific concern. Hence the word את is an indication that G’d’s specific concern extended also to the members of Noach’s family.
	Alternatively, the reason Torah chose to mention G’d’s concern for the domestic beasts and the free-roaming animals was to draw our attention to the fact that He displayed no such concern for the birds; hence the birds are not mentioned in this verse. The reason may have been that seeing that the mammals were all created on the sixth day of creation, i.e. the same day as man, they shared special consideration by G’d with man; the birds which had been created already on the fifth day did not enjoy this distinction. This may also be reflected in the wording אשר אתו בתיבה “who were with him in the Ark.” The Torah wanted to stress that there was something that man and the other mammals shared to the exclusion of other phenomena on earth, namely G’d’s especial concern for their fates. It is noteworthy that the same word את occurs in the narrative of the Torah when it describes both man’s and the mammal’s creation on the sixth day. Please compare Genesis 1,24-25. The words אשר אתו in our verse here may be an allusion to that verse in 1,24.

	8,4. ותנח התבה בחדש השביעי בשבעה עשר יום לחודש על הרי אררט, “The Ark came to rest on the mountain range of Arrarat on the seventeenth day of the seventh month.” The day on which the Ark “landed” on that mountain range was the seventeenth day of the month of Nissan. [This is based on the view of Nachmanides that whenever the Torah here speaks of the seventh or the tenth month, this is calculated from the day the universe was created and not from the date the deluge began.]
	When the Torah wrote that the waters kept increasing for one hundred and fifty days (7,24), this describes a process which had commenced on the seventeenth day of Marcheshvan , i.e. the day on which the deluge began. It refers back to where the Torah reported (7,11) that in the sixth hundredth year of Noach’s life on the seventeenth of the second month, the fountains of the deep broke open, etc.” You will note that there are 150 days between the seventeenth of Marcheshvan and the seventeenth of Nissan. 
	According to Nachmanides the timetable of the deluge ran as follows: Rain descended on earth for forty days continuously from the date the fountains of the deep broke open. During those forty days the waters on earth rose to a level of fifteen cubits above the highest peaks. At the end of the forty days the rain stopped but the fountains of the deep remained open and the “windows” of the heavens also remained open so that the atmosphere was extremely moist. The entire globe was full of water none of which dried off during that period. This condition continued until the end of 150 days after the rain had started falling. At that point G’d made a strong wind blow in the atmosphere and on earth and the fountains of the deep closed. The waters which had flooded earth from below returned to the interior of the earth where they had been before the deluge started. At that point the “windows” of the heavens were closed also and the air of the atmosphere began to dry up. As a result, the level of water on earth became drastically reduced so that the Ark which had previously been about two or three cubits deep in water managed to “land” on the mountain range of Arrarat. Some 73 days later the tops of the mountains became visible on the first day of the tenth month, i.e. on the first of the month of Tamuz. Another forty days later, on the tenth of the month of Av, the dove left the Ark for good. Another thirty days later Noach removed the cover of the ark.

	8,7 .וישלח את העורב, “he sent out the raven, etc.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 108 claim that the raven had an incontrovertible argument against Noach, claiming that both G’d and Noach hated it. G’d hated the impure creatures, seeing that He had commanded Noach to save only a single pair of each. Noach hated the raven seeing that he was prepared to endanger its survival as a species by sending it on a dangerous mission when he could have sent out a dove or another pure bird of which there were seven pairs. It therefore taunted Noach by accusing him of having sexual designs on its mate. Noach retorted by telling the raven that it was being deliberately vicious seeing it was well aware that he had refrained from indulging in sexual relations in the Ark even with his own wife, someone with whom he was permitted to have relations. Why then would the raven suspect him of having designs on a species which was forbidden to him, i.e  the raven’s mate? The raven was not willing to accept Noach’s argument. As a result, Noach told the raven that it would neither be fit to eat nor to be offered as a sacrifice to G’d. At that point G’d intervened and told Noach to take the raven back into the Ark at least until the waters on the earth had dried off. G’d explained that in the future a certain righteous individual (the prophet Elijah)  would dry out the world (decree drought) and at that time G’d would need the raven who would carry food to Elijah who would be in hiding at that time. (compare Kings I 17,8). The word יבשת, “dry land,” is closely related to the word תשבי, a favourite description of the prophet Elijah whose home town appears to have been Tishbi or something similar.

	8,8. וישלח היונה מאתו, “he sent out the dove away from him.” When the Torah described Noach as sending out the raven the word מאתו, “away from being with him,” was missing. This teaches that the habitat of the pure birds is close to the righteous people.
	8,11. והנה עלה זית טרף בפיה, “and here it had torn off an olive leaf with its beak.” Seeing that destruction had been decreed on man and beast there was no need for the Torah to have reported that the trees too had been doomed by the deluge. In fact, the destruction of vegetation on earth had been so thorough that our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 28,3 claim that even the lower millstones had been thoroughly destroyed. This may be based on Job 14,19 אבנים שחקו מים, “the waters wear away even stones.” There was no need for the Torah to add that the leaf which the dove carried in its beak must have been one that had withered already a long time previously. The question is: where did the dove find even such a leaf? The Midrash offers several explanations. Rabbi Levi claims that the leaf came from Mount Olives (Jerusalem), seeing the deluge had not touched the Holy Land.  He claims that G’d had said to Ezekiel  (Ezekiel 22, 24)  בן אדם  אמר לה את ארץ לא מטהרה היא לא גשמה ביום זעם, “Ben Adam,  say to her: “You are a land that has not been cleansed; she had not been rained upon on the day of fury.” The words לא מטהרה refer to the fountains of the deep beneath the Holy Land not having opened at the time of the deluge, whereas the words ולא גושמה mean that no destructive rain fell on the Holy Land during the period of the deluge. Nonetheless, it is fair to assume that the waters of the deluge which had flooded neighbouring countries also spilled over into the Holy Land. After all, the Torah testifies that the waters of the deluge “covered all the high mountains  beneath the whole sky (7,19).” Seeing that no rain had fallen on the Holy Land which would have uprooted and broken the trees in that land, the waters which spilled over into that land did not have such a destructive effect. It is quite plausible therefore that the dove took the leaf from Mount Olives.
    This explains what is meant when the Torah wrote ((8,11) וידע נח  כי קלו המים מעל הארץ, “Noach realised that the waters had subsided from upon the earth.”
    	Another view expressed in Bereshit Rabbah 33,6 is that the dove brought this olive leaf from Gan Eden. This appears very puzzling. If that were true whence did Noach know that the waters on the surface of the earth had subsided? After all, the waters of the deluge had most certainly not penetrated into Gan Eden! Nachmanides addressed this problem and wrote that possibly the gates of Gan Eden were locked so that the waters could not enter there, and as soon as the waters on earth subsided the gates to Gan Eden reopened.
    	The word טרף, “it had torn (it)” in our verse is puzzling. We would have expected the Torah to describe what happened to the leaf, i.e. the feminine form טרפה seeing that the bird יונה always appears in the feminine form. The answer is that it is not a form of a verb but an adjective and the word טרף has to be understood as if the Torah had written טרוף, “torn off.” This is the reason for the vowel kametz under the letter ר in the word טרף, when actually we would have expected to find the vowel patach. The Torah could have merely written והנה עלה טרף בפיה, “and here a torn leaf was in its beak.” This alone would have provided Noach with the information that the waters on earth had subsided. The addition of the word זית, i.e. that this leaf had been torn from an olive tree, caused our sages to derive the lesson that it is better to subsist on one’s own efforts (relying directly on G’d’s bounty), even if one has to eat something bitter such as olive leaves, than to be fed delicious morsels by one’s (human) host in the Ark, i.e. by Noach (compare Rashi on our verse).
    	Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 33,6 comment further in the name of Rabbi Avuhu: “if the dove entered Gan Eden and brought a leaf from there why did it not at least bring a leaf from a cinnamon tree or something sweet ?” It wanted to hint to Noach “better something bitter which originates in Gan Eden than something sweet which originates from you.”
    	According to these homiletical comments by the Midrash, the word טרף, must have a connotation of “food.” We do indeed find this meaning for the word טרף in Proverbs 30,8 where Solomon, having spurned riches turns to G’d and exclaims: הטריפני לחם  חקי, “feed me with the bread allotted to me.” All creatures may draw some logical conclusions from this paragraph. If even birds prefer freedom and a relatively difficult mode of subsistence, how much more so must we human beings who have been equipped with a brain and the power to reason adopt such an attitude in life! Would that intelligent people were aware of the demeaning aspect of relying on fellow human beings for their subsistence.
    	8,14. בשבעה ועשרים יום לחודש “on the twenty-seventh day of that month.” This was the month of Marcheshvan. Earlier the Torah had spoken of “on the seventeenth of the month the fountains of the “deep” broke open (7,11),” whereas now the Torah says that on the twenty-seventh day of that month the earth had dried out completely. This teaches that the deluge lasted exactly one full solar year (365 days). We know that ordinarily the solar year is 11 days longer than the lunar year, i.e. 12 months. This is why our sages in Ediyot 2,10 stated that the period during which the people of that generation were judged lasted for 12 months. (According to Rabbi Shlomoh ben Aderet we have to add the eleven days of the difference between the solar and the lunar year so as to avoid the Mishnah in Ediyot being in conflict with the Torah). We are also told in that same Mishnah that the judgment of the Egyptians in Egypt (the ten plagues) lasted 12 months and that Job’s afflictions lasted for 12 months. Also the judgment of the wicked in Gehinom lasts for 12 months. Finally, the Mishnah states that the judgment experienced by the nations taking part in the final assault on the Jewish people under the kingdoms of Gog and Magog will last for 12 months.
    	יבשה הארץ, “the earth had dried up.” Although the earth had completely dried up Noach did not leave the Ark until G’d had given him express permission to do so and had commanded him: “leave the Ark, etc.” (8,16). Seeing that he had only entered the Ark at the direct command of G’d he did not want to leave it until G’d commanded him to do so. Basing themselves on Noach’s example the sages in Tanchuma Noach 7 concluded that Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah did not want to leave the furnace of Nevuchadnezzar (Daniel 3,26) until bidden to do so [the wording is that Nevuchadnezzar said to them; “step out and come here!” They had not wanted to come out until bidden to do so although the bottom of the furnace had risen miraculously to be level with the ground around them and this would have been a clear indication that their ordeal was over.]
    
    	8,16. צא מן התבה, אתה ואשתך ובניך /  “leave  the  Ark, you and your wife, your sons and the wives of your sons.” This was a sign that permission had been granted to once again conduct regular married life with one’s spouse, something which had been forbidden while they were inside the Ark. We know this as at the time Noach and his family entered the Ark the Torah prescribed the sequence “you and your sons, your wife and the wives of your sons” (6,18). At this point the sequence mentioned by the Torah is: “you and your wife, your sons and the wives of your sons.” Clearly, the difference points to separation of the sexes while they were inside the Ark .Sanhedrin 108 states that only three creatures engaged in sex inside the Ark; they were the raven, the dog, and Cham. All three of them were punished. The raven was condemned to ejaculate its semen via its beak, the dog is kept on a leash; Cham was punished by becoming black-skinned.
    	8,20ויבן נח מזבח לה’ , “Noach built an altar for the Lord, etc.” Noach’s thinking when offering sacrifices was in an ascending manner. First, he built an altar on earth, addressing himself to G’d as the attribute of Mercy, hence the word לה’. From this attribute of Mercy, he proceeded to ויעל עלת, “he raised total-offerings on top of that altar.” Although the word עולות for total-offerings is read as a plural, it is spelled without the letters ו, i.e. as if it were a singular. This indicated his intent to elevate himself spiritually by means of the sacrifices. The animal was to take his place symbolically when the smoke of its flesh rose heavenwards. Isaiah 60,7 where the prophet, quoting G’d, exclaims  יעלו על רצון מזבחי ובית תפארתי אפאר, “they will ascend on high achieving goodwill associated with My altar and I will glorify even further My glorious House,” is similar. [We would have expected the prophet to write יעלו לרצון על מזבחי, “they will ascend on My altar to achieve goodwill, etc.” The change in the wording indicates that the person offering the sacrifice wanted to achieve a spiritual union with Him Who is “above,” Ed.] We find such a concept even with Manoach in Judges. He had not even bothered to build an altar [it was forbidden at that time to build private altars, Ed.] but the prophet described the ascent of his sacrifice from a spiritual point located as higher than the altar i.e. מעל המזבח, “from above the altar” (Judges 13,20). Subsequently, that same sacrifice is described as reaching heaven. At that point the angel is depicted as “taking a ride in the flame and ascending” (to heaven? also). The word להב in Judges may be understood as connected to לב, heart. In other words, the heart was the medium which enabled the sacrifice and what it stood for to reach heaven. This explains G’d’s reaction which is described here in the words וירח את ריח הניחח, “G’d’s bounty which originates in the celestial regions was drawn “downwards”. At that point G’d said אל לבו, to the attribute of Justice, “I will not continue ever to allow My attribute of Justice to curse the earth because of man, i.e. “because I have discovered something positive in man.”
    	8,21. מנעוריו, “from the time he is youthful.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 34,10 say that the meaning of this expression is that the word מנעוריו , refers to “the moment the baby is born.” It accompanies man from the time he is born and that this is why he does not have to observe the Torah’s commandments until he attains the age of puberty (13) as only  then does the יצר הטוב, the urge to be good, become part of him. (based on Kohelet Rabbah 9,22 and on Kohelet 4,14  כי מבית הסורים יצא למלך, “for from the time he is a prisoner he (the evil urge) rules.”) The evil urge had considered itself imprisoned in the fetus which is inside the mother’s womb and it wants to “celebrate its freedom” as soon as the baby is born. Seeing that the word הסורים is spelled defective with the letter א missing, this is an allusion to the evil urge which ignores the א, the One and Only G’d and His wishes. Alternatively, the defective spelling makes the word the equivalent of the aramaic סרי, meaning ויבאש, “it became foul.”
    	8,22. עוד כל ימי הארץ , “Furthermore, as long as the earth will continue to exist, etc.” The wording of this verse [Rabbi Chavell sees in the word כל an allusion to כלה, “something finite”] indicates that there will come a time when the earth will no longer exist. Even though the word עוד is spelled defective without the letter ו,  and this would allude to the very reverse, i.e. the infinite existence of earth based on the word עד being similar to ועד, “forever,” we must give precedence to the reading of the word over its spelling.
    	זרע וקציר, “seedtime and harvest;” the ones (being seeded) are going to be born, whereas the others are going to die (harvested). The verse goes on to explain the cause of such birth and death respectively, i.e. קר וחם, “cold and heat.” Basically, this verse intends to acquaint us with six regular phenomena which will recur at regular intervals as do day and night.
    	9,3. כירק עשב נתתי לכם את כל, ”just like the green herbs, I have given you everything”. Had the Torah only written the word כל, I would have concluded that all kind of meat is permissible  for human consumption (including that of creeping things, etc. as argued by the Gentile interpreters of the Bible). The mention of the words כירק עשב, “like the green herbs,” limits the type of meat permitted for consumption by human beings. Just as not all herbs are intended for human consumption so not all meat is intended for human consumption. Poisonous herbs and certain (most) mushrooms are certainly not fit for consumption by humans. Similarly, there are categories of meat which are harmful to human beings. The Torah permitted only the kind of meat which is beneficial for man. The plain meaning of the verse is certainly not that it permits indiscriminate consumption of all manner of meat.
    	Sanhedrin 57 sees in the restrictive clause כירק עשב, a reference to the restrictions G’d had imposed on Adam and what he was allowed to eat, i.e. that he had not been permitted to eat meat. However, now this had changed and meat became permissible as food for human consumption just as herbs had been permitted for consumption by Adam at that time. The reason for this sudden permission of meat was that at the time of the deluge all animals had been guilty of death anyway so that man had now become their superior by dint of having already saved their various species from extinction. This gave man the right to slaughter animals for food [though not to hunt them for sport, Ed.].
    	9,4. אך בשר בנפשו דמו לא תאכלו, “but flesh; with its soul, its blood you must not eat.” The plain meaning is that G’d permitted only consumption of the flesh (meat) but not consumption of the life-force, נפש. In practice this means that tissue from an animal which is still alive is prohibited as food.
    	9,5. ואך את דמכם, “however, your blood, etc.,” The Torah specifies that permission to consume the body of a creature which had once been alive applies only to those creatures whose life-force extends only to their bodies’ mobility; human beings whose life-force is superior and includes communicative skills are not permitted to be eaten. This is the deeper meaning of אך את דמכם לנפשותיכם אדרוש, “but I will demand an accounting for the blood of your life-force.” It is the prohibition to commit suicide. 
    	The Talmud Baba Kama 91 deals with he culpability of people who take their own lives. The letter ל in לנפשותיכם is similar to the same letter in Chronicles I 3,2 השלישי לאבשלום בן מעכה, “the third one of Avshalom was Maachah,” which is understood to mean השלישי אבשלום בן מעכה, “the third one was Avshalom son of Maachah.’
    	מיד כל חיה אדרשנו, “I will demand an accounting from any animal concerning him.” Any animal which will kill a human being will be held accountable for its deed by G’d. It happened that a rooster had killed a human being and that the family of the victim brought that rooster to the court and the court executed it by stoning it. The Torah continues:	ומיד האדם, “and from the human being, etc.” This refers to instances where there are witnesses to the murder. In other words: man must judge murder when there are witnesses, whereas G’d will judge the murderer when there is no evidence which is admissible in a human tribunal.
    	9,6. שופך דם האדם באדם דמו ישפך” when someone spills the blood of a human being his own blood is to be spilled by a human being.” The word באדם, means: “before a human tribunal.” There have to be witnesses who can testify. If so, the guilty person is subject to execution. This is also the thrust of the Targum’s translation: דישוד דמא דאינשא בסהדין על מימר דיינא דמיה יתשד, Onkelos clearly translates the word באדם as “in the presence of witnesses.”
    
   כי בצלם אלוקים עשה את האדם, “for in the image of G’d did the Maker make man.” This is obviously not a literal quotation of our verse, as the word העושה, does not appear in the text The author adopted Rashi’s comment that the word העושה is missing in our text and has to be substituted by the reader. Rashi adds that there are numerous other examples of this type throughout the Torah. 
    	Bereshit Rabbah 34, 14 understands the words אך את דמכם לנפשותיכם אדרוש, as including suicide by means of asphyxiation when no blood has been spilled. To the question if the kind of suicide committed by King Saul who was already in his death throes when he commanded the Amalekite to finish him off so that he would not be captured by the Philistines alive counted as suicide, the answer is that it is not, as the word אך in our verse is an exclusion and exempts such a situation.
    	The question is also asked if people such as Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah who allowed themselves to be thrown into a fiery furnace (i.e. certain death) had been guilty of a form of suicide, the answer is negative and the reason cited is also the restrictive word אך in our verse (verse 5). The words מיד כל חיה are understood by the Midrash as a reference to the four empires who have hosted Jews in exile as these are referred to as חיות, comparable to beasts in Daniel 7.3.
   מיד האדם , this is a reference to Israelites who have been referred to as אדם by Ezekiel 34,31 when he said ואתן צאני צאן מרעיתי אדם אתם, “and you are My flock, sheep of My pasture-you are Adam.” The words מיד איש אחיו refer to the descendants of Esau as Yaakov prayed in Genesis 32,12 “save me please from my brother, from Esau.” The words אדרש את נפש האדם, refer to an accounting to be rendered at a future time. 
    The words ואתם פרו ורבו “and you be fruitful and multiply,” have been placed here in order to teach that anyone who fails to practice the commandment to procreate is just as bad as someone who has committed murder. In fact, the sages in Yevamot 63 go so far as to say that failure to try and procreate is not only akin to bloodshed but that he is guilty of diminishing G’d’s image in the world. Different scholars phrase this idea slightly differently but they all agree that failure to attempt to procreate is equivalent to damaging G’d’s image in the eyes of His creatures. The idea underlying such statements is Genesis 17,7 in which the covenant between Avraham and G’d stipulates להיות לך לאלוקים ולזרעך אחריך, “to be your G’d and the G’d of your descendants after you.” G’d meant that as long as you will do your best to have descendants G’d’s benevolent presence will be manifest amongst you. If you leave no descendants after you, on whom is G’d’s benevolent presence supposed to manifest itself? On the trees? On the stones?
    	We need to explore the precise meaning of Rabbi Akiva who speaks of man who does not try and start a family as diminishing the image of G’d.” How can man “diminish” G’d’s image? Rabbi Akiva was careful not to say that such people “void” G’d’s image. We have a verse in Isaiah 13,4 קול המון בהרים דמות עם רב, “the sound of a great multitude of people, creating the impression (image) of a great many people.” There are similar verses in the Bible, and our sages explain that the expression דמות עם רב is a reference to G’d Himself. There is another homiletical explanation of the verse in Song of Songs 1,9 דמיתיך רעיתי as meaning that on occasion a human being has the impression as if he had seen an image of G’d similar to what is described in Exodus 15,2 This is my G’d and I want to exalt Him.” This is why Solomon wrote in Song of Songs דמיתיך רעיתי “I have had an image of You as my beloved companion.”
    
    	9,8. ואל בניו אתו, “and to his sons with him.” Noach’s sons also heard the divine voice. In order that we should not think that only Noach himself heard this voice and that he was to tell his sons about it, the Torah adds the word אתו, “simultaneously.” This is why you find that the paragraph phrased in the plural, i.e. G’d saying  אתכם, ביניכם, “with you”, (pl) among you, (pl).” G’d included Shem and Yaphet in those whom He addressed. Cham no longer qualified for being addressed by G’d directly.
    
    	9,13. את קשתי נתתי בענן, “I have placed My bow in the cloud, etc.” The plain meaning of these words is that the rainbow is to serve as a sign just as when Yaakov and Lavan erected a mound (pile of stones) as a monument, i.e. a symbol of their treaty in Genesis 31,52. Another example of such a symbol is found when Avraham and Avimelech concluded a treaty in Genesis 21,30 and Avraham set aside seven sheep to serve as a visible symbol of their treaty, (as testimony that he had dug the well). Any symbol which is displayed in front to two partners to a treaty or agreement is called אות, “sign.” This is particularly evident when the removal of the foreskin is referred to as the “sign,” אות, of the covenant between G’d and the Jewish people Genesis 17,11. Just as circumcision is the symbol of a special relationship between Avraham and his descendants and G’d, so the rainbow was a symbol of a new relationship between G’d and mankind which would preclude the recurrence of a deluge. The word נתתי, “I gave or I have given,” may either mean that G’d placed the rainbow in the sky now or that He had done so much previously, in fact before the deluge, at the time of creation; but at that time there had not been a covenantal significance to that phenomenon.
    	There can be no doubt that the phenomenon of the rainbow as a symbol of the new relationship between man and G’d was meant to reassure man that there would not again be a deluge on earth. The word נתתי may be translated as “I have sworn.” When G’d bestows a gift upon people it is sufficient for Him to say so; there is no need for G’d to confirm this by an oath. We have proof of this when G’d promised the land of Canaan to Avraham and his descendants as an inheritance. He did not do so by swearing an oath; He simply said לזרעך נתתי את הארץ הזאת, “to your descendants I have given this land (Genesis 15,18).” When G’d refers to this gift on future occasions He refers to an oath (Numbers 14,23, Deut. 34,4 etc.) although we never find that He accompanied the promise with an oath. We may therefore understand the word נתתי, “I have given,” as “I have sworn. “This is also the reason why Isaiah 54, 9 could say כי מי נח זאת לי אשר נשבעתי, ”for this is for Me just like the waters of the time of Noach, concerning which I have sworn, etc.” 
    	While it is true that some of our sages (Shevuot 36) have used this passage to prove that when the Torah quotes G’d as saying “no” twice in the same verse this is equivalent to an oath as the Torah writes in verse 11 ולא יכרת כל בשר עוד ממי המבול  ולא יהיה עוד מבול לשחת הארץ “and all flesh will not again be destroyed by the waters of a deluge, nor will there be another deluge to destroy the earth,” the words of the Torah are like fire and may be divided into yielding many different meanings. You will observe that Onkelos translates the words (Genesis 15,18) “לזרעך נתתי as יהבית “I have given,” whereas in our verse he translates נתתי as “יהבית also. as “I have given.” Whereas in Genesis 15,18 G’d had only promised that He would give something to Avram’s descendants, we would have expected Him to say “I will give,” especially since, at the time, Avram did not yet have any descendants.” However, the point the Torah and Onkelos wanted to make was that when G’d promises someone a gift in the future the Torah describes it as if it had been given already as when G’d promises He will surely keep His promise.
    	We have a similar situation when Avraham purchased the cave of Machpelah from Efron in Genesis 23,13 where Avraham speaks of the money for that cave in these words: נתתי כסף השדה קח ממני, “I have given the money for the field, take it from me!” (actually Avraham had not yet “given: the money as yet). Onkelos therefore correctly translates the word נתתי when spoken by Avraham (a mortal human being) as אתן, “I am going to give.” This is so in  spite of the fact that Avraham was already holding the money in his hands, and he had no intention of changing his mind.. However, there is a difference between a promise by a human being even someone of the calibre of Avraham and that of a promise by G’d. G’d does not go back on a promise; hence it may be described as if it had already been fulfilled. The lesson is that when the Torah speaks of something G’d will do in the past tense this merely confirms that the promise was unconditional.
    	Remember that this sign of the rainbow is not one that is visible on a daily basis whenever there are clouds in the sky as the wording of the Torah might suggest. The rainbow is also not visible on every rainy day However, in a generation which is guilty of sins it appears in order to remind people of G’d’s commitment. You have proof that this is the case as we have a tradition (Bereshit Rabbah 35,2) that during the generation of King Chiskiyahu a rainbow was never observed; neither was it observed during the generation of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai. The reason was that both these people were so righteous that their accumulated merits served as sufficient protection for the people of their respective generations. It is also reported (in the same section of the Midrash) that in the time of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi there never appeared a rainbow in the sky. Such phenomena explain why the word לדרת in the line לדורות עולם “for all future generations” is spelled with the respective letters ו missing. This was a hint that there would be generations which do not require this sign as reassurance that there would not be another deluge. 
    Looking at our passage from a rational-investigative point of view, the word קשת, “bow,” usually refers to an instrument of war; it is so called as it cannot shoot arrows unless the person holding it exerts considerable tension on its frame. When such a “bow” is visible in the sky it is observed in an inverted shape, its “feet” on the ground. If its “feet” were visible in the sky it would symbolise warfare, as if the arrows were pointed at man from heaven. Now that the “bow” points in the other direction, this symbolises that man and G’d are at peace with one another. It is the custom of warring nations to hold their bows in such a position (when not actively engaged in shooting) that the string faces outward whereas when they are at peace they hold it in the opposite direction.
    Scientists have written in their textbooks that the appearance of a rainbow in the sky is a natural phenomenon. The describe that the rainbow has three distinct appearances. The first arc is reddish; the second arc is greenish, whereas the third section tends towards the colour black. The famous scientist Averroes (1126-1198) called that colour “violet” tending towards the colour black. These scientists also claim that the material the rainbow is made of is opaque and that the phenomenon is caused by the rays of the sun striking the opaque moisture which is like very fine droplets of rain which still linger in the air after most rainfalls. This is why the opaqueness which was black was turned into red. It is a fact that when white traverses something black it tends to become reddish-looking You will observe that when moist trees are subjected to fire the flame which rises from that fire is red because the fire itself tends to be reddish-whitish. It passes something black, i.e. the smoke, so that the flame which emerges afterwards is red.
    Bereshit Rabbah 35,3 sees something homiletical in the whole passage dealing with the rainbow. The word קשתי is related to היקש, “comparison,” similar in meaning to the word דמות, “likeness.” G’d said: “My rainbow is sort of a reminder of My image when it appears in the cloud.” Is it not extremely irreverent to say something like this? We must therefore understand the word קשתי as "My straw.” The meaning is that just as the straw, i.e. the pedicle of a fruit is necessary but quite subordinate to the fruit itself, it is necessary at times for such subordinate matters to become visible. Man possesses an invisible essence, the soul, and a visible peripheral shell, the body. The words “it will be when I place My clouds above the earth,” are similar to G’d saying: “when I fuse the physical with the spiritual, intangible, then this rainbow will become visible on earth.” The message to mankind is that the invisible spiritual forces we call soul must become manifest in the body. This is the meaning of the words ונראתה הקשת בענן, “the rainbow will become visible in the cloud.” The cloud is the curtain which divides  between man’s body and soul and the rainbow is the imperative call to man for his soul to become manifest.
    	A kabbalistic approach. The word קשתי is derived from קשה, “hard, severe.” It is a reference to the attribute of Justice, the “hard” attribute. G’d said that it should become the sign of the covenant, i.e. the sign of circumcision. The Torah very significantly did not say את הקשת נתתי בענן, “the rainbow I have placed in the cloud,” in other words “the well-known rainbow.” The reason G’d refers to “My rainbow,” is to remind us that the cloud He speaks of is not one of the regular clouds which appear in the sky every day. He does not speak of the kind of cloud which discharges rain. G’d speaks of the ענני הכבוד, “the clouds of glory,” such as when we are told in Exodus 16,10 והנה כבוד ה' נראה בענן, “and behold! The glory of G’d became manifest in the clouds” (the prelude to the Israelites receiving meat and bread from heaven at the hands of G’d).” The meaning of the words in our verse ונראתה הקשת בענן, is “the attribute of Justice will (then) become manifest in the cloud.” Seeing that we have a verse in Ezekiel 1,28 כמראה הקשת אשר יהיה בענן ביום הגשם, כן מראה הנוגה סביב הוא מראה דמות כבוד ה', “as the appearance of the bow which shall be on a rainy day, so was the appearance  of the brilliance all around. That was the appearance of the semblance of the glory of G’d.” Our sages in Chagigah 16 interpreted these words as being a warning that anyone who looks deliberately at the rainbow will have diminished eyesight. 
    	You should be enlightened by the following comment in Bereshit Rabbah 35,3 on the words את קשתי נתתי בענן. “The word קשתי describes something that is an obstacle for Me.” Is there then such a thing as an “obstacle” for G’d? Is there anything that HE cannot overcome?. We must therefore understand the word as derived from קש, ‘straw,” the pedicle of a fruit. Why did the Midrash repeat the same comment twice? Look at the conclusion of the passage! Here G’d speaks to Noach alone (not to his children) when He says “this is the sign of the covenant which I have established between Me and all of mankind.” At this point G’d took Noach into His confidence and revealed a mystical aspect to him which He had not revealed to his children. This is the deeper meaning of the words זאת אות הברית, “this is the visible symbol of the covenant.”
    	9,20 ויחל נח איש האדמה ויטע כרם, “Noach the man of the earth debased himself and planted a vineyard.” The reason that the Torah reports the planting of a vineyard by Noach as immediately following the covenant of the rainbow may well be in order to tell us that wine is an allusion to the attribute of Justice something that you are already familiar with. Concerning this our sages have said in Berachot 50: “one is not to recite a benediction over wine until one has added some water to it.” No one had paid any attention to this until the time of Noach. The early generations had each planted vines for their personal consumption . Noach began to plant vines in rows which we call כרם. This is why the Torah wrote ויחל, “he commenced,” i.e. he commenced to go about this matter in a novel fashion.” Another possible way of explaining the word ויחל is connected to the fact that Noach was the first member of the tenth generation of mankind, and every tenth is sacred. Now that he became preoccupied with the growing of wine, an intoxicating drink, he debased himself from his former state of holiness. This is the meaning of the word ויחל.
    	The Torah informed us of many problems that are apt to be caused by wine if wine was even able to cause a righteous man such as Noach, a man who had saved all mankind, to commit a sin by cursing his descendants. This whole paragraph is at least as much a warning to mankind as is the passage in Numbers chapter six which discusses that a nazirite must abstain from wine and any grape product. Our sages in Sanhedrin 70 note that the passage discussing wine contains the letter ו 13 times (ויחל, ויטע, וישת, וישכר, ויתגל, וירא חם, ויגד, ויקח שם ויפת, וישימו, וילכו  ויכסו,  ויקץ, וידע, אחורנית ) “And he debased himself, and he planted, and he drank, and he got drunk; and he uncovered himself, and Cham saw, and he told; and Shem and Yaphet took the cover, and they placed the cover; and they walked backwards; and he woke up; and he knew , and they did not look at their father’s nakedness. This is what Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 23,29 למי אוי, למי אבוי למי מדינים למי שיח למי פצעים חנם, למי חכללית עינים “Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions, who has quarrels? Who has injuries without cause, who suffers from redness of his eyes? Those who linger over wine, etc.” Solomon does not refer exclusively to wine but he includes all other matters which are the objects of man’s lusting after worldly pleasures and which are addictive and become the cause of man’s [premature] death in this world and his losing his right to eternal life in the hereafter. This is why Solomon adds in Kohelet 2,25 כי מי יאכל ומי יחוש חוץ ממני, “for who should eat and who should make haste (to enjoy these things) more than I?” He meant that he more than any other mortal being was able to indulge himself by tasting all the  pleasures of the body available in this life. Having tasted all these pleasures he concluded that these too were all vanity, not worth having.
    
    9,21. ויתגל בתוך אהלה, “he uncovered himself within his tent.” The word אהלה meaning “his tent” is spelled with the letter ה  at the end as if it meant “her tent,” i. e. the tent of his wife. This is an allusion to the fact that overindulgence in wine leads to excessive sexual activity.
    The Midrash in Bereshit Rabbah 36,7 conjectures that the spelling of the word אהלה is an allusion to the kingdom of the Ten Tribes who were exiled because of too much preoccupation with intoxicating wine. The capital city of that Kingdom, Shomron, is also referred to as אהלה in Ezekiel 23,4. Moreover we have a verse in Isaiah 28,7 וגם אלה ביין שגו ובשכר תעו “and these people are also muddled by wine and dazed by liquor.” The reference is to the Ten Tribes of the Northern Kingdom. The reason the Torah chose the expression (double entendre) ויתגל to describe Noach’s uncovering himself is that this word also means exile, גלות.
    9,24. וידע את אשר עשה לו בנו הקטן , “he became aware of what his younger son had done to him.” Cham was the youngest of Noach’s sons. Why then did Noach curse Canaan, Cham’s son instead of Cham? Actually, there were two reasons why Noach did not curse Cham himself 1) He was not able to curse Cham effectively seeing G’d had already blessed him as we read in 9,1 “G’d blessed Noach and his sons.” 2) Had Noach cursed Cham he would have only be able to make such a curse apply to his body but not his descendants (seeing that any offspring of Cham which had already been born would not have been included in he curse). This is why he chose to curse Canaan who as Cham’s firstborn so that even if he were to father a thousand children hey would all be included in the curse. When the verse tells us that Cham’s offspring were: Cush, Mitzrayim, and Put, and Canaan, in that order (10,6) which at first glance gives the impression that Canaan was the youngest of the four, the Torah enumerated these sons after the curse, at a time when Canaan had already been demoted from his rank as the firstborn. Proof that Canaan  was indeed Cham’s firstborn son is when the Torah said in 9,21 “He (Cham) the father of Canaan saw his father’s nakedness, etc. If Cham had already had other sons at the time, why would the Torah describe him as the father of Canaan rather than as the father of his older brothers. No doubt at the time when this occurred Canaan was the only son whom Cham had fathered.
    9,25. עבד עבדים יהיה לאחיות, “a slave of slaves  shall he be to his brothers.” According to the plain meaning of the text, Noach made the curse fit the sin of his son. He who had shamed his father by viewing his nakedness and not only not covering his father’s nakedness but calling in his brothers to show them that spectacle, in other words, making sport of his father, was cursed by becoming an object of derision as a punishment for having made his own father an object of derision. 
    Shem and Yaphet who had covered their father’s nakedness and put the blanket on their shoulders in a dignified manner walking backwards, were rewarded by G’d in a manner fitting their sensitive conduct. Israel, the descendants of Shem who later on received the Torah were given the commandment of ציצית, “fringes” on their garments as a form of distinction (compare Tanchuma on our verse). The descendants of Yaphet will merit proper burial at the time of the final war before the arrival of the Messiah, the war between Israel and Gog and Magog. We know from 10,2 that Gomer and Magog are descendants of Yaphet. From this entire episode we can learn that when two people between them perform a single commandment, they receive a reward for having performed the entire commandment. Furthermore, the one who commenced the performance receives a greater reward. Ezekiel 39,11 states אתן למגוג קבר, “I will provide a burial ground for Magog.” This is his reward for his conduct vis-a-vis his father Noach although in the war under discussion he attacked Israel. The Torah stresses the difference between the relative merit acquired by Shem and that acquired by Yaphet in our episode of covering their father, by not writing ויקחו את השמלה “they took the garment,” but by writing ויקח שם ויפת את השמלה, “Shem and Yaphet each took the garment, etc.” The word ויקח is in the singular. This is an allusion that Shem made the greater effort of the two.
    The reward of the מצוה of ציצית is greater than the reward of being allocated burial We find a similar distinction between relative merits awarded for the performance of similar virtuous deeds when the Talmud in Sotah 36 discusses the relative moral value of both Joseph and Yehudah sanctifying the name of the Lord. Joseph’s deed performed in the privacy of Potiphar’s house when he declined the efforts of Mrs Potiphar to seduce him quoting that it would be sinful against both G’d and her husband was rewarded by G’d by his having the letter ה of the holy name of G’ added to his name (Psalms 81,6). Yehudah, who sanctified G’d’s name in public when entering the sea of reeds before it had been split, thus demonstrating his faith in G’d’s forthcoming help, was rewarded by his name containing all the letters of the holy name of G’d. 
    According to a Midrashic interpretation, the words יהיה לאחיו “he will be for his brothers,” means that thirty descendants will be descended from Canaan  (compare 10,15-18). Also the standard compensation to be paid by someone who killed a Canaanite slave is 30 shekel of silver. Both these matters are alluded to in the word יהיה in our verse. ,
    
    9,27. יפת אלוקים ליפת, “may the Lord grant beauty to Yaphet.” Noach blessed Yaphet by promising him that G’d would increase the area of the earth he would dwell in. Onkelos translates the word כי ירחיב, “when He will expand,” in Deut 12,20 as ארי יפת. We see that to this very day the descendants of Yaphet occupy a major part of the surface of the earth.
    Noach blessed his son Shem by promising that the presence of the Lord would be manifest within his dwellings. There is no other nation which has experienced the presence of G’d in its midst except the people of Israel. This is partly due to the fact that they are descended from Shem. The expression וישכון באהלי שם is most prominently repeated when Yaakov, Yitzchok’s pious son is described as יושב אהלים, “a dweller in tents.” This expression in Genesis 25,27 is a reference to “the tents of Torah,” the most wide-spread manifestation of the presence of G’d. There is an allusion here that the presence of G’d, i.e. its becoming manifest, is usually found where Torah is being studied. In this manner Shem actually received two blessings from his father. Although G’d will, on occasion, grace Yaphet, grant him flashes of insights into the workings of the divine, the same is reserved on a regular basis for the descendants of Shem. An example of these “flashes of insight” is provided by the fact that King Coresh, (Ezra 1,2) a descendant of Yaphet, gave orders to rebuild the Holy Temple in Jerusalem and provided money and military escorts for the Jews to do so (compare Bereshit Rabbah 36,12 and Yuma 9).
    Actually, the presence of G’d (in its full Majesty) dwelled only in the Temple which Solomon had built. This is the meaning of וישכון באהלי שם, “it will dwell” (feel at home) in the tents of Shem. This is the opinion expressed in Yuma 10 ” The Talmud states that the reason for the absence of the presence of G’d in the Second Temple was not only the fact that most Jews preferred to stay in the Diaspora but that even if they had all moved to the Holy land, G’d could not have felt at home therein as it was built by grace of Coresh instead of by grace of descendants of Shem. Genesis 10,4 proves that the Persians are descended from Yaphet. Rabbi Yossi claims that the name Tiras mentioned there is equivalent to Paras, i.e Persia.
   ויהי כנען עבד למו, “and Canaan be a slave to them.” The word למו refers back to “his brothers.” He is to be a slave to the descendants of Shem and Yaphet. The reason the Torah repeats this for a second time is to stress that the state of slavery decreed for Canaan and his descendants is not something temporary. It is also a hint that in due course Shem will inherit the lands of Canaan and all his property. This is simply an application of the principle that anything which is owned by a slave becomes the property of his master (Pessachim 88). 
    
    10,1. ואלה תולדת בני נח, שם חם ויפת, “And these are the descendants of Noach: Shem, Cham, and Yaphet.” Starting with this verse and including chapter 11 verse 1, you will find the names of seventy individuals. All of them are descendants of Noach and at the end of that paragraph the Torah states: אלה משפחות בני נח לתולדותם בגויהם ומאלה נפרדו הגוים בארץ אחר המבול “These are the families of Noach’s descendants, according to their generations by their nations; and from these the nations were separated on the earth after the flood.” We learn from this verse that the world comprises 70 nations each with its own language. Chapter 11 verse 8 tells us that the various people at the time of the Tower of Babel were scattered and that each group would have its own language The reason the Torah makes a point of enumerating seventy different nations is to contrast this fact with the seventy people, all descendants of Yaakov, who descended with him to Egypt (Genesis 46,27). This is also what Moses had in mind at the time when he blessed the Jewish people shortly before his death (Deut. 32,8), and said בהנחל עליון גוים, בהפרידו בני אדם. “When the Supreme One gave the nations their inheritance, when He separated the children of man.” The nations Moses referred to are the ones mentioned in our chapter. Starting with that period in human history, G’d allocated boundaries, גבולות, to the various nations. All of this was to correspond to the founding members of the Jewish nation who went down to Egypt. The reason Moses said in Deut. 32,8 יצב גבולות עמים למספר בני ישראל , “He established the boundaries of the nations according to the number of the children of Israel,” instead of saying למספר בני יעקב , “according to the number of the sons of Yaakov,” was to stress that the children of Israel consisted of twelve separate tribes.
    It is worth recalling that the reason the Torah spends so much space on the details of this list of the descendants of Cham is to inform us about how many nations were descended from him is to make us aware that Avraham, a descendant of Shem, merited to become the father of the Jewish nation. The Torah hints that the only reason that there was a need for seventy nations in the first place was to ensure that out of all these there would emerge at least the one nation that G’d has chosen to become special to Him.
    Our sages (Tanchuma Vayeshev 1) have illustrated the matter by means of a parable. When someone loses a pearl on the beach, he will bring a sieve and sieve the entire sand on the beach in order to retrieve his pearl. Once he has found his pearl he throws the sand back on the beach. The parable intends to illustrate that just as all that sand on the beach only serves to yield up the one pearl, so there was no need for G’d to have all that many different nations except for that large number to eventually yield a Jewish nation. The sages said further (Bereshit Rabbah 1,8) that the concept of a Jewish nation had preceded the concept of all these other nations. We know that in G’d’s mind any end product had been carefully envisioned long before it would become manifest. This is also why the Jewish people did not appear on the stage of history until all the other nations already were in existence.
    Normal intelligence dictates that any end product must have been planned before it was brought into existence so that of course it existed in concept long before it was actualised. It is possible to prove this from the construction of the Holy Tabernacle where the Torah specifically instructed Betzalel (Exodus 35,32) ולחשוב מחשבות, “to plan appropriate thoughts,” (for the construction of golden and silver furnishings for the Tabernacle). 
    Nachmanides wrote concerning this chapter that the reason the Torah goes into all these details was to prove to its listeners that G’d preceded the establishment of the universe. It was to enable Avraham and his descendants to command their respective offspring to tell about what happened to Noach, and how his family was saved in the Ark. Avraham, who had still known Noach personally, was able to relate these matters as an eye witness to one of its survivors who had been told by Noach (and presumably by Shem). Noach’s father Lemech  in turn had known Adam and so was able to relate history as someone who had heard it directly from those who had experienced it. Avraham as a witness to the creation of the first human being was only two persons removed from someone who had been expelled from Gan Eden. Yitzchak and Yaakov had both been contemporaries of Shem still. In other words even they had spoken to survivors of the deluge. Yaakov, no doubt, told all this to the people who descended to Egypt with him as well as to Pharaoh and his servants. According to a calculation made by Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra, Noach died when Avraham was 58 years old. The very letters in the name נח amount to 58 in their numerical value.
    
    10,11. מן הארץ ההיא יצא אשור, “from that land Ashur went forth, etc.” He was one of the sons of Shem as we are told in verse 22 that Shem’s sons were Eylam, Ashur, Arpachshad Lud and Aram. Seeing that most of the people alive during the generation of the Tower were descendants of Shem, the Torah mentioned that Ashur had left that land (the valley including Babel). He had not had part in the uprising against G’d that those people were planning in accordance with the statement by our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 37,4. the words מן הארץ ההיא mean that Ashur dissociated himself from these people and their land as he realised they were preparing to rebel against G’d. This also explains Psalms 83,9 גם אשור נלוה עמם, “also Ashur made common cause with them,” Seeing that on this occasion Ashur was on the side of G’d, the psalmist had to contrast this with a future occasion when also Ashur joined the forces of evil planning to wipe out the Jewish people.
    
    10,14. ואת פתרוסים ואת כסלוחים אשר יצאו משם פלשתים, “and the Pathrusim and the Casluhim, whence the Philistines came forth.” The Torah stresses this in order to tell us that the nation of the Philistines have their origin in bastardy The two above-mentioned nations engaged in wife-swapping and the Philistines emerged as a result of this incest (compare Bereshit Rabbah 37,5). You will find that all these descendants of Mitzrayim have names which end with the letters ים, “sea,” an allusion to their eventual demise in the sea (Pessikta Zutrata). The first of these nations was called לודים, since they were both born in the sea and drowned in the sea.
    
    10,15. וכנען ילד את צידון בכורו, “and Canaan begot Tzidon his firstborn.” We have now heard about ten descendants of Canaan; all of them (and their lands) were promised to Avraham when G’d promised him the Holy Land at the covenant between the pieces. We read there (Genesis 15,18-19) “to your descendants I have given this land from the river adjoining Egypt to the great river, the river  Euphratus; the Kenite, the Kenizite, the Kadmoni, etc.” The Torah enumerates a total of ten Canaanite nations in that instance. The reason these nations appear with different names in chapter 15 is that in this chapter only the names given to their respective founders by their fathers are mentioned. At the time G’d promised the lands of these nations to Avraham their names had undergone changes just as they no longer spoke the same language as they had spoken at the time they were born and grew up. When you count the names of Canaan’s descendants listed here you will actually find that there are eleven. This is easily accounted for; Canaan’s firstborn Tzidon was the one who was called “the Canaanite.” He was joined with one of his brothers  who never developed into a clan that qualified for the term “nation.” Of the ten nations whose land G’d promised to Avraham only seven were subsequently conquered by the Israelites in the days of Joshua. But the three remaining ones, i.e. The Kenite, the Kenizite, and the Kadmoni, have never been conquered by the Jewish people. In other words, the passage in which G’d promised all these nations to Avraham indicates that there is a future for the Jewish people after their exile when G’d will make good His promise. G’d’s thoughts are very profound indeed. Consider for a moment why He wanted Canaan of all people to own the Holy Land before it came into possession by the Jewish people. Seeing that Canaan was the slave who became the servant of Shem at his father’s command and who acquired the Holy Land at the time all the nations were split up, there would not be the slightest complaint by anyone who would be dispossessed due to the Jewish people taking over that land. Had it not belonged to slaves who by definition do not own anything in their own right, G’d would have had to justify dispossessing such a people. Now that this land was “owned” by the Canaanites there was not even a need to justify their becoming dispossessed. 
    11,4.ונעשה לנו שם , “so that we can make a name for ourselves.” According to the plain meaning of the text, all these people wanted was to settle in one single location on earth in order to stay together. However, they did not find a location other than the valley of Shinor in which to do this. This is why they wanted to build a city and a tower which could  accommodate all of them. The purpose of the tower was to serve as a beacon so that people all over the earth would be able to see it and to orient themselves by means of it. They themselves would all live in a single city. This is the reason the Torah quoted them as saying פן נפוץ, “lest we will scatter.” This is why G’d punished them by scattering them to teach them that they had contravened His commandment to fill the earth with their presence (9,1). Isaiah 45,18 pointed out that G’d had made the earth in order for it to be settled by mankind.
    From an homiletical point of view the operative clause in our veres are the words “let us make a name for “ourselves.” This is an oblique reference to idolatry. The word שם, “name,” here and the same word in Exodus 23,13 ושם אלוהים אחרים לא תזכירו, “and you must not mention the name of any other deity,” mean the same thing. We also have a Midrashic comment in Midrash Tehillim 1, that the word הבה, introduces an evil thought, an evil intention as it does in Judges 20,7 הבו לכם דבר ועצה הלום, “come up with a plan here and now!”. Furthermore, we have a tradition that the word עיר, “city,” is a reference to a deity as we find in Daniel 4,10 that the words עיר וקדיש refer to a destructive angel (Satan or similar). I have read in a Midrash on the Ten Commandments that these people proposed to take spades planning to invade heaven to flood it and drain it in order to ensure that another deluge could not originate from that source. They wanted to take large chunks of heaven and to engage in war with the King of the heavens. The Tower had seventy steps in an easterly direction and seventy steps in a westerly direction on its opposite side. G’d descended those seventy steps accompanied by seventy angels and He confused their language and their dialects. Thus far that Midrash.
    
    We also read in Bereshit Rabbah 38,6 that these people said:  “we do not agree that G’d should have an exclusive right to heaven whereas we have only been assigned earth. Let us make war against Him.” (This Midrash appears in a variety of slightly different versions). 
    Looking at this story from a rational point of view, the words “and let us make a name for ourselves,” must be understood thus. The people of that generation were very advanced in matters of philosophy and even technology. However, they used their intelligence in a sinful manner. They constructed the city and Tower to protect themselves against a deluge of fire (seeing that G’d had promised not to again bring a deluge of water). This is what the word “war” in the Midrash refers to. They prepared to contend with heavenly forces (such as angels) against the will of the Lord. They tried to isolate and tame the power of fire in order to neutralise its deadly effect so hat it could not engulf their city. The author quotes scientists in his generation as attempting similarly to “tame” the power of “fire.” [I presume he speaks about the construction of lightning rods. Ed.]
    There was another reason which motivated them. They had been witness to the fact that G’d had decreed death on Adam, while they perceived themselves as physically powerful and enjoying a much longer life span than the 120 years G’d appeared to have decreed. They thought that they were all powerful [G’d Himself (verse 6) questioned whether their power should not be curtailed.] They planned to scale heaven while alive and well in order to overcome the impediment to this imposed upon them by their mortality. Their principal aim was to overcome the decree issued against Adam which made all of them mortal also. All of their planning in building the Tower was designed to achieve immortality. The reason G’d had to scatter them was because they planned to nullify His world order. The Torah has worded its report in such a way that it did not spell out these people’s evil intent in detail.
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 38,6 elaborate on the words דברים אחדים, saying  these words should be read as דברים אחודים, “words  which were kept isolated, made inaccessible.” Whereas the Torah revealed the sin of the generation of the deluge, it did not spell out the sin of the generation of the Tower.
    I have heard it said that there were seventy people engaged in building the Tower. No doubt there was a special reason why seventy, and only seventy people would have been actively engaged in the building of that Tower.
    A kabbalistic approach to the meaning of the words “let us make a name for ourselves.” Fundamentally, their sin was the same as that of their forefather Adam who had become guilty of what our sages called קצץ בנטיעות, the heresy practiced by Enosh (4,26). The word הוחל in that verse needs to be translated as “was desecrated.” Here too the words וזה החלם לעשות have to be understood in that same vein, i.e. “and now they committed a desecration.” Another way of understanding the same word is to derive it from ,תחלה “beginning;” in that case the correct translation would be “and this is what they commenced to do!” However, the words must not be detached from their plain meaning. The common denominator between these two explanations is that these people undertook something which, if left unchecked, would result in the end of mankind. This is the deeper meaning of the expression קצץ בנטיעות, “cut off the saplings at their very roots” (figuratively speaking).
    The reason the Torah uses the word וזה “and this,” is that this word is related to שם i.e. ונעשה לנו שם, “let us make a name for ourselves.” The word שם in this instance is a reference to the highest emanation [the one known in modern kabbalistic literature as כתר. Ed.] They wanted to conquer the highest regions of heaven. They were under the mistaken impression that that emanation is the absolute highest level of “heaven,” i.e. celestial force, which exists. This very mistaken belief undermines the true faith and is equivalent to someone being מקצץ בנטיעות. Considering all this, the Torah had said previously (11,2) ויהי בנסעם מקדם, “it was when they departed from the One called Kedem, i.e. from the Creator who preceded all” (compare Bereshit Rabbah 38,7). The Torah did want us to know that basically, their sin was of the same category as that of the first man. This is why the Torah refers to the people in this paragraph as בני האדם, “Adam’s sons”, to hint that what they did paralleled what Adam had done. Rabbi Berechyah in Bereshit Rabbah 38,9 asks rhetorically: “how else was the Torah supposed to describe these people if not as בני האדם?” Should the Torah have referred to the as בני חמירא, the “sons of donkeys, or “the sons of camels?” The answer [I think, Ed.] is in the extra letter ה before the wordאדם  i.e. that the Torah stresses that they behaved not just like ordinary human beings but like the first human being, Adam [as opposed to 5,1 where the Torah describes זה ספר תולות אדם, “this is the Book of the generations of man,” without the letter ה in front of the word אדם Ed.] 
    The words בני האדם are a hint that these people were like the first human being and the Torah had indicated that the people of the deluge had sinned by denying that there is something higher than the emanation כתר, which had let to their destruction in the “lower universe.” We had explained earlier that the attribute of Justice, even when in a dominant role, is always accompanied by some aspect of the attribute of Mercy as represented by שם the Ineffable Name י-ה-ו-ה. In the case of the deluge, the principle of מדה כנגד מדה operated in such a way that as punishment for that generation’s refusal to recognise anything beyond the emanation שם=כתר, they experienced the full impact of the unrelieved attribute of Justice so that even the earth they had lived on was destroyed. The earth had been the creation of the attribute of Justice, i.e. אלוקים. The attribute of Mercy, i.e. השם, had been “co-opted” only at the time when the Torah reported the creation of Adam (2,4) as a functioning human being
    Basically, man had tried to separate the role of the attribute of אלוקים from the role of the attribute שם, or י-ה-ו-ה. G’d demonstrated to them that such an attempt if successful spells disaster both for them and for the earth they lived on. They had wanted only “nature,” as represented by the attribute אלוקים.
    It is quite possible that prior to the deluge such considerations had not had a philosophical basis, had been mostly based on an emotional resentment of authority from an extra-terrestrial force. At this time, it had been developed to a philosophy by highly intelligent people, people who had already learned of the value of co-operation, unity, working towards a common goal. This was why their newly developed approach was so dangerous. [I have taken the liberty to phrase these thoughts in my own way. Ed.]
    G’d scattered them (i.e. separated them from their unity) all over the globe as retaliation for their attempt to “scatter,” i.e. separate His attributes from one another. Furthermore, they had calculated the precise number of steps needed to ascend to heaven (70) [according to Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer, the number reflects 70 miles, a mile per step. Ed.] The number may also allude to the 70 representatives of the 70 nations in the celestial spheres. According to tradition, Nebuchadnezzar (who was also from Babel (though it was renamed Babylon) introduced the golden image of בל into the remnants of the Holy Temple to symbolise that this philosophy had triumphed. (In Jeremiah 51,44 the prophet predicts the eventual humiliation of that idol and that of the people who worshiped it) Daniel 3,1 speaks of a huge golden image Nebuchadnezzar had put up in the valley of Dura in the land of Babylon. This valley may be identical with the valley described in our chapter  where the Torah described these people as וימצאו בקעה, “they found a valley.” All of this is part of the aforementioned hints the Torah provided concerning the sins of that generation. My the Lord protect us from committing similar errors.
    
    11,9. כי שם בלל ה' שפת כל הארץ ומשם הפיצם ה', “for it was there that G’d confused the language of the whole earth, and from there G’d scattered them.” You should know that wherever the name of G’d (the four-lettered one, even) appears in a reverse order such as here when the respective first letters in the four words    הארץ ומשם הפיצם ה' appear, the Torah means the attribute of Justice. This is just one of the examples of this rule. In every one of the numerous instances where we encounter the use of the four-lettered name of G’d where we would not have expected it, the addition of such a reverse allusion as we have shown here makes it plain that the Torah had the attribute of Justice in mind. I will demonstrate this in detail whenever we shall encounter this phenomenon.
    Seeing that our passage appeared to refer to the attribute of Mercy when we read such phrases as וירא ה' “G’d saw”, (verse 5) or ויאמר ה’,”G’d said,” (verse 6), names of G’d which suggest that the attribute of Mercy was at work, the Torah had to provide us with an allusion to show that at that time the world was already under the attribute of Justice which had already been poised to strike. This attribute of Justice was now “wrapped” inside a layer of the attribute of Mercy in recognition of the unity which was a dominant feature of mankind’s lifestyle at that time. People loved one another and the Torah reflected this by writing that they spoke one language and had a common purpose.” This is the reason why G’d only scattered them instead of destroying them.
    The confusing of their languages was an example of the principle of the punishment fitting the crime, מדה כנגד מדה. Their sin consisted of the words they spoke, i.e. ויאמרו הבה נבנה לנו עיר, “they said: ”let us build a city for ourselves, etc.” Seeing they had put the power of speech to improper use, their power of speech now became impaired so that they no longer could understand each other.
    The descendants of Noach who had numbered seventy at that time, were now divided into seventy nations, each with a distinctive language. You know already that there are seventy “princes,” i.e. representatives in the celestial spheres who represent these seventy nations before the throne of G’d. They correspond to the respective kings or heads of these nations here on earth. Each one of these seventy celestial “princes” is a part of the nation he represents, unlike Yaakov (Jeremiah 10,16) of whom the prophet said לא כאלה חלק יעקב כי יוצר הכל הוא, “unlike these is the portion of Yaakov, for it is He Who forms all things.” Just as the Jewish people do not need intermediaries before G’d but have direct access to Him, so the Hebrew tongue is superior to all the other languages in the world. It is G’d’s own language and as such it is as superior to other languages as is G’d Himself to any of the agents He has appointed in this world to do His bidding.
    This is what our sages in Shabbat 12 alluded to when they said: “when someone asks in Aramaic (in his prayer) for whatever he needs, the angels will not assist him (add their pleading on his behalf) as the angels do not understand that language.” This poses a problem as we have already stated that the great planet is more knowledgeable than man, and the angels are certainly more knowledgeable than that great planet; if man knows Aramaic, why does not that angel understand that language? Besides, we have a tradition that both Joseph (Sotah 37) and Mordechai knew all the seventy languages (compare Megillah 13).
    The correct explanation of the statement in Shabbat 12 that מלאכי השרת אינן מכירין בלשון ארמי ואינן נזקקין לו is that their knowledge of the Aramaic language is of no help to the people praying in that language as just as these angels do not act as agents for Jews praying in any language other than Hebrew they also do not act as agents for Jews praying in Aramaic. There is, however, no doubt that the angels do understand that language just as they understand every language. It is the duty of the Jews to draw the help from celestial sources by means of the Holy Tongue, Hebrew. Unless they are capable of praying in Hebrew their prayer loses in effectiveness.
    
    11,10. אלה תולדות שם, “these are the descendants of Shem.” You do not find the word death, or “the died,” in connection with any of the descendants of Shem who have been enumerated here [except when the Torah reports that Avram’s father Terach died in Charan (verse 32). Ed.] as you find it mentioned when the Torah enumerated the generations between Adam and Noach. It is possible that the reason is that the kingdom of David (the Messiah) will be descended from them, and in due course  the Messiah will be the cause of banishing death altogether. [At this point our author once again indulges in speculation about the timing of that event. Seeing that time has passed and the Messiah did not arrive, I have omitted the rest of this passage. Ed.]
    
    11,28. .וימת הרן עלפני תרח אביו בארץ מולדתו באור כשדים, “Haran died during the lifetime of his father Terach in the land of his birth by the fire of the Chaldeans.” From this verse we hear about the great loyalty of Avraham to His G’d and the strength of his belief in, Him in that he was prepared to die a martyr’s death rather than betray his belief in G’d. If the Torah had not provided us with a hint of this here, it would have had to spell out the incident in order to explain why Avraham suddenly qualified to be spoken to by G’d directly in 12.1. and was told to move to the land of Canaan. It is just not normal that man should qualify for receiving a direct communication from G’d unless G’d had first told us something about the outstanding characteristic of such a person.
    We find that G’d did not communicate with Noach (6,13)until the Torah had reported (6,9) that G’d considered him a ”righteous and perfect individual” in his time. Our verse therefore lays the groundwork for G’d preparing to communicate with Avraham.
    It is a fact that Avraham’s birthplace was not Ur in the land of the Casdim, but that he was born on the west side of the river Euphratus. We have direct confirmation of this in Joshua 24,2 where we are told מעבר הנהר ישבו אבותיכם מעולם, “your ancestors have lived on the far side of the river Euphratus from time immemorial.” The word מעולם in that verse is clear proof of the fact that Avraham was not born in Ur. This is also why he was known as אברם העברי, in 14,13,  “Avraham from across the river.” Had he been born in Ur Casdim he should have been known as אברם הכשדי, “Avram from the land of the Chaldaens.” Another proof for our contention is the fact that Nachor, Avraham’s brother is reported as living in Charan, a place well west of the river Euphratus. If we find in verse 31 that Terach took his son Avram and Lot the son of Haran with him as well as Sarai his daughter-in- law on his way from Ur Casdim in order to go to the land of Canaan and that they got as far as Charan, this suggests that Nachor was the only one who remained in Ur Casdim at the time.
     However, the truth is that Nachor had never left his birthplace in the first place. This is also the reason the Torah writes the word “in the land of his birth” in the middle of the verse instead of at its end. The word  מולדתו, “his birthplace,” refers to Aram which was well to the west of the river Euphratus. We find that our sages in Baba Batra 91 mention that Avram was a prisoner for ten years, three of them in a place called Kuta, and seven years in a place called Kardo. According to some scholars the former place is identical with Ur Casdim. Others hold that it was west of the river Euphratus. You should know that Terach begat his sons Avram and Nachor on the west side of the river Euphratus, the land of his fathers, and that subsequently he migrated to Ur Casdim to join his son Avram where his younger son Haran was born. Nachor had stayed in his birthplace in Charan all that time. The words  בארץ מולדתו refer to Haran, who had indeed been born in Ur Casdim.
    Maimonides, in his More Nevuchim 3,29, writes that there is a record in Egyptian books about agriculture that Avram was born in a place called Kuta and that he disagreed with all the local people concerning their worshiping the sun. The king therefore imprisoned him where he remained for many years. Some time later the king feared that Avram would cause destruction to his country and that he would sway his subjects into changing their religion so that he decided to expel Avram to the borders of the land of Canaan.Thus far Maimonides.
    As to the meaning of the word אור in our verse. The word appears in three meanings. 1) valley or depression; 2) fire; 3) mountain. The reason that it may mean valley is based on Isaiah 11,8 מאורת הצפעוני, ”the den of an adder.” The prophet calls the den of that viper מאורה, and a valley is a depression in the earth. Our verse then would mean: “from the valley of the Casdim.” The reason the word may mean “mountain,” is based on Isaiah 24,15  באורים כבוד ה', “for the glory of the Lord is in the mountains,” and the reason the word was used to symbolise mountains was that the Israelites used to light flares on the mountains to inform the people that the new moon had been sighted so that the people who lived far from Jerusalem would observe the next day as New Moon. This is what is meant in Isaiah 24,15 באיי הים שם ה' אלוקי ישראל, “the name of the Lord G’d of Israel is (even) in the islands of the sea.” The prophet urges  the people to proclaim the mighty miracles of G’d by honouring G’d with lights, as if the meaning of the words הר כשדים were “fire.” We encounter this word in Isaiah 44,16 חמותי ראיתי אור “I am hot, I can feel the fire (heat).“ It is the opinion of the sages in the Talmud that Nimrod threw Avram into a fiery furnace when he refused to retract his refusal to consider him a deity.”
    Whatever the true facts, there occurred either a public  or a private miracle for Avram while he was in Ur Casdim when 1) the king who had imprisoned him took him out of prison which was situated in either a valley or on a mountain instead of killing him, or, 2) he was miraculously saved from the fiery furnace.
    
    11,30.  ותהי שרי עקרה, אין לה ולד, “Sarah remained barren, she had no child.” Some women remain childless for many years, appearing to be barren; at the end of a number of years they become pregnant and have children. Our verse informs us that in addition to Sarai being עקרה, “barren,” she was unable to conceive any children by nature, i.e. אין לה ולד. This is why both Avram and Sarai decided to leave their home and to move to the land of Canaan hoping that due to the additional merit of the Holy Land they would be able to have children. Although the words “Terach took his son Avram, etc.” convey the impression that Terach was the prime cause of that move, this is not true. The fact is that the family undertook the whole journey only on account of Avram. We find later on that after Terach died, his grandson Lot joined Avram (12,4; 13,1) who was the enterprising member of the family.
    
    11,32. וימת תרח בחרן, “Terach died in Charan.” Up until this verse the whole chapter had listed all the descendants of Shem without once mentioning the word “death.” Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 39,7) were very conscious of the fact that the Torah wanted to protect Avram’s image in the eyes of the readers. If  Avram had left Charan for the land of Canaan without the Torah revealing that his father had died, the readers would have accused him of abandoning an elderly father in his old age. This is why the Torah reported Terach’s death before telling us that Avram moved to the land of Canaan at the command of G’d although at the time Terach had not died yet, as we know from the age at which Terach died. 
    If the Torah reported Terach’s “death” as if it had occurred prior to Avram’s departure for the land of Canaan, this is only because our sages consider sinners as “dead” even while they walk around on earth (compare Rashi). [The Torah reports Avram as 75 years old (12,4) when he settled in the land of Canaan, whereas his father was seventy years old (11,26) when he fathered him. Seeing that Terach lived to be 205 years old at his death, (11,32), Avram left him when his father still had 60 years left to live. Ed.]. 
    If our sages nonetheless interpret 15,15 ואתה תבא אל אבותיך בשלום, “and you will join your fathers in peace,” as referring to the hereafter, and this seems to include his father Terach among the people whom he would encounter there, this can be explained only by the fact that Avraham’s merits acquired on earth benefited his father posthumously so that G’d awarded Terach a share in the hereafter. While Terach had lived on earth, however, he had been an idolater all his life and had died without repenting. Perhaps this is the reason why the letter ן in the last word of the chapter, i.e. וימת תרח בחרן is reversed, pointing backwards. [both according to Rashi and Rabbi David Kimchi this appears to have been the spelling in their time, although nowadays there is no such inverted letter ן  in any of our versions of the Torah. Ed.] The inverted letterן  is seen as an indication of G’d’s anger at Terach and as a message that his share in the hereafter is due entirely to the merit of his son Avraham. It was a case of the fruit “saving” the tree.
    Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 7) may have derived the ruling that the wood from all kinds of trees barring that of the olive tree and the grapevine is fit for feeding the fire on the altar, from the principle that the fruit can save the tree.
    Another reason for the inverted letter ן  in the word חרן may be that the very inversion symbolises Tohu, chaos. [We have a tradition that the 6.000 years allocated to life on this terrestrial globe is divided into 3 periods each of 2.000 years. The first 2.000 years are described as Tohu, the next as Torah, the last as the period during which the Messiah prepares to come. A review of the numbers given in the Torah will show that Terach’s death in the year 2083 coincided (roughly) with the period at which Tohu ended. The second period, the one of Torah, began with Avraham’s beneficial activities on earth and especially in the Holy Land. The Torah contains a number of inverted letters all of which contain a message to us. Similarly, there are good reasons why sometimes a letter is written in larger or smaller than regular script. All such hints are part of the 50 gates of בינה, superior insights, which were revealed to Moses while he was on Mount Sinai.
    Our sages in Sanhedrin 104 have stated that “whereas a son may confer some of his merit on his father, the reverse is not the case.” They base this on Deut. 32,39 ואין מידי מציל, “there is no rescuer from My hand.” Whereas Avraham’s merits were not able to save his son Ishmael, they were able to confer merit on his father. Yitzchak could not confer of his merit on his son Esau either. Concerning this state of affairs, Solomon said in Proverbs 17,6 עטרת זקנים בני בנים, ותפארת בנים אבותם, “Grandchildren are the crown of their elders, the glory of children are their fathers.” Seeing that it is within the province of the children to confer merit on their fathers, Solomon applied the complimentary “crown,” to them. This is a greater compliment  than the term תפארת, “glory,” which he applied to their fathers. When the elders can point to righteous grandchildren they can wear this knowledge with the same pride as a king wears his crown. The parents who are unable to transfer of their merits to the children, are תפארת, a glory in their own right only if their children do measure up to the standards set for them by their fathers. We find a reference to such parents in Esther 9,28 וזכרם לא יסוף מזרעם, “and their remembrance will not perish from their descendants.” The various generations who have been loyal to G’d will ascend hand in hand spiritually. This is what Job 14,7-8 referred to when he said: “there is hope for a tree; if it is cut down it will renew itself, its shoots will not cease, if its roots are old in the earth” As long as the “saplings” are similar to those who have planted them we can apply the blessing of Isaiah 61,3 וקורא להם אילי הצדק מטע ה' להתפאר, “they shall be called ‘the terebinths of victory, planted by the Lord for His glory.’”
 ויאמר ה' אל אברם לך לך
    
(12). הולך את חכמים יחכם, ורועה כסילים ירוע, “He who walks with scholars will become wise; he who keeps company with fools will come to grief“ (Proverbs 13,20). King Solomon warns people in this verse to try and move within circles of scholars and at the same time to try and avoid keeping company with fools. The reason he uses the expression הולך, is that a person should always walk behind the scholars, become familiar with them, and consider himself as an adjunct to them. He should make of the scholars leaders for his “head.” Anyone who practices this virtue cannot fail to become wise himself.
	On the other hand, anyone who habitually mingles with fools will wind up causing harm to his own head, i.e. he will become “broken.” Basically, this verse in Proverbs describes the damage which results from keeping company with fools and the advantage which accrues to a person from the company of scholars. It is a fact that while someone who mingles with the scholars will benefit by such an association, the scholar will not suffer by it at all. This is the reason the Torah has been compared by David to a light (candle), seeing that an unlimited number of people can get light from this candle without the light of the candle becoming dimmed. This is the meaning of Psalms 119, 108 נר לרגלי דברך, ואור לנתיבתי’ “Your word is a lamp at my feet, a light for my path.”
	Our sages in Yalkut Shimoni (this book was not at the disposal of the author. Ed) comment on this verse in Proverbs that the matter may be compared to someone who enters a perfumery store. His clothing will absorb some of the fragrances in that store although he did not make a purchase of any of the products that are for sale there. In other words, the owner of that store provided a service for the browser without making a sale. Similarly, the mere fact that one is in the presence of scholars results in something rubbing off on those who make a point of being in such company. Solomon describes that the opposite is true when one frequents the haunts of fools. Not only is their presence not beneficial, but it is even harmful to those who are not of their ilk.
	The expression כסילים  which Solomon applies to these fools are people who deliberately choose negative virtues, indulge in physical pleasures as their main purpose in life and who at the same time despise and ridicule people concerned with moral/intellectual pursuits. Such people do not qualify for admonition as they belong to one of the three categories of people who are not to be admonished. They are 1) כסילים, fools, 2) לצים, scoffers, 3) רשעים, wicked people. Concerning category one Solomon said (Proverbs 23,9) “do not speak to a fool; he will disdain your sensible words.” Concerning the scoffer, Solomon said (Proverbs 9,8) “do not admonish the scoffer lest he hate you.” Concerning the wicked, Solomon said (Proverbs 9,7) “rebuking a wicked person one hurts oneself.” Just as the very company of scholars is like an open invitation to serve the Lord, so the company of the other types of people we mentioned is like an invitation to reject the service of the Lord. The Torah writes in Deut. 7,4 “for he will lead astray your son (grandson) from following Me. The Torah spoke about the results of intermarriage of a Jewish girl with a Gentile. Although, technically speaking, the children of such a union will be Jews, the influence of the Gentile father and his family will estrange them to Judasim.
	For all the above considerations David commenced his Book of Psalms with praise for the people who resist keeping company with the habitual sinners, and who instead make the Torah of G’d the object of their ambition, preoccupying themselves with it both by day ad by night (Psalms 1,1-2). 
	Solomon followed in the footsteps of his father when he commenced the Book of Proverbs (1,8) with the words שמע בני מוסר אביך, “listen to the instruction of your father my son; etc.” He continued immediately by warning that we should not expose ourselves to the seductive words of the wicked (1,10)
	Our patriarch Avraham made every effort to observe the eventual laws of the Torah and the sacrificial services; our sages illustrated this when they said (Yuma 28) that he even observed such rabbinic ordinances as עירוב תבשילים, ensuring that he had cooked and baked food in the house for the Sabbath which follows on the heels of a festival so that preparation of food on the festival itself would not be viewed as exploiting a day when work is forbidden to prepare for the Sabbath. Avraham faced the dilemma of keeping away from wicked people, people who were the cause of truly free choice of worship having become impossible. Once you have become a true heretic (compare Maimonides Hilchot Teshuvah) you are not given a chance to repent). This is why G’d told him to move away from such people so that he would not become infected by them. G’d sent him away from his land, his birthplace to a land which He was going to show him (once he had set out to leave his home).
	According to Tanchuma 3 on Lech Lecha, Avraham was not aware of the stench caused by the people amongst whom he lived as his environment was similar to a graveyard which had been sprinkled with a bottle of spikenard oil which neutralised the stench which emanates from there. How did G’d deal with this problem? He took Avraham from place to place and acquainted him with the different smells of the universe. In this manner Avraham was able to appreciate what was wrong in the world, and he would be trained not to become overwhelmed by the stench caused by the lifestyles of his contemporaries. Then came the point when G’d said to Avraham: “remove yourself from them and do not become dirtied by them.” This is the meaning of the words לך לך, i.e. “it is time that you  by yourself.” The repetition of the letters לך לך allude to the word לכלך, dirt. G’d did not want him to become dirtied by his surroundings.
	This was the first of the ten trials Avraham had to undergo; he successfully coped with all of them. The final and greatest trial was when G’d told him to offer up his son Yitzchak on Mount Moriah. At that time G’d again introduced the trial with the words לך לך in order to compare his first trial to his last trial. The commandment of which the Torah speaks here at the beginning of chapter 12 was issued while Avraham was in Charan as this was his country and his birthplace. Concerning that place Avraham said later (23,2 when he instructed Eliezer to get a wife for Yitzchak): “but go only to my country and to my birthplace!” It was certainly a great trial for him to leave his country and the place he had been born and raised in, the place where he had dwelled with his whole family, and to go to an entirely unknown country.
	Remember that prior to G’d’s communication to Avraham telling him to move away from home, it would have been appropriate for the Torah to tell us something about Avraham’s virtues, just as the Torah had done before it reported that G’d issued commands to Noach before him. We must assume that the reason the Torah did not do so was because it had already hinted previously that Avraham was a person of exceptional qualities when the Torah referred to אור כשדים, as we explained  on 11,28.

	12,2. ואעשך לגוי גדול, “and I will make you into a great nation.” Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 39,15) explain that being a traveler, a nomad, brings in its wake three negative phenomena. It results 1) in a decrease of one’s fertility; 2) a decrease of one’s financial resources; and 3) in a decrease of one’s standing amongst one’s peers. G’d promised Avraham that he would not suffer from these negative phenomena. By saying: “I will make you into a great nation,” G’d told Avraham that his ability to procreate would not only not suffer but would be enhanced. By adding: “I will bless you,” G’d hinted that Avraham would prosper financially. By further adding “I will make your name great,” He countered Avraham’s concern that his standing amongst his peers would decline due to his becoming a nomad.
	It is noteworthy that G’d did not use the customary expression ואשימך לגוי גדול, “I will let you become a great nation,” but He said ואעשך לגוי גדול, “I will make you into a great nation.” This is equivalent to G’d saying: “I will make you into an entirely new phenomenon.” The expression G’d used is comparable to when the Torah said (1,7) ויעש אלוקים את הרקיע, “G’d made the sky.”
	The deeper meaning of the words לגוי גדול, “to a great nation,” is a reference to the Jewish nation which is described in Deut. 4,8 as ומי גוי גדול  אשר לו חקים ומשפטים צדיקים, “and who else is a great nation which has righteous decrees and ordinances?” The words: “I will make you into a great nation,” are alluded to when we refer to G’d as the G’d of Avraham,” the words “I will bless you,” are alluded to when we refer to G’d as “the G’d of Yitzchak;” the words “and I will make your name great,” are alluded to when we speak of G’d as “the G’d of Yaakov.” The words והיה ברכה “and be a blessing,” prompted our sages when they formulated the first benediction in the principal עמידה prayer to conclude with reference to Avraham only when we say מגן אברהם, “the shield of Avraham” at the conclusion of that benediction. 
    The deeper meaning of these words והיה ברכה, “and be a blessing,” is that G’d had said: ”up until now when I created My universe and it needed My blessing in order to endure I blessed Adam and Chavah as we read (1,28) ‘G’d blessed them.’” This was repeated when Noach and his family required G’d’s blessing after the deluge in order to rebuild mankind. At that point (9,1) the Torah wrote: “G’d blessed Noach and his sons, etc.” From here on is the power to bless was entrusted to Avraham who could use it to bless whomever he saw fit to qualify for a blessing.
    
    12,3.ואברכה מברכיך ומקללך אאור , “and I will bless those who will bless you, and those who curse you I will curse.” This implies that the people of Ur Casdim were cursing Avraham and that had prompted G’d to tell him to move to a land He would show him. There he would become a source of blessing instead of the recipient of curses. G’d would henceforth curse those who cursed Avraham, be they individuals or groups of people. This, at any rate is Nachmanides’ interpretation of our verse. He adds that the Torah did not want to elaborate on the causes why Avraham was so disliked, just as it had not spent many words on describing the religious arguments which went on during the time of Enosh.
	There is, however, another approach to the meaning of the words “and the one who curses you I shall curse.” It may refer to King Nimrod.” The Torah did not need to write the word ומקללך in the plural as once G’d curses the King of a nation this means that the entire nation will suffer the curse. It appears likely that the people of Ur Casdim engaged in a variety of forms of idolatry, different sections of the populace believing in and worshiping different deities. Some people served the Moloch, believing that if they sacrificed one of their children to that god, he in turn would grant them success in the rest of their endeavours. The Moloch’s priests promised that his adherents would become great nations. Other people, interested less in political success but in economic success, would worship another deity which symbolised such success. Still others believed that by worshiping the right deity they themselves might be appointed by that deity to become its prophet and to enjoy its powers on earth. Considering all these factors, G’d promised Avraham that He would make him into a great nation, that He would bless him, that He would make him a great name, and that he himself would become a source of blessing, all in order to counter the various claims to the contrary which the different followers of different deities promised to their followers. These words were a message that all the claims made by the various priests of the various deities were devoid of content and that they had no power to influence their followers’ fates either positively or negatively. None of the forces of nature considered as primary sources of power by those who worshiped them has the power to cause any changes in the universe except within the parameters set for them by their Creator. They most certainly could not act in a manner which is the opposite of their generally perceived function. It was extremely foolish to expect that a planet such as Mars which is perceived as a harbinger of war and bloodshed should become a source of blessing.
	This is why G’d added: “and I will bless those who bless you, and those who curse you I shall curse,” to underline that only G’d Himself is the source of both blesssings and curses. The only power in the universe which is able to influence events in our lives in either direction is the Creator Himself who has created the other forces to act as His agents. This is what the prophet meant when  he said  (Jeremiah 10,16) לא כאלה חלק יעקב כי יוצר הכל הוא, “not like this is the portion of Yaakov; for it is He who formed all things.” He meant that both good and evil emanate only from Him. This is also why Isaiah 45,7 said: “I the Lord  do all these things.”
	An homiletical approach (Tanchuma Lech Lecha end of section 4) sees in the words ואברכה מברכיך, “and I will bless those who will bless you,” a reference to the Priests who extend G’d’s blessing to the Israelites seeing that after the Torah commanded the Priests to bless the Israelites, the Torah (Numbers 6,27) concludes with the words ושמו את שמי על בני ישראל ואני אברכם, “let them place My Name upon the children of Israel, and I shall bless them.” This is equivalent to G’d saying: “I will bless this tribe.” G’d said: “in this world the tribe of Levi will bless you, whereas in the world to come I will bless you directly.” This is also more directly alluded to in Jeremiah 31,23 יברכך ה' נוה צדק הר הקדש, “the Lord bless you, abode of righteousness O holy mountain.”
	ונברכו בך, “and through you will be blessed, etc.” The plain meaning of these words is that in proportion to all the curses that have been heaped upon you at this time, in the future all these nations will be amongst those who bless you.
	A Midrashic interpretation (Bereshit Rabbah 39,19) of these words: “the dew and and the rain [nature’s way of spreading blessing, Ed.] will be due to your merit.” The words ונברכו בך, “through you will be blessed all the nations of the earth,” were first fulfilled when Yaakov blessed Pharaoh (and the famine ended). They were fulfilled when Joseph revealed the meaning of his dream to Pharaoh, enabling him to take measures to insulate his people against the devastating effect of seven years of famine. Similarly, Daniel interpreted Nebuchadnezzar’s dream with beneficial effects for him Whenever the Gentile nations experience troubles they will turn to the Jews for advice and blessings and we will reveal  to them what to do. Thus far Bereshit Rabbah.
	A kabbalistic approach sees in the words ונברכו בך a message that the blessing will filter down from above, seeing that Avraham represents the highest emanation- so that he will be the first one to receive it from G’d- and he will channel it through the lower emanations. The author quotes an unknown text according to which all the blessings the Gentile nations receive will come to them only via Avraham. This is also why David said (Psalms 117,1-2) שבחוהו כל העולם, “praise Him, all you peoples,... for great is His steadfast love for us and His faithfulness endures forever.” [The structure of these two verses indicates that the Jews and their relationship to G’d are the only reason that G’d suffers the existence of the other nations at all. Compare Bamidbar Rabbah 1. Ed.]

	12,5. ואת הנפש אשר עשו בחרן, “and the souls they had made in Charan.”The plain meaning of these words is that they refer to the slaves and maids they had acquired while in Charan. The word עשו appears as describing acquisitions in Deut 8,17 כחי ועוצם ידי עשו לי את החיל הזה, “my strength and the might of my hand made me all this wealth.” (compare commentary of Rabbi Avrham Ibn Ezra and Rabbi David Kimchi on that verse.) 
	A Midrashic approach to the word עשו is found in Bereshit Rabbah 39,14  where it is understood as applying to the converts Avraham and Sarah managed to make in Charan and whom they took with them to the land of Canaan. Avraham converted the males, Sarah the females. This is why the Torah speaks of that phenomenon in the plural, i.e. “they had made, each one separately.” If only Avraham had been busy proselytising the Torah should have written אשר עשה “whom he had made.” We also find that Yaakov did the same as his grandfather Avraham as the Torah speaks of his sojourn  in the land of Canaan in these words (Genesis 37,1) וישב יעקב בארץ מגורי אביו, “and Yaakov zetlled inthe land in which his (grand)father had had succeeded in making converts” (Bereshit Rabbah 84,4). From this you learn that Yaakov was also making converts.
    
    12,6. עד מקום שכם,“as far as a place called Shechem. This traversing of the land by Avraham and his moving away towards a mountain of which the Torah (verse 8) speaks as well as the fact that he established his tent (residence) between a place called Ai and a place known as Bet El are all references to matters and places which acquire significance for the Jewish people later on in their history. At this time, these places had not been known by the names reported here in the Torah. This is what the sages (Tanchuma Lech Lecha, 9) had in mind when they said מעשי אבות סימן לבנים, “experiences in which the patriarchs were involved him served as a preview of things that would occur in the lives of their descendants.”
   והכנעני אז בארץ, “and the Canaanite was in the land at that time.” The plain meaning of these words is that the Canaanite, a powerful people, dominated that land at that time. Avraham was afraid of them and this is why we did not hear of his building an altar, i.e. preaching his religion, at that time until G’d appeared to him at Shechem and promised him that his descendants would inherit the land of Canaan. Then Avraham was no longer afraid and it became clear to him that this was the land that G’d had promised him and this is why the Torah says in verse 7:  “he built an altar to the G’d who had appeared to him.” This was a way of thanking G’d for this assurance (compare Bereshit Rabbah 39,16) that his descendants would inherit the land. The reason the Torah writes the word אז instead of writing והכנעני היה מאז בארץ, is that the Canaanite had already lived in that land since the days of Noach. This made it easy for G’d to dispossess them in due course; they were after all a nation cursed to be slaves and as slaves had no legal claim to any property.
	Another reason for the word אז is that the word is an acrostic composed of אקלים ז, the seventh climate. [this is a hyperbole for the central region, the words “middle climate” referring to a region devoid of extremes. Ed.] It may also be referred to as the land of the fourth, i.e. the central “climate”. Concerning this central “climate,” Solomon wrote in Proverbs 3124,  וחגור נתנה לכנעני, “she gave the belt to the Canaanite.” As is well known, a belt is worn around a person’s middle. What Solomon meant was that this central piece of the earth was given to the Canine on a temporary basis until its true owner, the Jewish people, would be awarded it by G’d on a permanent basis.
	Another meaning of the word אז in our verse may be connected to the Torah’s failure to describe the Canaanite as יושב בארץ, “dwelling permanently in the land.” The Torah only referred to the Canaanites as being present in the land. This is in contrast to Genesis 13,7 where the Torah did use the term יושב, “was dwelling,” when describing the tenure of the Canaanite and the Perizite in that land. The reason is that in that verse the Torah did not refer to a people which had its inheritance in that land but only to two tribes which had control of it at that time. The reason the Torah referred to the Canaanite with the ה הידיעה, the letter ה which indicates that the noun referred to is one that we are familiar with [the definitive article], is that it represents a celestial force known as “Canaanite.” This is a force from which the 70 nations derive their power on earth as we know from Joshua who said to the Israelites (Joshua 24,15) [at the time when the Israelites on the East Bank of the Jordan had built a public altar, something that aroused suspicions of their national and religious secession Ed.] בחרו לכם היום את מי תעבדון אם את אלוהים אשר עבדו אבותיכם אשר בעבר הנהר ואם את אלוהי האמור אשר אתם יושבים בארצם ואנכי וביתי נעבוד את ה'. “Choose this day which ones you are going to serve, the gods that your forefathers served beyond the Euphrates or those of the Emorites in whole lands you are settled; but I and my household will serve the Lord.” We find that the celestial representative of the Egyptian nation is called מצרים by the Torah when we read in Exodus 14,10 והנה מצרים נוסע אחריהם, “and here Egypt (instead of the Egyptians) was traveling behind them.” Had the Torah referred to Egyptian nationals, human beings, the word for “traveling” should have been נוסעים instead of the singular נוסע. These are concepts which we are familiar with through our study of Kabbalah. Even the scientists of our day agree with these concepts.
    	We also find that the spiritual force of Israel is referred to as ישראל. This is the meaning of Psalms 24,6 מבקשי פניך יעקב סלה, “Yaakov who seek Your Presence Selah.” The psalmist refers to the spiritual concept “Israel” who are distinguished by the virtue of seeking out G’d.”
    Our sages always in Bereshit Rabbah 74,8 also interpret Psalms 118,2 יאמר נא ישראל כי לעולם חסדו, “Let Israel declare, “His steadfast love lasts forever,” in the same spirit. They interpret the word “Israel” as “ישראל סבא, the traditional description of the spiritual concept “Israel.” Such verses only prove that the “glue” is named in accordance with the object that it sticks to, and vice-versa i.e. the object that the glue sticks to is named in accordance with the glue which enables it to stick to it. Once we understand this principle a number of subjects in the Torah which appeared problematical can be understood. 
    	The fact that a prophet or angel has a special name should not be something that surprises you; neither should the fact that the site of the Holy Temple has a special name. This is what the sages in Baba Batra 75 had in mind when they explained that the verse in Jeremiah 23 6 וזה שמו אשר יקראו ה' צדקנו, “and this is the name he shall be named: “‘The Lord is our Vindicator.” You see that even a human being may carry the  name of the Lord. Similarly, the city of Jerusalem bears the name of G’d as we see from the very last verse in the Book of Ezekiel 48,35   ושם העיר מיום, ה' שמה and the name of the city from that day onwards “the Lord is there”. The Talmud suggests to change the vowels under the word “Shemah” (its name), to “shammah.” (there). Similarly, it is nor surprising to find unusual sounding names for angels, i.e. G’d’s agents.
    
    12,8. ויעתק משם ההרה, “he moved on from there to ‘the’ Mountain, etc.” He moved from the site where he had built the altar and came to Mount Moriah where he built another altar. This was a sign that in the future the Jewish people would offer burnt-offerings and peace-offerings on that Mountain in the Holy Temple. He prayed there i.e. (“he called there in the name of the Lord”) This too was a preview of the times when the Holy Temple would be called “a house of prayer for all nations” (Isaiah 56,7).
	
	The choice of the word ויעתק, with the vowel segol under the letter ת instead of the vowel patach, or at least the vowel segol under the the letter ע, needs explaining. The word is transitive and means that in his thoughts Avraham moved the mountain The “thoughts” are the highest emanation הר which the mountain of Moriah represents You will find a similar expression in connection with Moses when the Torah writes (Exodus 24,15) ויעל משה אל ההר, “Moses ascended the mountain.” You know that Onkelos translates the words על ההר in that instance asלטורא  “to the mountain,” not “on the mountain.” This is also what is meant when the Torah says in Exodus 19,3 ויעל משה אל האלוקים “Moses ascended to G’d.” This “move” of Avraham away from Bet El near there is not to be interpreted as an attempt by Avraham to separate from Bet El spiritually or to re-evaluate anything in his philosophy G’d forbid, but to “unify” the concept of Moriah with other basic concepts of Judaism. His ascent to the emanation הר is a logical continuation of his return to his spiritual origin which was מקדם, i.e. from a philosophical concept recognizing that G’d is the prime Cause of all things This is why the word מקדם follows the word ההרה in our verse. Immediately afterwards, the Torah writes לבית אל, “to Bet El.” In that instance “Bet El” symbolises the emanation חכמה. The word or letter “Bet” in the expression “Bet El” is a reference to the letter “Bet” with which the Book of Bereshit (the Torah) commences. G’d recognised Moses’ philosophical and theological development when He praised him by saying בכל ביתי נאמן הוא, “he is thoroughly at home in all aspects of “My letter Bet” and what it stands for.”(Numbers 12,7) This is also what the prophet Micah had in mind (Micah 4,2) when he said לכו ונעלה אל הר ה' ואל בית אלוקי יעקב, “go-let us ascend to the “Bet” of the G’d of Yaakov.” The expression בית אלוקי יעקב in that verse is a reference to Moriah, the concept of the highest emanation which is termed הר ה'. 
	When the Torah continues with the words ויט אהלה, “he pitched his tent,” this is a reference to the emanation בינה, insight. This is why the word אהלה does not conclude with the customary masculine ending ו for “his,” but ends with the letter ה. This letter represents the first letter ה in the four-lettered Ineffable Name. The world was created by means of the power and energy which reposes in that letter. It represents the “King” who built the palace (the universe) employing His “architect” (the angel alluded to in the ה of the word בהבראם) “He created them using the letter ה.” (compare Genesis 2,4, as well as  page 161 in this translation). The letter ה of that word represented the last letter ה in the Ineffable Name.
	The word ויעתק which can be read transitively as we explained, as well as intransitively, may refer to the עתיק יומין, (Daniel 7,9) “The G’d of pre-historic times,” a reference to the emanation כתר. Kabbalists will understand all this.
    The plain meaning of these words is that Avraham preached his brand of religion. We find the word קרא used in this sense in Proverbs 20,6 רב אדם יקרא איש חסדו, “he proclaims most people as his true friend.” Another verse in which the root קרא appears as meaning “to proclaim publicly, to preach,” is in Psalms 116,17 ובשם ה' אקרא. “I will publicly proclaim the name of the Lord.”
    When we are told of Joseph’s triumphal ride through Egypt after he had been appointed viceroy (Genesis 41,43), the Torah writes ויקראו לפניו אברך, “they called out before him אברך.” The generally accept translation of this word is: “on your knee!” However, I believe we may understand it as a proclamation of Joseph’s faith in the G’d of the heaven which he made public at this time.
    The word ויקרא also has a connotation of תפלה, prayer, as we know beyond doubt from Psalms 30,9 אליך ה' אקרא ואל א-דני אתחנן “I call to You, O Lord; to my Lord I made appeal.” Prayer, תפלה, is addressed to the attribute of Mercy, whereas תחנה, pleading is addressed to the attribute of Justice. Onkelos also translates this word in the same spirit when he wrote וצלי בשמא דה’, “he prayed in the name of the merciful G’d.”
	A Midrashic approach to our verse understands the word ויקרא as if it were written with the letter ה at the end, such as Psalms 104,3 המקרה במים עליותיו, “Who provides a roof for His upper spheres, much like a human being who provides a roof to protect himself against dangers from above. In a similar manner Avram tried to provide his contemporaries with a faith which would act as a shield for them against negative experiences in life. He did so by assuring them that there is life after their physical death.
    
	12,9. ויסע אברם הלוך ונסוע הנגבה, “Avram kept journeying steadily in a southerly direction.” The point of all his travels was to make camp in a great number of locations. He confined himself to the area which would later on form part of the territory of Yehudah which is located in the southern part of Eretz Yisrael. This area includes Mount Moriah. This is the plain meaning of our verse.
	We may include a further meaning in the wording of the text, namely that each move by Avram represented a spiritual ascent to ever higher levels, keeping his spirit on the move while providing quiet and calm for the body. The Torah reported that “he pitched his tent,” to indicate his physical state; only then did it refer to constant motion, i.e. Avram’s ongoing spiritual ascent to higher levels. We read about Avram making camp in a variety of expressions such as ויאהל, ויבא, וישב, “he put up a tent, he arrived, he settled.” All of these journeys had as their purpose that he should qualify for the gift of prophecy on the level of communication with the attribute of G’d known as שדי. This is an attribute of theא-ד-נ-י  level of G’d. It is alluded to in the word הנגבה (southward), whose numerical value 65 equals that of the name א-ד-נ-י. This is also the reason this name of G’d appears again and again when Avram addresses G’d such as in 15,2 when he asked: א-דני אלוקים  מה תתן לי, “Lord O G’d what can you give me?”, Or a few lines later (15,8) א-דני אלוקים במה אדע כי אירשנה? “Lord, O G’d how will I know that I will inherit it (the land of Canaan)?”

	12,10. ויהי רעב בארץ וירד אברם, “there was a famine in the land and Avram descended, etc.” Our sages (Tanchuma Lech Lecha 9) told us that what happened to the patriarchs and is reported in the Torah serves as a preview of what would happen to their descendants in the future. Everything which happened in this passage foreshadowed what happened to the Israelites in Egypt during their exile hundreds of years later. The Egyptians took Avram’s wife from him and G’d punished them with great plagues and He allowed Avram to leave the land of Egypt with both livestock and silver and gold in great quantities. Pharaoh even ordered a guard of honour to accompany Avram out of his country. History repeated itself during the exile and subsequent Exodus of the Jewish people. This is what we read in Bereshit Rabbah 40,8 “whatever happened to Avraham happened to the Israelites. In connection with Avram, the Torah says: ‘there was a famine in the land, whereas we find in Genesis 45,6 that Joseph speaks to his brothers about two years of famine which had already passed at that time. We read in connection with Avram: “the woman was taken to the house of Pharaoh,”  whereas in connection with the Israelites in Egypt the decree to kill the male babies meant that the women were taken as slaves by the Egyptians (practical meaning of Exodus 1,22 ‘let every daughter live.’) In connection with Avram we read (12,17) “G’d brought great plagues on the house of Pharaoh and his servants on account of Sarai, Avram’s wife.” In connection with the Israelites in Egypt the Torah writes: “I will bring one more plague on Pharaoh (Exodus 11,1). We read in connection with Avram that he was called in to Pharaoh (12,18-19) and told “take your wife and leave!” In connection with the Israelites, (Exodus 12,31) Moses and Aaron were called in to Pharaoh and told to leave the country with all their belongings. There are several more quotations in that Midrash showing the similarity of what Avram and the Israelites experienced in Egypt.

	12,11. הנה נא ידעתי כי אשה יפת מראה את, “here now, I am well aware that you are a woman of beautiful appearance, etc.” The word הנה usually appears as an introduction to something new as in Genesis 19,20 where Lot introduces his request to spare the town of Tzoar by saying הנה נא העיר הזאת קרובה “here, after all, is this city which is nearby.” Another example of a new subject being introduced with the word הנה appears in Genesis 22,6 when Yitzchak prefaces his inquiry about where the lamb for the sacrifice is with the word הנה.
	On the other hand, the word נא is usually an expression introducing a request which appeals to the goodwill of the other party as that particular request cannot be justified legally. The person making the request uses the word נא to put his opposite number in a forgiving mood, a state of mind in which it is easier to grant the request about to be made of him. When Avram wanted to get Sarai’s approval to tell a white lie he prefaced his request by complimenting her on her beauty. No doubt Sarai was not unaware of her physical attractiveness. According to Bereshit Rabbah 40,4 what Avram meant was that although under normal circumstances travel and the strains experienced on a journey detract from a woman’s beauty, at least temporarily, he found that Sarai’s beauty had not only not been diminished but appeared to have been enhanced further by that experience. This proved to be an unexpected source of danger to his life; hence he made this request that she should tell a white lie..
	However, Tanchuma on Lech Lecha 5 claims that Avraham had never looked at Sarai in a way that made him notice her beauty as he had made a promise to his eyes not to use them in a manner which would arouse his desire for physical gratification. We find a reference to such conduct in Job 31,1 ברית כרתי לעיני, “I have  covenanted with my eyes not to gaze at a maiden.” It is not unusual to find that the righteous enter into such “covenants” with a number of their organs in order to ensure that these organs would not cause them any harm. This is similar to someone making a treaty with a former enemy that he would not harm him. The Torah urges us (Exodus 23,32) “do not make a treaty with them or their gods “ (the Gentile nations resident in the land of Canaan). Our sages in Baba Batra 16 commented on this that there is no enemy who causes as much harm to another person as do his own deeds. Furthermore, our sages on that same folio comment עפרא לפומיה, “earth in his mouth.” They ridiculed what appeared to be Job’s superior piety by saying: “granted Job had undertaken not to look at other maidens but he had not denied himself the pleasure of admiring the beauty of his own wife.” Avram, however, had not even looked at the beauty of his own wife prior to his arrival at the border of Egypt.

	12,13 אמרי נא אחותי את, “please say that you are my sister, etc.” This was an inadvertent sin committed by Avram; it caused the eventual exile in Egypt of his descendants. It was certainly a grave sin to cause his wife to sin on account of his own fear of being killed. He should have demonstrated faith in G’d that He would save him as well as his wife. He committed another sin when he left the land of Canaan on account of the famine. He should have demonstrated faith in G’d that He would make sure he would not die from hunger. On account of this sin his descendants were enslaved by Pharaoh. This, at least, is the view of Nachmanides.
	Our sages (Nedarim 32) claim that the exile in Egypt was due to Avram asking G’d in 15,8 “how will I be sure that I (my descendants) will inherit the land?” This is also what we find in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer 48 where G’d is quoted as having told Avram of this exile in reply to his question. [I suppose the version in P.d.R.E. is older than the version in Nedarim. Ed.] At any rate, it is clear that Avram’s query in that chapter was considered sinful. The common denominator of the views expressed by our sages is that the sin consisted of thoughts which Avram articulated The result was 430 years of exile of varying degrees of severity. Seeing that the exile was due to a sin it was divided into three stages. The sin consisted of three parts. 1) sinful thought; 2) sinful speech; 3) sinful action. This is why the intelligent reader ought to reflect that the present exile is likely to last three times as if the exile in Egypt lasted 430 years and it was due merely to Avram’s inadvertently sinful utterance, it stands to reason that the present exile will last three times as long. After all, the sin which led to the 430 years of exile in Egypt was confined to an utterance by Avram which G’d considered sinful. The sin which led to the destruction of the first Temple, idolatry, (Yuma 9) was certainly much worse and not committed inadvertently and only by an ancestor to whom the Torah had not yet been given. At the time when the First Temple was destroyed most of the people had been guilty of sinning in thought, in speech, as well as in deed. G’d had therefore decreed three times 430 years of exile on the Jewish people. This must have been the basis of Daniel’s calculation. When you examine the final verses in Daniel 12,11 in which he mentions 1290 years, and 12,12 אשרי המחכה ויגיע לימים אלף שלש מאות שלשים וחמשה in which he speaks about the redemption at the end of 1335 years (years), this number is made up of three times the number 430. 
	[Our author misquotes the two verses in Daniel by referring only to the number 1290, ignoring the next number in the verse following. Many attempts have been made to reconcile these numbers. Seeing the commentators who laboured over these verses lived before the time alluded to had elapsed, their efforts at the time were very relevant. Now that many hundreds of years have elapsed since the expiry of these 1290 or 1335 years respectively, this editor sees little point in referring to such efforts. Ed.] This may also have been what the prophet Micah 7,20 alluded to when he said: תתן אמת ליעקב חסד לאברהם,”You will keep faith with Yaakov, and maintain your love for Avraham.” (The word אמת is understood as an acrostic of אלף מתים תשעים) This was a prayer  for G’d to hasten the redemption. He appealed to G’d who had sworn that He would invoke the attribute of חסד when it comes to the redemption of Israel as we know from Deut. 32,40 where G’d swore an oath to avenge Israel from its enemies. The words there כי אשא אל שמים ידי, “I raise My hand to heaven (in an oath)” are paraphrased by Daniel 12,7 וישבע בחי העולם, “He swore an oath in the name of the Eternal.”
    
    12,16. ויהי לו צאן ובקר, “he retained sheep and cattle.” The word ויהי in this instance does not mean that he now acquired them, but that he retained the flocks and herds he had owned previously. He did not purchase them in Egypt and made profit there. After all, Avram had only asked that his life be spared. 
    
	12,17. וינגע ה' את פרעה, “G’d smote Pharaoh with plagues, etc.” Most commentators believe that this statement is to be interpreted literally, i.e. that Pharaoh was personally smitten with afflictions. They interpret Genesis 20,18 as meaning that the vaginal openings of the women and the penises of the men in Avimelech’s household were blocked by divine action (Baba Kama 92). This is also based on Chronicles I 16,21 לא הניח לאיש לעשקם ויוכח עליהם מלכים, “He allowed no one to oppress them; He reproved kings on their account.” 
    On the other hand, Rabbi Saadyah Gaon understands our verse as a threat by G’d to afflict Pharaoh. His reasoning is that if G’d had afflicted Pharaoh prematurely this would not have been fair justice as Sarai had been brought to Pharaoh’s palace by others (without his having ordered this) and he personally had not yet laid a hand on Sarai. Seeing that he had not yet committed a sin why would G’d punish him as a preventive measure? Rabbi Saadyah Gaon applies the same reasoning to what happened later at the court of Avimelech (chapter 20). As to Genesis 20,17 where the Torah expressly reports that G’d healed Avimelech and his household in response to Avraham’s prayer, Rabbi Saadyah understands this verse not so much as a healing after an affliction but as a preventive medicine G’d provided against Avimelech and his household suffering such afflictions in the future. This would be a demonstration of the verse in Exodus 15,26 כי אני ה' רופאך, “for I the Lord am your Healer.” In that passage the Torah had also spoken about afflictions which were not going to be visited upon the Jewish people, and G’d describes this as a result of His acting as Israel’s Healer. As to the verse we quoted from Chronicles, Rabbi Saadyah understands this as referring to verbal warnings not to actual occurrences.
Our sages clearly did not understand matters in this way and believed that seeing that these two kings both had evil intentions G’d countered their evil intentions by forestalling the harm they were about to do and effectively smiting them by disabling the respective organs with which they were going to commit their sin. The sages of the Talmud understand our verses literally.

	12,19. הנה אשתך קח ולך, “here is your wife, take her and go!” Avram did not bother to make a response to Pharaoh although he did make a response to Avimelech in chapter twenty. In the latter case he excused his conduct by saying he had feared for his life if he would have declared that Sarai was his wife. The obvious question is that seeing that both kings had asked him about his relationship to Sarai, why did Avram see fit to explain his conduct to Avimelech whereas he did not do so vis-a-vis Pharaoh? 
We must conclude that the manner in which Pharaoh restored his wife to him by saying only the minimum words required “take and go,” indicated to Avram that he was not interested in listening to explanations.

	13,9. השמאל ואימינה, “to the left, and I will turn to the right.” This meant that if Lot chose to go to the left, Avram would go to the right, i.e. to the South, as this was the direction in which he was headed. We had been told already prior to the famine which broke out in the land of Canaan that Avram journeyed steadily in a southerly direction (12,9).
     On the other hand, ואם הימין, if Lot ”were to turn to the right,” Avram would force himself to move to the “left.” This is what Rashi explains. It is somewhat amazing that Rashi should say of Avram that he said: “I will force myself to go to the left.” Since it had been Avram’s intention to travel in a southerly direction, why would he change direction? What Rashi must have meant is: “I will cause you to turn to the left.” [in other words, Avram did not really offer Lot a choice in the matter. Ed.] He would force Lot to move in a northerly direction. I have heard that the more accurate versions of Onkelos have the following wording: אם את לצפונא ואנא לדרומא ואם את לדרומא ואצפנך “If you turn north I will turn south; if you want to turn south I will have to force you to turn north.” Avram made it plain that the size of his herds dictated to him to travel in a southerly direction.
    
	13,12. אברם ישב בארץ כנען, “Avram dwelled in the land of Canaan.” This means that he lived all over the land of Canaan as opposed to Lot who lived only in the Jordan valley. Avram continued the life of a nomad whereas Lot had a firm abode. The words בערי הככר do not mean that Lot lived in several towns of the valley simultaneously but that he lived “in one of the towns of the valley at a time.” This too was due to the extent of his herds. All of those towns were part of the land of Canaan. This is why the Torah wrote that Lot “chose for himself the entire valley of the Jordan river;” he concluded a treaty with Avram that the latter would not move to any part of that valley. 
	ויאהל עד סדום “his tent extended as far as the town of Sodom.” Here the Torah taught us something detrimental about Lot. He chose the proximity of evil people and pitched his tent among them. This is why the Torah immediately continues with telling us what kind of people lived in Sodom.
.
	13,14. אחרי הפרד לוט, “after Lot had separated, etc.” The verse teaches  that G’d had not communicated with Avram until he had separated himself from a wicked companion.
    
	13,17. קום התהלך בארץ, “arise and walk throughout the land, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the words, G’d wanted Avram to stake a claim to different parts of the land already now by setting foot on it and by pointing out its boundaries and his having set foot on it.
	From a rational/investigative aspect, the word התהלך is one that occurs in connection with the emanation חכמה such as in Proverbs 6,22 בהתהלכך תנחה אותך, “when you walk it will guide you (the wisdom of Torah).” A similar thought is reflected in Psalms 39, 7 אך בצלם יתהלך איש, “man can walk (successfully) only if he enjoys the ‘image’ of G’d.” This is a reference to the format of the spiritual soul. Only selected righteous people have been mentioned as possessing such distinction. Examples of people who strove for the acquisition of such wisdom are Noach, Chanoch, and Avraham, and others like them. Seeing that Avraham acquired such wisdom in stages and that his soul kept traveling הלוך ונסוע הנגבה, “constantly approaching further to the ‘south,’ the symbol of חכמה, G’d said to Him: ‘arise and walk throughout the land.” This was in response to his unspoken request to attain ever greater insights. (Torat Chayim points out that the numerical value of the word הנגבה=65 equals that of א-דני the attribute of G’d which communicated with him). The relevance of this interpretation of our verse is based on the fact that the Torah nowhere reports that Avram actually traversed the land physically in accordance with G’d’s instructions. All the Torah reports is that Avram pitched his tent in Chevron. In other words, the Torah seems to emphasise that instead of walking Avram ישב “sat” in Chevron. We have already pointed out earlier that even the word ויאהל does not mean to pitch a physical tent as much as it refers to “pitching the tent of Torah”, i.e. establishing a spiritual abode. When G’d added כי לך אתננה, “for to you I will give it,” He also referred to the חכמה Avram had been searching for. G’d was going to grant Avram progressively greater insights into the workings of the universe, and He would help him acquire greater spiritual eminence. This is similar to Kings I 5,29 where the prophet reports וה' נתן חכמה לשלמה, ‘and the Lord had granted חכמה,’the emanation wisdom’ to Solomon.”

	14,1. ויהי בימי אמרפל מלך שנער, “it was in the days of Amrafel the king of Shinar, etc.” “Amrafel” is identical with “Nimrod.” He was the king who ordered Avram thrown into a fiery furnace for his refusal to acknowledge him as a deity. He was the first of ten kings who ruled over the entire populated earth. The last one of these ten kings will be the Messiah. This paragraph is intended to tell us that Avram was a great hero and warrior. This is why the Torah tells us that whereas four kings engaged five kings in war and the five kings succumbed to the four, Avram, practically single-handed, undertook to engage these four mighty kings in battle. He overcame them all.
	From a Midrashic-homiletical point of view, there is another aspect to this whole report of the Torah. The four kings represent the four empires who at one time or another played host to the Jewish people when they were in exile (compare Bereshit Rabbah 42,4). “Shinar” represents Babylon, based on Daniel 2,38 אנת הוא רישא די דהבה, “you are the head of gold,” (a reference to the huge golden image constructed by Nebuchadnezzar). “Elassar” represents the kingdom of the Medes; this was the name of a city in Persia/Media. The kingdom of “Eylam” is a reference to Greece. Our sages (Avodah Zarah 10) explain that the Greeks ruled in Eylam for six years  before their rule extended over most of the inhabited earth. The “king of Goyim,” is a reference to the Roman Empire. This empire was one which many nations chose to be governed by. The reason the Torah calls the king of that country a “king of nations,” is that his capital was a Metropolis of many different nations, tribes, and political groups. The point of the Midrash is to demonstrate that just as Avram overcame these nations, so his descendants in the future would succeed in overcoming their exiles in accordance with the oft-cited principle of מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, that the experiences of the patriarchs foreshadowed the experiences of their descendants.

	14,4. ושלש עשרה שנה מרדו, “and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.” The word שלש in this instance is to be understood as a cardinal number rather than as an ordinal number. We find an '. 
    
    
    
example of such use of the word in Exodus 20,11, where the Torah writes כי ששת ימים עשה ה'  instead of כי בששה ימים עשה ה'.

	14,5. בא כדרלעומר, “Kedorleomer came, etc.” The Torah wants to describe the power of this king as well as that of the kings who joined him and who defeated the various mighty kings who dwelled in fortified cities. This is the true meaning of the words בעשתרות קרנים. The word קרנים, “horns,” symbolises strength seeing that the strength of a bull is represented by its horns.  They even defeated the wealthy amongst them [reference to the name זוזים, derived fromזוז , coin. Ed.] Seeing that these four kings defeated the kings (Refaiim) who resided in fortified cities  as well as the ones who dwelled in the mountains, there was no need to mention that they overran the cities in the valley. According to Bereshit Rabbah 26,16, שוה קריתים is a reference to cities in the valley. The אימים were people who had inspired fear amongst all the people around them. The חורי בההרם שעיר were tillers of the soil in mountainous territory. According to Tanchuma these people were able to “smell” the earth, i.e. their sense of smell told them about what a particular piece of earth was best suited for. According to another Midrash the name עין משפט refers to Kadesh, the place where Moses would be judged when he hit the rock instead of speaking to it The name חצצן תמר is an allusion to חציון של תמר, another name for the land of Israel which is situated in the very centre of the earth. (חציון from the word חצי “half.”) The main reason the Torah provides us with all these details of the military exploits of Kedorleomer and Arafel and their allies is to provide the background to the tremendous military achievement of Avram and his 318 warriors in the latter half of this chapter. This is why the Torah underlines in verse 17 אחרי שובו מהכות את כדרלעומר ואת המלכים אשר אתו “after he (Avram) returned from defeating Kedorleomer and the kings who where with him.” 
	14,10. ועמק השידים בארות בארות חמר, “and the valley of Sidim was full of clay pits, etc.” Rashi says that these pits were full of clay which the people in the neigbouring areas used to make into bricks.  According to a Midrash the clay was so sticky that it required a miracle for the king of Sodom to escape from it after he had fallen into it. A miracle was performed for the King of Sodom which enabled him to escape. Some of the people at the time did not believe that Avram had been saved from the furnace into which Nimrod had thrown him. Once the King of Sodom emerged from the clay, these people who had refused to believe when Avram had been saved, would now become convinced of G’d having saved Avram when they observed that the King of Sodom emerged from these pits. Why should they now retroactively believe in the G’d of Avram? Nachmanides feels that those who had believed in G’d at the time would not now have their faith in G’d reinforced; on the contrary, having seen a miracle performed for an idolater and well known sinner such as the King of Sodom, they would question the miracle which had occurred to Avram in retrospect. However, the correct understanding of the Midrash quoted by Rashi must be as follows: The King of Sodom was saved because of Avram’s merit. G’d saved him in order for him to pay honour and respect to Avram (verse 17) after the latter freed him from being stuck in the pit. Once people realised that G’d had performed a miracle for the sake of the King Sodom in order  to enhance Avram’s reputation, they could certainly credit that G’d had performed a miracle in order save Avram’s life.
    In Tanchuma on Lech Lecha section 8 we are told that the word שידים is understood as derived from שדים, “breasts.” The valley provided for its inhabitants what a mother’s breast provides for her infant.  Now that the inhabitants of that valley had become so sinful it was turned into the Dead Sea as paraphrased by Psalms 107, 34 ארץ פרי למלחה מרעת יושבי בה “a fruitful land into a salt marsh, because of the wickedness of its inhabitants.”
    
	14,13. ויבא הפליט, “The fugitive came, etc.” According to the view of Bar Kapparah quoted by Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish in Bereshit Rabbah 42,8 the term “the fugitive,” refers to Og who had survived the deluge. The reason he was called עוג was because when he arrived at Avram’s house to tell him that Lot had been captured, Avram was occupied with the halachot concerning עוגות, cakes. Og did not have any creditable motives in telling Avram about this. He hoped that Avram would go to war to rescue Lot and when he would fall in battle, he, Og, would marry Sarai, Avram’s widow. G’d assured Og that he would be rewarded for having troubled himself to inform Avram of Lot’s capture by enjoying inordinately long life, but that he would also have to watch millions of Avram’s descendants because he had meant to cause Avram’s death. The reason that Moses was afraid of Og (Tanchuma Chukat, 25) was that he was concerned that he would still be protected by G’d’s promise of long life.  
	According to Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 27 “the fugitive” was none other than the angel Michael; he is also referred to as “a fugitive” in Ezekiel 33,21 בא אלי הפליט מירושלים “the fugitive came to me saying the city  has been smitten.”
   והוא שוכן באלוני ממרא האמורי, “and he dwelled at Eloney Mamre of the Emorite.” It is well known that the three good friends of Avraham were Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre. All three were Emorites. We do not find however that the description “Emorite” is ever applied to either Aner or Eshkol. We do not find that even Mamre is referred to as an Emorite except here. We do not find that he is mentioned anywhere else in the Torah. [in chapter 23 Mamre is mentioned as a place name only. Ed.] The reason he is mentioned here is because the Torah refers to the ברית. The Torah is concerned that we should not think that all three of Avram’s friends urged him to circumcise himself  but only Mamre. Our sages say in Bereshit Rabbah 42,8 that when the commandment to circumcise himself was issued, Avram went to consult with his friends and both Aner and Eshkol advised against, whereas Mamre advised strongly in favour, asking how he could possibly refuse seeing that G’d had saved his life so many times? He argued that seeing Avram was ready to give his life for G’d at any time if requested to do so, how could he even consider refusing to offer a single one of his organs at G’d’s command? In recognition of Mamre’s advice G’d told Avram that He would reveal Himself only in Mamre’s proximity not in the palaces of either Aner or Eshkol. The name ממרא is also viewed as an acrostic for the words מלכים, מילה, רעבון, אש that G’d had saved Avram from the kings, that he had received the advice to go through with the circumcision, that G’d had saved him from the famine in the land of Canaan, and from the fire in Nimrod’s furnace. We also find that the word אמירה is used in connection with the commandment of circumcision, i.e. שש אנכי על אמרתיך, “I rejoice with your utterances” (Psalms 119,162).
    
	14,14. וישמע אברם כי נשבה אחיו, “when Avram heard that his brother had been taken captive, etc.” Avram girded himself for battle as soon as he heard about this. He immediately mobilised the three hundred and eighteen men who derived their immediate sustenance from him. Bereshit Rabbah 43,2 claims that the number 318 is really only the numerical value of the letters in the name of his trusted servant אליעזר. How do we reconcile this Midrash with the principle of אין מקרא יוצא מידי פשוטו, that “we must not completely divorce a verse of Scripture from its literal meaning?” After all, the Torah expressly states that the three hundred people concerned were ילידי ביתו “members of Avram’s household?” Actually, the meaning of the Midrash is that all the three hundred and eighteen men mentioned were members of Avram’s household, were being fed at his table. Having mobilised all of them, Avram discounted most of them realising that the credit for the victory went only to Eliezer who was the most G’d-fearing one amongst them. Victory in battle is not determined by the size of the armies- as we know from Gideon- but is due to the merit of the individual soldiers. The Torah told us in Deut 20,8 that if someone has reason to fear for his life (due to sins he has committed) he should go home instead of joining the ranks of the soldiers. The author of the Midrash noticed that the word וירק, he “mobilised,” is composed of the word רק, “only.” It means that Avram reduced the men whose merit could ensure victory to those that possessed sufficient merit which left him with his trusted servant Eliezer, whose merit was equivalent to that of the other 317 men in his household. While it is true that the word חניכיו is spelled with the letter י indicating that there were more than one person, the fact is that “200 includes 100,” i.e. that the word חניכו, “the one whom he had trained,” is included in the word חניכיו, “the ones whom he had trained.”  We may interpret the word to mean that all the people whom Avram had trained (in matters spiritual) were loyal to the most illustrious of them all, to Eliezer.
    As to the word אחיו, “his brother,” when in fact Lot was Avram’s nephew and not his brother, the Torah wrote it in this way in order to show us the virtue of brotherliness which Avram extended even to a nephew who had chosen to live as a neighbour of the wicked people of Sodom. He had not allowed considerations of the strife which had occurred between them previously to influence his judgment concerning his nephew, the son of his brother. He risked his life on his behalf as if he were a biological brother.
   וירדף עד דן, “he pursued as far as Dan.” This is a reference to the מדת הדין, “the attribute of Justice.” Once the attribute of Justice caught up with these kings there was no need for Avram to pursue any further. We find a similar expression in Isaiah 41,3 ירדפם יעבור שלום, “He pursues them, he goes unharmed.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 43,7 Avram threw earth at these people and the earth turned into swords. When he threw straws at them they turned into arrows. Another explanation offered by the Midrash (Tanchuma Lech Lecha 13) on these words is that when Avram approached Dan, a place where in later years the Israelites would commit idolatry, his strength suddenly evaporated in view of this prospect. (The Midrash referred to the golden calves erected by Jerobam King of Israel shortly after the division of Solomon’s kingdom compare Kings I 12,29) 
    
	14,15. ויחלק עליהם לילה “the night was divided for them.” The plain meaning of the line is that it became dark. Nonetheless, Avram did not desist from pursuing these Kings and their armies until midnight.
    According to Tanchuma Lech Lecha 9 G’d told Avram: “you have killed My enemies from midnight until morning, I promise you that when the time is ripe I will kill those that hate your descendants from midnight until morning.” This is the deeper meaning of Exodus 11,4 כחצות הלילה אני יוצא בתוך מצרים, “around midnight, I will go out in the midst of Egypt.” From all this it appears that Avram carried on the battle from midnight until morning. According to the plain meaning of the text Avram did not sleep at all during that night. He spent the first half of the night in pursuit; the second half of the night he spent in battling his enemies. This is the meaning of the words ויחלק עליהם לילה הוא ועבדיו ויכם וירדפם, “the night was divided for him and his servants, he smote them in the second half of the night after having pursued them during the first half.”
	עד חובה אשר משמאל לדמשק, “as far as Chovah which is to the left of Damascus.” This means “until they admitted their guilt he called to them from the “left,” i.e. the seat of the attribute of Justice. They were falling to the left of Eliezer who originated in Damascus. [The word Damascus here is a simile for Eliezer who used to draw water and give others to drink from the Torah of his master Avraham, as will be explained later by our author. (Rabbi Chavel)] The word משמאל in our verse may be read as referring to Damascus or as referring to the previous word עד חובה אשר. In the latter case the translation would have to be “as far as Chovah which is on the left side.” You will find a similar construction of one word being able to be used in the latter half of a verse as well as in the first half in Psalms 50,2 מציון מכלל-יופי אלוקים הופיע “From Zion, perfect in beauty, G’d appeared.” [The word מציון may be understood as the end of verse one preceding it. Ed.]

	14,18. ומלכי צדק מלך שלם, “and Malki Tzedek the King of Salem, etc.” This King was none other than Shem, the son of Noach. He was a Priest of the Supreme G’d. According to the plain meaning of the text the word כהן means “servant.” Seeing that all nations have their “priests” who serve angels who are called אלוהים, such as Exodus 15,11 מי כמוך באלים ה' “who is like You amongst the divine forces O Hashem?,” The Lord G’d is here referred to as אל עליון, Supreme G’d. According to Nedarim 32 he was a real Priest and this is the reason Avram gave him a tithe of ten percent of the spoils of war.

    14,19. קונה שמים וארץ, “who owns heaven and earth.” The term קונה is not to be understood as a contrast to מוכר, “who sells.” The meaning of the word is similar to זוכה, “who has a rightful claim.” We find the word קונה in that sense on numerous occasions  in Talmudic Hebrew such as in Baba Metzia 10 קנה לעצמו. In that instance the Talmud discusses someone who had found an object which he lifts up on behalf of his companion. Such an act represents a claim to ownership of that object by said companion. The word does not imply that the object was acquired from someone else. [the final ruling in that instance is that such an act does not accomplish anything unless the one who lifts up the object had been asked to do so in order to acquire it on behalf of the one who asked him. Ed.] In other words, Malki Tzedek did not mean to imply that in order to own heaven and earth G’d had to acquire it from an outside source.
    You should realise that every time the word יש appears it implies that the matter is subject to acquisition (from someone else) whereas when we encounter the word אין this means that the object is not subject to acquisition. Seeing that G’d created the universe as a יש- מ"אין" “as a “something” out of “nothing,” He naturally “owns” the universe. This is the reason why the Torah in this instance chose the expression קונה to describe G’d’s relationship to His universe. Seeing that he owns it, He is able to transfer it or part of it to the Jewish people.
According to Bereshit Rabbah 43,7 it appears that the words קונה שמים וארץ were understood as referring to a literal acquisition in the sense of property passing from one owner to another. It would then refer to the original raw material from which the universe has been constructed. The wording in the Midrash is: “Who did G’d acquire it from?” Answer: “If her eyes are beautiful does this not prove that her hair is beautiful also?” Malki Tzedek made the point that not only part of the universe is G’d’s but all of it. According to our author the point is that the Midrash means that the fact that G’d “acquired” the original raw material does not mean that it was not He who had created that material also
    .ויברכהו ויאמר ברוך אברם לקל עליון קונה שמים וארץ, וברוך קל עליון, “Blessed be Avram to the Supreme G’d who owns heaven and earth, and blessed be the Supreme G’d, etc.” Malki Tzedek first blessed Avram and only then did he bless G’d. He was guilty of a sin by doing so. He should first have blessed G’d just as David did in a similar situation in Samuel I 25, 32-33. David first blessed G’d before he blessed Avigail who had prevented him from becoming guilty of bloodshed. Malki Tzedek was punished for this lack of respect for G’d by losing his position of High Priest. This position was accorded to Avraham instead as is recorded in Nedarim 32. A reference to this is found in Psalms 110,1 נאם ה' לאדני שב לימיני where the man who is described as sitting on G’d’s right hand side is understood to be Avraham. He is the only person to whom David ever referred as אדני, “my master.” David considered Avraham as his personal patriarch. In verse 4 of the same Psalm David says: נשבע ה' ולא ינחם אתה-כהן לעולם על דברתי מלכי צדק, “The Lord has sworn and will not relent, you are a priest forever, because of what I have said, taking the place of Malki Tzedek.” It had been inadmissible to praise someone of flesh and blood before praising the Eternal.
    When Yehudah was about to condemn Tamar, Malki Tzedek’s daughter to death by burning (Genesis 38,24), he had not been aware that G’d had already removed the priesthood from Malki Tzedek. [so that death by burning would not have been applicable to his daughter according to Jewish law even if she had been guilty of harlotry. Ed.]
    According to an opinion expressed in Midrash Mishley, the words קונה שמים וארץ refer to Avram. This is based on Proverbs 17,1 טוב פת חרבה ושלוה בה מבית מלא זבחי-ריב “better a dry crust with peace, than a house full of feasting with strife.” Avram merited to acquire both heaven and earth (life in either world) seeing the Torah said ברוך אברם לאל עליון קונה שמים וארץ The verse means  that Avram’s descendants merited the Torah which was given to them from heaven. They also acquired the earth, i.e. they became fruitful and multiplied like the dust of the earth.
    
    14,23. אם מחוט ועד שרוך נעל, “if as much as a thread or shoe-lace, etc.” This was a demonstration of Avram’s generosity in that he did not want to be enriched by the spoils of war. He did not even want to accept trivial matters which have no monetary value. He even rendered an oath concerning this when he said: “I have raised my hand to the Lord, etc.” The expressionידי  הרימותי is equivalent to the expression נשאתי את ידי (Numbers 14,30), the standard formula introducing an oath. The reason he chose this expression is that it is related to תרומה, a gift to the temple treasury or to the priest which sanctifies the objects in question.. It is as if Avram had declared that just as sanctified property was out of bounds to him, so the booty of his victory against the four kings was equally out of bounds to him. Such gifts are usually termed תרומת יד, “a gift from someone’s hand.”
    Rabbi Saadyah Gaon wrote that  by mentioning “threads and shoe-laces,” the Torah wanted to include both vegetable, animal matter as well as inert matter. The word מחוט includes all vegetable matter including fruit and grain. The words ועד שרוך נעל refer to matters derived from living creatures such as domestic animals or birds. The words ואם אקח, “or if I will take (accept)” refer to inert matter and include silver and gold, jewels, etc. This is why he added the words: “nor will I take anything which was yours.”
    Bereshit Rabbah 43,13 views the words: “if either a thread or a shoelace,” as follows. G’d said to Avram: “you have spoken about a ‘thread.’ In recognition I will give your descendants the commandment ofציצית , ‘fringes’. They  too are called “threads.’” The translation of פתיל תכלת is חוטא דתכלתא “blue thread.” Regarding the expression שרוך נעל, ‘shoelace’, something else Avram refused to accept, G’d told him that the Jewish people would receive the commandment of תפילין, “the straps of the phylacteries” as compensation. The Jewish people would also receive the commandment of eating from the Passover, of which the Torah says that it should be eaten (the first time in Egypt) נעלכם בגליכם, “while you wear your shoes.” The Israelites also merited the commandment of יבום וחליצה, “the levirate marriage and its corollary the removal of the candidate’s shoe if he refused to perform that commandment and thus would enable his sister-in- law to remarry outside the family” (compare Deut. 25,4-10). The Torah speaks of הנעל חלוץ in that connection also.
    
    15,1. אל תירא אברם אנכי מגן לך, “do not worry Avram, I will be your shield.”  One may understand G’d’s promise to Avram in this verse as including three separate assurances 1) He should not be afraid on account of the kings whom he had slain. The words: “do not be afraid,” are only addressed to someone who is already afraid. Avram was afraid that the sons of these kings would want to avenge their fathers and attack him. This is why G’d said; “I will be a shield for you.” The second assurance concerned Avram’s having a son of his own. This is alluded to in the words שכרך הרבה מאד, “your reward will be very great.” Actually, all G’d had to say was שכרך רב, “your reward is great.” The addition of two letters ה which were not really called for indicated that by means of the two letters ה which would be added both to the name אברם and to the name שרי, Yitzchak would be able to emerge as their son. This was an assurance concerning reward in this life. The third assurance was an assurance concerning the hereafter, and it is alluded to by the addition of the word מאד, “very much,” to the promise of much reward. We find something similar in Job 35,15 ולא ידע בפש מאד, “and he does not know that it may be long drawn out.” Elihu had attacked Job for denying that G’d personally supervises the fate of individuals. He accused him of recounting his afflictions day after day, whereas he had no idea of the serenity in store for the righteous in the hereafter.
    Seeing that of these three assurances, only the first one was explicit whereas both the promise of children and that of an afterlife were only allusions, Avram related only to the visible, and did not understand the allusion which was included in G’d’s words. This is why he felt constrained to ask G’d: “what can You give me?” He meant: “seeing that I have no children I am comparable to a bush in the desert (Jeremiah 17,6), i.e. something that has no future”. In his reference to Eliezer, Avram meant that not only did he not have a biological heir, but his heir-apparent Eliezer was not even from his home-town Charan but from Damascus. 
At this point G’d began to tell Avram in detail what He had previously only hinted at. Firstly, He told him that Eliezer would not be his heir but that someone who was his biological son would inherit him. When G’d added the words הוא יירשך, “he will inherit you,” this was really superfluous and meant that the ”הוא“ of the world i.e. G’d Himself, would be his heir.” He meant that he, Avram, would be the heir of G’d inasmuch as the name הוא is one of the attributes of G’d. This is a familiar concept from Exodus 34,9  ונחלתנו, “and make us Your heritage.” Nachmanides adds that the words (verse 4) והנה דבר ה' אליו לאמר may be understood as G’d interrupting Avram in mid-sentence and assuring him that he was wrong, that Eliezer was not going to be his heir.

	15,5. ויוצא אותו החוצה, “He led him outside.” It is not usual for people to be able to view the stars from inside their houses until they have stepped outside. The reason the Torah needs to use this description of what transpired when G’d spoke to Avram is because up until now the level of prophetic visions he had enjoyed was the one called “Bet El.” David (Psalms 45,14) had referred to that level of prophecy, i.e. intimacy with G’d, as כבודה בת מלך פנימה, “the glory (entourage) of the King’s daughter consists of her remaining inside.” Now that Avram was going to experience prophecy of a higher level, G’d had to mention that He took him beyond the level of “Bet El”, i.e. outside or beyond that level. This is the meaning of the word ויוצא.
	Our sages in Shabbat 156 understand these words to mean that G’d removed Avram’s fate from the influence of the horoscopes, i.e. astrological limitations, when He said to him: הבט נא השמימה, “look skywards”, please.” Whenever we encounter the expression הבט it means “looking down.” If Avram had been on earth and had looked at the sky, the stars, the expression הבט would have been inappropriate. Therefore, the Torah wanted to tell us that G’d had placed Avram in a position above the stars and had told him to look down at the sky. He could henceforth trample the limitations imposed on a person due to his horoscope.
	My own opinion is that our verse represents the true meaning of Isaiah 41,2 צדק יקראהו לרגלו, “the horoscope (planet) Jupiter He summoned at his feet.” This is the source of the Talmudic statement that the fate of the Jewish people is not dependent on any constellation of stars or planets (Shabbat 156). We have similar statements in the Midrash at the end of Song of Songs. In Song of Songs 8,14 ברח דודי ודמה לך לצבי, our sages understand this line as comparing Avraham, G’d’s beloved, to a roe, and the words על הרי בשמים at the end of that verse as a reference to heaven by reading the word בשמים instead of as besamim, as  bashamayim.” This too is understood as meaning that horoscopic considerations do not apply to the fate of the Jewish people. We must distinguish between the fate of the Jewish nation as a whole which is not subject to horoscopic influences and that of the individual Israelite whose fate is subject to horoscopic influences. The discipline of astrology is a most important discipline, and our sages have never disputed its significance.
	וספור הכוכבים אם תוכל לספור אותם, “and count the stars if you are able to count them.” G’d meant that just as Avram was unable to count the number of the stars so his own descendants would be innumerably many. An additional meaning in that message was that the cumulative wisdom possessed by the Jewish people would be beyond comprehension. Just as there are stars which give off more light than others, so there would be Jews who would possess more wisdom than others with which to enlighten their peers. Still another meaning included in that message to Avram was the promise that the degree of reward for which different Jews would qualify in the hereafter would also vary in proportion to the intensity of the light radiated by different stars. There is a reward for the souls and it is apportioned in accordance with the achievements of these souls while imprisoned in a body. Our sages in Sifri on Deut.1,10 explained the words ככוכבי השמים לרוב, “as numerous as the stars in the sky,” as referring to seven different groups of righteous souls in the hereafter. Each group differs from the next group in the level of reward G’d has accorded to it. Some radiate the kind of light  radiated by the sun; others the kind of light radiated by the moon,  and so on. 

	15,6. והאמין בה', “and he believed in G’d.” He believed the message  that G’d had indeed decided  that this would occur.
	ויחשבה לו צדקה, “and Avram considered this as an act of kindness by G’d.” He believed that G’d would indeed carry out His promise as He was so fair and just. He did not expect G’d to do what He had said He was going to do as a reward for his good deeds. This is the view of Nachmanides concerning the meaning of these words. It is possible to explain the words: “He considered it for him as an act of righteousness,” as G’d being the speaker and Avraham the one concerning whom G’d said it.

	15,7. אני ה' אשר הוצאתיך מאור כשדים וגו', “I am the Lord Who has taken you out of Ur Casdim, etc.” According to Nachmanides G’d referred to the time commencing with His saving Avram miraculously from the furnace of Nimrod. Ever since Avram had enjoyed G’d’s goodwill and He had intended to give the land of Canaan to him. What G’d said here did not mean that He was now going to give the land to Avram but that the reason He had saved Avram from Ur Casdim was in order to eventually give it to him. In view of all this, Avram was concerned that the promise of inheriting the land should not be subject to conditions which his descendants might not be able to meet. Although G’d had repeatedly referred to Avram’s descendants as receiving the land, he was afraid that some sin might prevent realisation of this promise  and this is why he asked: “how will I know that I will indeed inherit it?” He had not meant to ask for a miracle or a physical sign. G’d did not respond to him as He had done when He showed him other signs. Avram was only interested in receiving an ironclad assurance that neither sins by his descendants nor repentance of their evil deeds by the Canaanites would invalidate G’d’s promise.
	G’d therefore concluded a covenant with him to confirm what He had said and that he or his descendants would definitely inherit the land of Canaan.
	According to a comment in the Sefer Hayashar at the time Avram was born a certain star in the eastern sky “swallowed “ four other stars in four directions of the sky. At that time Nimrod’s advisors said to him: “at this moment a son has been born to Terach whose descendants will produce a nation which will inherit the whole earth as well as the hereafter. If you agree, let us give his father a house full of gold and silver and get his permission to kill the baby.” Thereupon Nimrod immediately sent an urgent message to Terach in which he referred to the baby who had been born to Terach on the previous evening, and demanded that it be handed over to be killed. In return he promised Terach a house full of gold and silver. Terach replied by citing a parable. He said: “I will explain to you how your offer looks to me. They told a horse ‘let us cut off your head and we will give you a house full of barley.’ The horse replied: “you are fools. If you cut off my head who is going to eat the barley? Similarly, if you are going to kill my son who will inherit all this gold and silver?” Having heard this explanation by Terach the king replied: “I infer from your words  that a son has been born for you. Terach replied that this was true but that the baby was dead already. Thereupon the king told him: “the offer to pay you for him with a house full of gold and silver applies only if you deliver him alive. If you deliver him dead the offer does not apply.” Thereupon Terach hid the baby in a cave for the next three years. G’d provided two outlets for that cave. One became the source of fine flour, the other of oil. 
    When Avram was three years old he left the cave. When he looked around he began to wonder who had created heaven and the earth and himself. At first he began praying to the sun all day long. Then, at night, when he saw the moon, he began to pray to the moon as he had concluded that the position of the moon in the sky was proof that the moon had created it and the stars as well as earth and himself. He considered the stars as servants of the moon. When the moon disappeared in the morning and the sun rose in the East he began to realise that the phenomena he had observed thus far had only been tools in the hands of someone mightier than either of them. He now went to his father Terach and asked him who had created heaven earth and himself? Terach answered him: “my god created all these phenomena.” Thereupon Avram asked his father to show him this god who supposedly was powerful enough to have created all these phenomena. Terach brought him one of his idols. Avram could not accept that this idol had any power at all. He went to his mother asking her similar questions. He asked his mother to cook a fancy dish so that he could offer it to one of the idols hoping it would be accepted as an offering. He placed the food in front of Terach’s biggest idol. The idol did not respond at all, neither by sign or movement of his eyes or other organs. At that point, Avram had some divine inspiration and he said of these idols  פה להם ולא ידברו, עינים להם ולא יראו, “they have a mouth and are unable to speak, they have eyes but are unable to see” (Psalms 115,5). He seized the idols and burned them. He took the largest idol outside and placed the fire in his hand. When his father came home and wanted to know what had happened, Avram accused the biggest idol of having burned the others. Terach accused Avram of having burned his idols. Avram claimed to be innocent accusing the largest idols of having burned the others in a fit of fury. Thereupon his father said to him: “my son, you are foolish, how can any of these lifeless idols do such a thing? I myself have made these idols out of wood.” Thereupon Avram said to his father: “I wish you would hear yourself talk. If they have no power why did you tell me that they have created heaven and earth?” Terach then went to Nimrod  and told him that his son had burned both his own and Nimrod’s idols. Nimrod sent for Avram and asked him why he done such a thing. Avram denied having done anything and blamed the largest of the idols for having burned the others. Thereupon Nimrod also challenged him by saying: “since when do these idols possess a spirit of life enabling them to act?” Avram then told Nimrod more or less the same as he had told his father, adding: “why do you reduce the god who has created heaven and earth to a wooden image and you worship such an image?” Thereupon Nimrod told Avram that he personally had created heaven and earth and that both heaven and earth were under his control.
	Thereupon Avram said to Nimrod: “You are able to create? when I came out of the cave I saw the sun rise in the east and set in the west. If you can make the sun rise in the west and set in the east I will worship you. If you are unable to do this, the one who gave me the power to burn the idols will also give me the power to kill you.” Upon hearing this Nimrod consulted with his advisors and asked them what to do with Avram? Thereupon the advisors told him: “this is the one concerning whom we have told you that he will become the founder of a nation which will take over the entire universe including the hereafter. Now the only thing you can do is to do to him what he has done to those idols which he burned.” Upon hearing the advice of his councilors Nimrod immediately threw Avram into a fiery furnace. At that point, G’d was filled with mercy for the boy and He saved him. This is the meaning of His words to Avram: “I have taken you out of the fire of the Casdim.”

    15,8. במה אדע כי אירשנה, “how will I know that I will inherit it?” Avram meant: “by means of which merit will I inherit it?” G’d answered: “by means of the merit of the sacrifices you are about to offer.” This is the meaning of the verse קחה לי “take for Me” (verse 9). When G’d said this He again appeared to Avram as the attribute of א-דני,  but in this instance it was followed by the letter ה [the name “Hashem” with the vowels of the name “elohim.”] to show that the attribute of Mercy was also involved to some extent.
This amounts to the name שדי. You know that we must not pronounce the Ineffable Name as it is spelled. Hence the sages in charge of vocalisation adjusted the vowels in a manner that make them suitable for reading. We must use either the form “elohim,” or the form “adonai,” when pronouncing G’d’s name. A scriptural reminder that this is so is found in Chabakuk 2,2 וה' בהיכל קדשו הס מפניו כל הארץ, “and the Lord is in the Sanctuary of His Holiness; silence in His presence everyone on earth!” This verse is a reminder that only inside the Holy of Holies may the Ineffable Name be pronounced as we would read it had we not been cautioned not to read it as it is spelled.

	15,10.ואת הצפור לא בתר , “and he had not cut the bird in half.” The reason Avram had cut up the four-legged animals but not the birds was that the former represent the idolatrous Gentile Nations, and these have been compared to animals as it says (Psalms 22,13)  סבבוני פרים רבים, “many bulls surround me.” It is also written in Daniel 8,20 האיל אשר ראית, “the ram that you saw ....are the kings of Medes and Persia.” In verse 21 of the same chapter the king of Greece is described as הצפיר השעיר, the “he-goat.” On the other hand, in Song of Songs 5,2 and 2,14 the Jewish people are compared to doves. Seeing that Israel will continue to exist indefinitely, Avram did not cut up the birds representing it.

	15,11 .וירד העיט על הפגרים, “The bird of prey descended on the carcasses.” This was a hint that in the future the Gentile Nations would try and prevent the Israelites from performing sacrificial service in the Temple.

	15,12. והנה אימה חשכה גדולה נופלת עליו, “and here a dread, a great darkness was falling upon him.” Here Avram received a hint of the four exiles the Jewish people would endure in the course of their history prior to the final redemption. Bereshit Rabbah 44,17 interpreted each of the following words as referring to a specific exile. The word אימה is an allusion to Babylon; the word חשכה alludes to Medes; the word גדולה refers to Greece; the word נופלת עליו is a reference to the exile under the Romans.
	Nachmanides wrote: Avram found himself afraid in his soul and this fear was followed by darkness. Later on the darkness increased still further until finally, he felt as if the darkness was physically falling upon him. The reason for all this was that while G’d had covenanted with Avram that He would give the land to his descendants as an eternal inheritance, He had made some reservation to this promise. The reservation was that four different kingdoms would at one time or another enslave the Jewish people and rule over them in their own land. This would be in retribution for sins committed by the Jewish people in the future. Afterwards G’d informed Avram of an exile that would precede the fulfillment of the promise that they would inherit the land of Canaan, the exile in Egypt. This exile was one that represented a punishment for himself because he had asked Sarai to tell a lie about their relationship. Thus far Nachmanides. 

	15,13. ידוע תדע כי גר יהיה זרעך וגו', “You shall surely know that your descendants will be  strangers, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the verse means that Avram’s offspring would spend 400 years in a land which would not be theirs, that they would be enslaved and oppressed by the owners of that land. G’d deliberately refrained from telling Avram how many of these years would be spent in relative freedom and how many in oppressive slavery.
	Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra wrote that the four hundred years would commence on the day G’d spoke to him. If so, G’d would have predicted to the day when the Exodus would take place. [Rabbi Chavell saw several editions of Ibn Ezra, some of which had the line “and he did not tell him the date of the redemption.” The present edition of Mossad Harav Kook has the version we have quoted.]
	ארבע מאות שנה, “four hundred years.” The reason for this number in connection with the exile in Egypt is not clear. Not a single one of the commentators gives us any insight into this number. You will find that the number 400 is prominent in matters concerning the עין רע, “the evil eye.” The numerical value of the words עין רע is 400. The last letter of the Hebrew alphabet, the letter ת is equal to 400. As such it embodies all the letters in the alphabet. Similarly, עין רע is an all inclusive destructive concept. Seeing that the letter ה was added to Avram’s name (Avraham), a letter which represents the attribute of Justice, the evil eye gained power over him, and the attribute of Justice decreed exile on his descendants for four hundred years, corresponding to the עין רע, the eye of Satan. We may now understand the words ידוע תדע כי גר יהיה זרעך, “you must surely know that your descendants will be strangers” [they will be subject to a hitherto unknown attribute of G’d in their lives Ed.], i.e. the ones who will be born as the result of the two letters ה which will be added to both your and Sarai’s name respectively, and which represent the attribute of Justice, will be subject to the evil eye. As a result of such a development ועבדום וענו אותם ארבע מאות שנה, they will be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years. You will encounter this number again in connection with Efron, עפרן, whose name equals 400 and who demanded 400 shekel from Avraham before he allowed him to bury Sarah in the cave of Machpelah. What we learn from this is that עפרן  also represented the “evil eye.” You will also find this in connection with עשו, who based his success in life on that of his father Yitzchak who represented the attribute of Justice. He too possessed עין רע, an evil eye. Bereshit Rabbah 76,8 claims that the reason Yaakov (Genesis 32,15) instructed the attendants of the herds and flocks he sent to his brother Esau as gifts to place a substantial distance between one flock and another was to satisfy Esau’s evil eye which could never get enough of anything. This may be the reason that Esau had taken precisely 400 men with him when he set out to meet (and may be to kill) Yaakov. 

	15,14. וגם את הגוי אשר יעבדו, “and also the nation whom they will serve I will judge, etc.” Nachmanides writes as follows in his commentary on this verse: The word וגם introduces the thought that although “I have decreed exile on the Israelites and therefore the people who have enslaved them may be perceived as merely executing My will, I will judge that people for what they will do and I will not let them go free because in what they did they carried out My plan.” The reason for all this has already been recorded in Zechariah 1, 14-15 קנאתי לירושלים ולציון קנאה גדולה, וקצף גדול אני קוצף על הגוים השאננים אשר אני קצפתי מעט והםה עזרו לרעה, “I am very jealous for Jerusalem- for Zion- and I am very angry with those nations that are at ease; for I was only angry a little, but they overdid the punishment.” The author quotes more verses of a similar nature. At any rate, the Egyptians had not received instructions from G’d to serve as His taskmaster against the Jews, nor had their inhuman treatment of the Israelites been what G’d had intended. The Egyptians had tried to destroy the Jewish people not to discipline them. This is why they were punished for their excess cruelty. This is why G’d told Avram: דן אנכי, “I am going to judge.” G’d promised hat He was going to investigate if what the host-nation does conformed to His will or if they had added to G’d’s decree of their own will. This is also what had impressed Yitro (Exodus 18,11) when he said כי בדבר אשר זדו עליהם, “for with the matter that they had sinned, He (G’d) judged them.” Seeing that the Egyptians had used water to drown the Jewish babies, something which most certainly had not been part of G’d’s plan, He punished them by means of water (when He drowned them in the sea of reeds).
	You should know that if G’d had decreed that Reuven should be killed and such a decree had been recorded and sealed in front of G’d  on Rosh Hashanah (in other words that the decree had become irreversible), the human executioner of said Reuven will not be considered free of the charge of murder even though what he did resulted in G’d’s decree being carried out. Such an executioner is a murderer and will be punished by G’d as such. If however, said human executioner had heard from the mouth of a prophet that a decree of death had been passed by the celestial court on a certain person and he made himself the executioner of that decree in order to carry out G’d’s will, he will not only not be considered a murderer but he will be credited with having done a good deed. We find a classic example of this when Jehu killed the surviving family of Achav (Kings II 10,17, and 10,30). We read there: יען אשר הטיבות לעשות הישר בעיני ככל אשר בלבבי עשית לבית אחב, בני רבעים ישבו לך על כסא ישראל. “Because you have acted well and done what was pleasing to Me, having carried out all that I desired upon the House of Achav, four generations of your descendants will sit on the throne of Israel.” If the person doing something similar had not heard the decree of G’d against his intended victim and he had committed the act out of feelings of personal hatred or in order to commit robbery, he is subject to being punished for the same deed that someone who had heard G’d’s decree would be rewarded.
	We have an explicit verse in Isaiah 10,5-6 in which the prophet spells this out. “Ha, Assyria, rod of My anger in whose hand, as a staff is My fury! I send him against an ungodly nation, I charge him against a nation that provokes Me. To take its spoil and to seize his booty and to make it a thing trampled like the mire of the streets.” The prophet goes on to say in verse 7: “But he (Assyria) has evil plans, his mind harbours evil designs, etc.” It is clear that the prophet draws a line of distinction between a conqueror who does what he does because he wishes to fulfill the designs of his Maker, and the conqueror who is merely motivated by dreams of personal glory, vengeance, and other base motives.
	The same applied to Nebuchadnezzar. All of the prophets had declared that G’d had decreed destruction on Jerusalem and that Nebuchadnezzar and all his people had been chosen to be the instrument by means of which G’d’s decree would be carried out. This is what we read in Jeremiah 32,28-29: הנני נותן את העיר הזאת ביד הכשדים וביד נבוכדרצר מלך בבל, “here I am about to deliver the city of Jerusalem into the hands of the Chaldaens and Nebuchadrezzar the King of the Babylon and they will put the city to fire.” Nonetheless we find that Nebuchadrezzar was punished just as Sancheriv had been punished for exiling the Ten Tribes (compare Jeremiah 50,18). כה אמר ה' הנני פוקד אל מלך בבל ואל ארצו כאשר פקדתי אל מלך אשור, “so says G’d: ‘I will deal with the King of Babylon and his country just as I have dealt with the King of Ashur.” Thus far Nachmanides’ comment on our verse.
	You have to appreciate that when G’d concluded this “covenant between the pieces” with Avram, Avraham was only 70 years old. Although we have been told at the beginning of chapter twelve that Avram was 75 years old when he moved to the land  Canaan, this had been his second departure from Charan. The first time he had left Charan was when he was seventy, and the next time when he was seventy-five. The Torah is not bound to record events in chronological order. Thirty years elapsed between the covenant mentioned in this chapter and the birth of Yitzchak. At the time when Yitzchak was born (21,5), Avraham was one hundred years old. The decree of four hundred years exile applied from the birth of Yitzchak. So we have a total of 430 years between the time this covenant was concluded and the Exodus from Egypt. This is the meaning of Exodus 12,40 “the duration of the stay of the Jewish people in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years.”
	A Midrashic approach to our verse (Bereshit Rabbah 44,21-22) views the repetition of the words ידוע תדע as follows: The first  ידוע means “know that I will scatter them.” The second תדע means “know that I will gather them in” (after they have been in exile). The message is: “Just as the exile will not be accidental but will be orchestrated by Me, so I will also be the One who will orchestrate the ingathering of the exiles.” The words וגם את הגוי אשר יעבודו refer to the other four exiles which the Jewish people will experience after the exile in Egypt, the four exiles we already alluded to earlier. G’d’s message is that what will happen to the four empires who will exile the Jewish people will be similar to what will happen to the Egyptians. The words דן אנכי are an allusion to the Ten Plagues with which G’d would smite the Egyptians, the letters in the word ד-ן are the first letters of the words דם נגע, ‘blood, plague.” The word נגע appears in the Torah in connection with the tenth plague (Exodus 11,1).

	15,16. ודור רביעי ישובו הנה, “and the fourth generation will return here.” According to Rashi our verse refers to the time frame beginning with the exile in Egypt until the Israelites would inherit the land, a period of four generations. These four generations consist of 1) Yehudah, 2) Peretz, 3) Chetzron, 4) Kalev. The latter entered the land of Canaan as a resident at the age of 80.
	According to Nachmanides the words “the fourth generation will return here,” refer to the Emorite The cumulative sins of the Emorites who were in the land at the time G’d concluded the covenant with Avram would be sufficient for G’d to dispossess them by that time. We know that G’d allows up to three or four generations of people to continue in the evil footsteps of their ancestors until He intervenes and brings retribution upon them. According to Nachmanides the period of four generations commenced only at that time. The word ישובו would allude to a possible repentance by the Emorite in which event G’d would not dispossess them. When the Torah singled out the “Emorite,” this was only an example of what would be in store for all the Canaanite tribes. Seeing that the Emorite was the strongest tribe amongst the Canaanites, the Torah singled out that tribe for special mention. The prophet Amos 2,9 describes the Emorites as “stout as the oak.” The words עד הנה mean: “until the measure of their sin is full.” Actually, the Torah should have written: יבואו הנה “they will come here.” The reason the Torah chose to write  ישובו הנה ‘they will return here,” is to point out that they will be considered as if they had already been settled in the land of Canaan previously seeing that Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov and his children had lived in Canaan before descending to Egypt. Remember that Yitzchak had never left the land of Canaan. Concerning Yaakov the Torah had written וישב יעקב בארץ “Yaakov settled in the land.” This is why now the Torah wrote that the fourth generation would return “here.” They would return to what had already been their land.
	Another message contained in these words may be an allusion to the sanctity of the land, the land in which there is found the “gateway to heaven” (Genesis 28, 17). This means that the Sanctuary of the terrestrial regions is on the soil of the land of Canaan. This is the point from which the souls ascend to the celestial regions. This is also where they enter the terrestrial regions. It is appropriate therefore to describe the land of Canaan as the place to which the souls return. The righteous and pious people therefore experience an urge to die near that location in order for their souls to immediately find the path to the celestial regions. Another way of reading the words עון האמורי, “the guilt of the Emorite,” instead of עון הכנעני, “the guilt of the Canaanite,” is that the word אמורי is an allusion to “speech.” G’d may have alluded to Avram’s mistake in asking במה אדע כי אירשנה, “how do I know that I will inherit it?”

	15,17. והנה תנור עשן, “and here there was a smoking furnace.” At first glance one would think the Torah should have written עשן תנור, “the smoke of a furnace,” instead of תנור עשן. This is the way the Torah describes a similar phenomenon at the time the Jewish people received the Torah at Mount Sinai. At that time the Torah wrote ויעל עשנו כעשן הכבשן, “its smoke (that of the mountain) rose like the smoke from a furnace” (Exodus 19,18). However, -using a kabbalistic approach- it is possible that the Torah wanted to inform us of the force which had passed between these pieces and accepted Avram’s sacrifices. It also wanted to inform us that that particular force was composed of both male and female elements. The male element was the active one, the one which initiates an activity, whereas the female element was the passive one, the one that specialises in receiving, in accepting something. All activities are enhanced and assume a more important dimension due to the presence of the female element. This is the reason the word שכינה, “G’d’s benevolent presence,” is a word in the feminine gender.
	Onkelos translates the verse (Exodus 33,14) פני ילכו [usually translated as “My (benevolent) presence will go, will accompany,” Ed] as “שכינתי תהך,” (feminine) instead of as “שכינתי יהך.” (masculine). In other words, he considers the word פנים which is masculine as feminine in that instance. The name of that force (known as מט'ט in Kabbalah) is well known. The word תנור alludes to it when you exchange the letters in that word on the basis of reversing the letters of the alphabet, i.e. ת=א, ש=ב, ר=ג. The word תנור would then be טרו'ן instead. This word is derived from מטטרון, the force designated by G’d to “run” His universe. The “furnace” is the receptacle which receives the fire, and as such it symbolises the female force. On the other hand, the words לפיד אש in our verse represents the masculine force. This is the reason the Torah used the masculine form when describing this לפיד אש, ”torch of fire,” as עבר בין הגזרים, “having passed between these pieces.” This was not the same force as that represented by the furnace. The Torah should have written עברו (pl) instead of עבר if these forces had been identical in gender.
	This is also the deeper meaning of the words כרת ה' את אברם ברית, “G’d concluded a covenant with Avram.” The idea is that G’d made the שכינה which represents the covenant “pass” between the pieces. Remember that it is this force which the Torah described in chapter 12,8 when Avram is first reported as having  built an altar to G’d as “the G’d who had appeared to him.”
	[This is unlikely; we have other examples where the vowel under the letter א in the word נראה points to a feminine attribute of G’d such as in Genesis 48,3 or Exodus 3,16 so that to consider the word “hanir-eh” in Genesis 12,8 as a reference to a feminine attribute of G’d does seem very forced. Ed
	
	15,18. ביום ההוא כרת ה' את אברם ברית לאמור לזרעך נתתי את הארץ הזאת, “on that day G’d concluded a covenant with Avram, saying; ‘to your descendants I have given this land.’” After G’d had previously already twice mentioned giving the land to Avram and to his descendants, i.e. in 12, 7 where it is phrased as “I will give,” and in 1,15 “to your descendants I shall give it,” G’d now phrases the promise as something that had already been fulfilled, i.e. “I have given it” (past tense). He mentions the gift He had already given to Avram in the past. The word נתתי means the same as נשבעתי, “which I have sworn.” When G’d gives something by way of a promise it is as if the promise was equivalent to an oath. We have numerous examples of this in Scripture. I myself have explained this already in connection with Genesis 9,13 where G’d spoke about the rainbow He had placed in the sky. After this gift, i.e. the oath on the occasion of this covenant, there followed the practical part of the covenant, the passing between the parts of the animals which had been sacrificed. We have another example of such a procedure in Jeremiah 34,18 ואת העגל אשר כרתו לשנים ויעברו בין בתריו, “and the calf which they had cut in half so as to pass between the halves.” This covenant was in the nature of a חרם, “consecration,” a warning to remain true to this oath as if to say to the party who would default: “may your fate be similar to that of the animals which lie before you cut in half if you do not honour the agreement we have just now concluded.” This is also why Onkelos translates ברית simply as קים, “something that remains in effect.” The “something” is the oath preceding the sacrifice confirming it. This is also what Avimelech said to Yitzchak (Genesis 26,28) תהי נא אלה בינותינו, בינינו וביניך ונכרתה ברית עמך, “let there be an oath between us, between us and between you, and let us conclude a covenant with you.” The “covenant” was to confirm the oath mentioned previously. Of course, such a “covenant“ is not applicable to G’d (seeing it would be frivolous to assume that G’d would not honour His oath). However, the general tenor of a covenant is applicable to G’d’s promise. It is as if by passing between these cut up pieces of the animals G’d had said: “just as it is impossible to reconstitute these cut up animals, so it is impossible for Me to retract from My oath to give your descendants this land.”
	מנהר מצרים עד הנהר הגדול, “from the river of Egypt as far as the great river.” Three times G’d mentions the gift of the land in this paragraph. The first time it is mentioned when Avram enters the land of Canaan when G’d said “to your descendants I will give this land” (12,7). At that time G’d did not go into details about the nature of the gift. There was no point in doing so seeing Avram, who had entered the land from the North had only progressed as far as Shechem.” The second time (13,14) G’d said to Avram: “raise your eyes and look from the place where you are standing to the north, to the south, to the east and to the west; for the entire land you can see I will give to you and to your descendants.” Normally, people to not look into the distance and it would not be much of a promise if all the land which G’d promised to Avram’s descendants would be what his physical eyes (unaided by binoculars) could see, even if he stood on a hill at that time. What G’d meant was that Avram should concentrate with his spiritual eyes on all the four directions of the globe. On this occasion G’d added the words עד עולם, “forever,” adding that his descendants  would become as numerous as the dust of the earth which defies all attempts to count it. Now, on the third occasion when G’d refers to the gift of the land, He spelled out the boundaries of the land, namely from the river separating Egypt from the land of Canaan as far as the river Euphrates. In this instance, G’d no longer spoke of this gift as something in the future, but He said: “I have given it.” According to Nachmanides we have to understand this verse as “the covenant applies to the gift G’d had already given to Avram and the Jewish people.”
	The reason the Torah describes the river Euphrates as “the great river,” although it was mentioned only as the fourth and last of the rivers emanating from Gan Eden (2,14) is because it borders on the land of Israel. We have a popular parable which illustrates the point. “A commoner is liable to describe the valet of a king as ‘king,’ because such a person is continuously in the king’s presence” (compare Rashi on our verse). Seeing that the land of Israel is holy, a choice piece of real estate, the site of the Holy Temple to which is applied the term הבית הגדול, “the great house” (Chronicles II 2,4), the description “great” as applied to the river Euphrates which borders this land is not a misnomer. 
	Although G’d spoke here about the land being given to “your descendants” at a time when neither Ishmael nor Yitzchak had as yet been born, Ishmael, the son of a slave woman, is not included as a recipient of that promise. Ishmael did not constitute Avram’s principal “descendant” anymore than did the sons he begat after Sarah had died. The principal descendant is the son of the major wife of a husband, not that of concubines or minor wives. G’d had spelled this out after Ishmael had already been born when He said to Avraham (21,12) “for your descendants will be known through Yitzchak.”

	16,1.ולה שפחת מצרית , “and she had an Egyptian slave-woman.” The Torah emphasises that this woman belonged to Sarai personally, not to Avram; hence the word לה “to her, or hers.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 45,1 describe her as part of Sarai’s נכסי מלוג, property the wife brings with her at marriage over which the husband has only limited control,” i.e. he cannot sell it.
	ושמה הגר, “and her name was Hagar.” She had been given to Sarai when she was a prisoner in Pharaoh’s palace. As a reminder of that experience she was called “Hagar.” The word means “reward for your chasteness.” (based on the name being an acrostic i.e. הא אגריך “this is your reward”).

	16,5. ישפוט ה' ביני וביניך, “may the Lord judge between me and you.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 45,5 state that if one invokes the attribute of Justice against a fellow human being one will not emerge from such a confrontation completely unharmed. But for the fact that Sarai invoked the attribute of Justice she would have lived to the same age as Avraham. Because she appealed to the attribute Justice in her quarrel with Avram she lost 48 years of her life.  
	Rabbi Aushiyah added that seeing that at the time when Sarai said: “let the Lord judge between me and you,” Hagar was already pregnant with child seeing the Torah said ויבא אל הגר ותהר, what was the point of the angel announcing to Hagar (verse 11) “here you are pregnant and you will give birth to a son?” He should only have told her hat she would bear a son. We learn from this line that Sarai had looked at Hagar with the evil eye and she had aborted her fetus.” Rabbi Chanina added that if the prophet Elisha had made such a statement under the influence of the Holy Spirit that would have been sufficient [a reference to Kings II 4,17 where he predicted that the Shunamite woman would embrace a son a year from the time of the prophecy. On that occasion the Shunamite woman suspected the prophet of raising her hopes in vein. Ed.] Thus far the comment of Bereshit Rabbah. 
	Seeing that the word ביניך has been spelled “full,” i.e. with two letters י, we are entitled to derive from this that Sarai turned her face towards Hagar while speaking, and the words: “may the Lord judge between me and you” refer to between her and the fetus inside Hagar’s womb. This is what was meant by her turning her “evil eye on her, “ i.e. on what was inside Hagar’s womb.

	16,8. הגר שפחת שרי, “Hagar Sarai’s maidservant.” We already know that Hagar was Sarai’s maid servant from verse 1; why did the Torah have to repeat this? It is possible that the angel had two reasons why he thought it pertinent to mention Hagar’s personal status. 1) He wanted her to know that if she now experienced a divine vision this was not in her capacity as an Egyptian woman but was only due to her being part of Sarai’s household. It was due to Sarai’s merit. The second consideration of the angel was to stress that her original status as a slave was 
one that would never be changed. She would remain Sarai’s slave for as long as she lived. The angel confirmed this later when he said to Hagar שובי אל גברתך והתעני תחת ידיה, “return to your mistress and submit to her.”

	16,13. אתה אל ראי, “You are a G’d who sees me.” Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra explained these words as meaning: “You are a G’d who reveals Himself by means of visions (to his creatures).” The word ראי is a noun.
	הגם הלם ראיתי, “for even here I have seen,” i.e. “an angel of the Lord after G’d had seen my affliction.”

	16,14. על כן קרא לבאר באר לחי ראי, therefore the well was called “The Well of the Living One.”

    17,1. אני אל שדי, “I am the G’d Shaddai.” According to Rashi the meaning of these words is: “who provides adequately in His capacity as G’d for all His creatures.” Rabbeinu Chananel writes that G’d gave the commandment for Avraham to circumcise himself and his household by using this attribute (name), seeing that the physical strength of a person is weakened when he undergoes  circumcision. [He wanted to encourage Avraham. Ed.] We are told in a Midrash that the meaning of Proverbs 2,7 וצפן לישרים תושיה, “He reserves sound wisdom for the upright though it weakens the body,” is a reference to circumcision. [The Talmud Sanhedrin 26 applies this verse to Torah study. Ed.] This was why G’d delayed giving this commandment to man for twenty generations. The word צפון then means “hidden.” There were 20 generations between Adam and Avraham. The name שדי is indicative of and equivalent to the emanation גבורה as we know from Ezekiel 1,24 כקול מים רבים כקול שדי, “like the sound of great waters, like the sound of Shaddai.”
	Seeing G’d did not want Avraham to say that when he would perform surgery on his flesh he would weaken himself, G’d introduced the subject by referring to Himself as the powerful One, as Shaddai, as if to assure Avraham that He personally would compensate him for any loss of physical vigour Avraham would experience as a result of observing this commandment. He would remain strong enough to overcome any of his adversaries, both he and all of his descendants who would abide by this commandment.
	Maimonides explains at the end of chapter 63 volume one of his Moreh Nevuchim, that the meaning of the attribute Shaddai is  אשר די, “who is self-sufficient,” i.e. He does not have any need for any of the phenomena in His universe, whereas the world (which He has created) has no need of anyone besides Him.
    The correct interpretation of the name Shaddai is that given by Rabbi Shmuel Ha-Nagid (of Cordova); the word is derived from שודד, i.e. “destroys, ruins.” The idea is that G’d destroys even the forces of heaven (if need be).
    Rabbi Saadyah Gaon explains the word שדי as meaning that He makes up any shortfall, i.e. supplies די, adequacy. Yet another explanation offered for this word relates it to Isaiah 66,23 מדי חדש בחדשו, ”from month  month.” It means that something is constant, repeats itself endlessly. The name Shaddai then describes G’d’s eternal nature. Nachmanides understands the word as describing G’d’s attribute of Justice as practiced in our terrestrial world. This is another way of describing “natural law” as it is perceived in our daily lives. The reason G’d considered it appropriate to reveal this attribute of His at this time was to inform Avraham that He, G’d,  overrides natural law whenever it pleases Him and that as a result He could decree that Avraham would sire children. Whenever G’d would perform miracles which are not visible to us on earth, something our sages call נסים נסתרים, “hidden miracles,” He does so in His capacity as אל שדי. By nature, Avraham was sterile and could not sire children. G’d neutralised the horoscopic forces which had been responsible for Avraham’s sterility by invoking the name Shaddai when doing so.
    [I must confess that I have difficulties with all this in view of the fact that at the beginning of our chapter Avraham is described as 99 years old, i.e. he had sired Ishmael 13 years previously without G’d mentioning that He had invoked the attribute Shaddai to enable him to do so. Ed.]
	This was an example of a hidden miracle, no one being able to see when and how it occurred. If Avraham became a father people would simply say that something natural had occurred as it was not unknown for even 100 year-old men to become fathers. Certainly such miracles cannot be compared to those performed by Moses both in Egypt and in the desert. All of the miracles performed by Moses enjoyed a mass audience. These miracles produced drastic and visible changes in the manner in which they affected natural law. Thus far Nachmanides.
	We need to explain the reason why G’d commanded this particular מצוה of circumcision to Avraham and his descendants. The act of circumcision is as if G’d imprints His Holy Ineffable Name on the bodies of the males so circumcised. The effect of circumcision is to leave a visible sign on the body of the person who underwent this procedure. Possession of this visible sign distinguishes the Jewish people from the Gentiles whose hearts and bodies are uncircumcised. Such people are comparable to שדים, “evil spirits,” whereas the Jewish people bear the signature of שדי on their bodies. Wearing this “sign” on their bodies entitles Jewish people to be called האדם, and this is what G’d meant when He asked Avraham to become תמים, “perfect.” Seeing that this “seal” confers the title תמים on the circumcised Jew,- he is entitled to some degree of protection against the temptation to commit sexual excesses and offences i.e. he is entitled to a higher erotic threshold. Hence the Torah introduced a variety of laws governing sexual mores of the Jewish people. David referred to this in Samuel II 22,24 when he said: ואהיה תמים עמו ואשתמרה מעוני, “I have been blameless before Him, and have guarded myself against sinning.” [Our author regards the three basic letters י-ה-ו of the Ineffable four-lettered name of G’d as being represented in our bodies by the male organ, the mouth, and the tongue.] 
    The word ואהיה in the verse in Samuel contains these three letters which represent the “seal” of circumcision on our bodies and which appeared for the first time when G’d said to Avraham והיה, in the sequence “והיה תמים.” The reason these letters appear once in a certain order and another time in a different order is that they allude to a spiritual bond between the terrestrial and the celestial worlds. This bond is reciprocal, mutual, i.e. on the one hand there is input by heavenly forces into man; on the other hand there is input by man to reinforce the spiritual sanctity in heaven.
    A Midrashic approach to the words אל שדי based on Bereshit Rabbah 46,3. G’d said: “it is enough for Me and you to be in this universe. If you accept My commandment to circumcise yourself, all well and good. If not, I will say to My universe די לעולמי, די לערלה, ‘enough’ for My world, ‘enough’ for a history of human beings dominated by their foreskins!’ (G’d threatened to destroy the universe).” 
    The meaning of this Midrash is that the whole strength of the Jewish people is concentrated in the heart, whereas the strength of the seventy Gentile nations as represented by their “princes” at the celestial court is equivalent to קליפות, “peels,” Thirty-five of these peels are on the “right,” i.e. of a positive kind, whereas the other thirty-five on the “left” are of a spiritually negative kind. The latter are called ערלה, “foreskin.” [The first two letters of that word, when inverted spell רע,=evil; the last two letters in that word are לה =35]. No one is permitted to take hold of the heart until the “peels” have been removed. If Avraham had not accepted the commandment to circumcise himself I would have said “enough,” i.e. that neither I nor these “princes” would have engaged in any activity whatsoever. This would have resulted in the universe disintegrating.
   התהלך לפני, “walk before Me.” This means “continue to perform My sevice.” The words following, i.e. והיה תמים, mean “as a result you will be perfect, free from blemish.” You will neither need to discard something superfluous nor add something that is lacking. The word תמים occurs as a description of the Torah in Psalms 19,8 תורת ה' תמימה, “G’d’s Torah is perfect.” This is why we must neither add a single letter to it nor omit a single letter from it (Deut.13,1). The definition of being תמים, perfect, includes the requirement that a person’s external appearance mirrors his internal but invisible virtues, and that what he says reflects what he truly feels. It is a fact that our patriarch Avraham was the root of faith in G’d and of those who believe in the exclusivity and uniquness of G’d. When it comes to matters of faith it is indispensable that what one professes to believe and what one does in fact believe must coincide. Anyone who says one thing while believing another belongs to the group of individuals of whom the psalmist (Psalms 78, 36-37) has said: ויפתוהו בפיהם ובלשונם יכזבו-לו, ולבם לא-נכון עמו ולא נאמנו בבריתו, “Yet they deceived Him with their speech, lied to Him with their words; their hearts were inconstant toward Him; they were untrue to His covenant.” This is why the Torah has formulated the requirement to be “perfect” as a positive commandment in Deut 18,13 by writing תמים תהיה עם ה' אלוקיך, “be wholehearted with the Lord your G’d.” Being “wholehearted” is one of the highest virtues, and the Torah refers approvingly to such people as Noach, Yitzchak, and Yaakov as having practiced this virtue (compare Genesis 6,9; 25,27; Bereshit Rabbah 64,3). We read in Psalms 15,2 הולך תמים ופועל צדק, “he who lives without blame and does what is right and acknowledges the truth in his heart;” these words refer to Avraham. Psalm 101,2 “אשכילה בדרך תמים, “I direct my reason in the path of moral integrity,” extols the virtue of תמימות as one that David tries to attain. In Psalm 41,13 David credits G’d’s support of him by attributing it to his integrity; ואני בתומי תמכת בי ותציבני לפניך לעולם, “You will support me because of my integrity and let me abide in Your presence forever.” Solomon also was keenly aware of the importance of this virtue and this is why he referred to it both in Proverbs 10,9הולך בתומים ילך בטח , He who walks in integrity walks securely,” and in Proverbs 11,20 where he writes ורצונו תמימי דרך, “but G’d delights in those who are blameless in their ways.” 
    
    17,4. אני הנה בריתי אתך, “As for Me, this is My covenant with you.” Nachmanides writes that the mystical meaning of these words is the same as Kings I 5,58 יהי ה' אלוקינו עמנו, “may the Lord our G’d be with us;” or, it is similar to  Genesis 28,15  והנה אנכי עמך “and here I am with you.” We also find a similar expression in Exodus 3, 12 where G’d assures Moses כי אהיה עמך, ”for I am going to be with you.” What G’d meant by His words was that this very covenant would be with Avraham and would enable him to become fruitful and to multiply. Subsequently G’d commanded Avraham to observe this covenant by performing the visible sign of it, the rite of circumcision. The constantly recurring sign of the circumcision is the Sabbath. There the Torah (Exodus 31,13) also writes that the Israelites would observe the Sabbath as a sign of the eternal covenant between G’d and the children of Israel. The similarity of the language of the Torah in both instances makes it clear that both ”signs” (the circumcision and Sabbath observance) refer to the same covenant although the Torah delayed mentioning this until Exodus 31,13.
    
    17,5. והיה שמך אברהם, “and your name will be Avraham.” The additional letter ה is from the last letter ה of the Ineffable Name י-ה-ו-ה. This gave Avraham the physical strength to produce offspring. We find that the letterי  which had been a part of Sarai’s name, i.e. שרי was divided between Avraham and his wife [they both now had a letter 5=ה instead of Sarai having a letter י =10]. By dividing this letter between them (each receiving the equivalent of 5), Avraham became the carrier of the מרכבה, the terrestrial carriage supporting G’d’s Presence together with Yitzchak and Yaakov who would not have been born without this change of name of both Avram and Sarai.
   כי אב המון גוים נתתיך, “for I have made you the father of a multitude of nations.” Our patriarch Avraham was as much a father of mankind as Adam in his time had been a father of mankind. Indeed we find that Avraham was called “Adam” in accordance with the interpretation by our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 14,6 where the words את האדם in Genesis 2,7 are understood as a reference to Avraham. They also interpret Joshua 14,15 האדם הגדול הענקים, “the great man amongst the giants,” as applying to Avraham. I have already hinted at this at the end of my commentary on Genesis 2,17. In this portion Avraham was given the commandment of circumcision concerning which no fewer than thirteen covenants were entered into between G’d and the Jewish people. Nedarim 31 explains all this in detail.
    
    17,13. והיתה בריתי בבשרכם לברית עולם, “and this My covenant shall remain on your flesh as an eternal covenant.” According to the plain meaning of the text these words mean that the removal of the foreskin will remain an irreversible sign that the person who has undergone this procedure believes in G’d and in His uniqueness. He will not change his belief either while he is alive on this earth or thereafter. It was part of the purpose of this commandment that G’d become the national G’d of the descendants of Avraham, as we read in verse seven of this chapter.
	A Midrashic approach to our verse views the commandment as similar to the offering of a sacrifice. Just as when a person offers a sacrifice on the altar and the blood of the offering achieves atonement for him, so the blood lost by the person being circumcised acts as atonement for him. This is why this rite has to be performed on the eighth day of the baby’s life. Just as an animal sacrifice is not admissible as such until the eighth day of the animal’s life (compare Leviticus 22, 27: ומיום השמיני והלאה ירצה, “and from the eighth day on it will be welcome as a sacrifice for G’d. In connection with the sacrificial offering the Torah writes (Exodus 29,33) ואכלו אותם אשר כפר בהם, “They- who received atonement through them (the offerings)- shall eat them;” so we make a festive meal to celebrate the induction of the circumcised baby into the Jewish community. In fact, the effect of the circumcision is far greater than that of an animal sacrifice. An animal sacrifice represents only a financial sacrifice by the donor whereas the rite of circumcision involves his body. The organ which is cut is one that radiates feelings to all parts of the body of the person concerned. This is why it is called ראש הגויה, “head of the whole body” in Negaiim 6,7. This is why this organ was chosen to serve as a demonstration of self-sacrifice and why someone who undergoes circumcision is considered in the eyes of G’d as if he had sacrificed his entire body on G’d’s behalf. This is also why in Psalms 50,5 the psalmist Assaph describes circumcision as “who made a covenant with Me over sacrifice.” G’d Himself describes His pious as having made a covenant with Him by means of circumcising themselves.

	In Bereshit Rabbah 21,14 we find that Rabbi Abba interprets the words (Genesis 3,24 ) את החרב המתהפכת, as a reference to circumcision. He explains his reason as being Joshua 5,2 where the instruments used to circumcise the people are described as חרבות צורים “swords of flint.” The other Rabbis consider the word חרב in that verse in Genesis 3,24 as referring to the Torah. They point to Psalms 149,6 וחרב פפיות בידם, “and a  two-edged sword in their hands,” as their reason. Rabbi Abdimai also interprets the entire verse there as connected to both Gehinom and circumcision; he considers circumcision as an insurance against a Jew becoming a permanent victim of Gehinom. G’d is portrayed as asking; “who will save My children from the blazing fire (in Gehinom)? The answer given is that the rite of circumcision will be the instrument saving Jews from Gehinom and its fires.
	In Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 29 we are told that Avraham circumcised himself on Yom Kippur. This is based on Leviticus 23,28 וכל מלאכה לא תעשו בעצם היום הזה, “you shall not perform any work on this very day.” We find the same expression בעצם היום הזה here where Avraham is described as circumcising himself in verse 26 with the words: “on this very day.” G’d reviews the blood of Avraham’s circumcision every year on that day and this contributes to His granting atonement for his descendants who continue to circumcise themselves.
	A rational-investigative approach to our verse: It is a well known fact that surgery, i.e. removal of a person’s organ weakens the body of the person undergoing such surgery. There is not a single organ of a person’s body which if removed does not  result in weakening his whole physique. The commandment of circumcision was designed to weaken sexual desire and to diminish the degree of physical enjoyment which results from sexual activity. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 80,11 have already made this point when they said that when a Jewish girl (Dinah) has sexual relations with an uncircumcised male it is more difficult for her to resist the temptation to repeat the experience. On the other hand, circumcision does not interfere in any way with a male’s ability to beget children. This is one of a number of natural abilities, and remains unimpaired. The ability to procreate is such a natural ability. The reason the Torah commanded that this commandment be performed on the eighth day of the baby’s life  is because prior to that the baby is too weak to undergo the procedure without danger to its well being. It has not yet been weaned from its pre-natal condition. This is the way Maimonides explains the matter. 
	A kabbalistic approach: the words והיתה בריתי בבשרכם לברית עולם mean that “My covenant on your flesh” shall be a symbol of an eternal covenant, ברית עולם. This is the deeper meaning of what Solomon said in Proverbs 10,25 וצדיק יסוד עולם, “and the righteous has an enduring, everlasting foundation.” This is also the meaning of Numbers 18,19 ברית מלח עולם, a covenant containing salt is enduring.” We derive this from an unusual nuance in our verse which by rights should have read והיתה בריתי בבשרכם לעולם, (without the word ברית being repeated). The repetition of the word לברית means that the covenant the Torah speaks of is between the legs of the male which are known as נצח והוד, “eternal and glorious.” This is also what is meant by the sages who coined the phrase המאיר עיני הלב, “who enlightens the eyes of the heart.” We find a comment in Eychah Rabbati 2,3 on the words (Lamentations 2,1) ולא זכר הדום רגליו ביום אפו, “and He would not remember His footstool on the day of His wrath.” The word הדום is viewed as an allusion to the blood between Avraham’s legs when he circumcised himself. On the day of His wrath G’d did not want to remember this deed in favour of the Jewish people. [The word הדום is understood by the Midrash as a double-entendre, meaning both something serving the legs and blood. Ed.] Seeing that the emanation מלכות is close to the emanation יסוד and we have demonstrated that the righteous is considered the foundation (יסוד) of the world, our sages interpret the Talmudic dictum מל ולא פרע כאלו לא מל, “if someone performed the removal of the foreskin without at the same time revealing the flesh beneath it, i.e. removing a thin membrane under the foreskin, a procedure known as פריעה, he might as well not have circumcised himself (or the baby) at all” (compare Shabbat 137). The reason is that such a person is considered as if he first separates something and then detaches it, whereas the purpose of any commandment is to “unite something.” This “uniting” symbolises the Oneness of G’d. Students of Kabbalah will understand what I mean.

	17,16. וברכתי אותה “and I have blessed her.” The blessing consisted in Sarah regaining her youthfulness and her experiencing her menstrual cycle as is mentioned in 18,12 where the Torah speaks of her saying אחרי בלותי היתה לי עדנה which Rashi interprets as: “after I had become wilted I again experience a menstrual cycle.” G’d also blessed her by providing her with an ample supply of mother’s milk as the Torah testifies when Sarah said (21,7) היניקה בנים שרה, “Sarah nursed a number of children at her breast.” The meaning of the words מלכי עמים, “kings of nations,” is a reference to both Yaakov and Esau.

	17,17. ויפול אברהם על פניו, “Avraham prostrated himself, etc.” This had already been mentioned in verse three. At that time Avraham prostrated himself in order to be able to receive G’d’s communication. In this verse he did so in order to pray for the continued well being of Ishmael. The reason the Torah mentions the word נפילה, “falling down” each time is to teach that until Avraham had circumcised himself he was not able to receive communications from G’d unless he first prostrated himself. This was because the foreskin is something G’d detests. We find something similar when Bileam, an uncircumcised Gentile prophet, received communications from G’d. He himself describes himself asנופל וגלוי עינים , “someone who has to fall down in order to receive revelations with his eyes.” Once Avraham had undergone circumcision we find that he was able to receive such communications while remaining upright. This is the meaning of 18,22: “and Avraham still remained standing in the presence of the Lord.”
	הלבן מאה שנה יולד? ,”shall a child be born to a hundred-year old man?” The last thing that Avraham meant to question was that G’d could arrange for his fathering a child by invoking miracles. He questioned only if it was possible to arrange for this without interfering with the laws of nature. This is why he drew attention to his age. He meant that if he had been unable to sire a child while he was full of youthful vigour how could he do so now without recourse to miracles? Seeing that the Torah had already credited Avraham with believing G’d’s promise in 15,6 when he was only 70 years old, much had happened in his life since to strengthen his belief in G’d’s ability to perform supernatural miracles. The word ויצחק, “he laughed,” must not be understood then as derisive laughter but as an expression of joy such as in Psalms 126,2 אז ימלא שחוק פינו, “then our mouths will be full of laughter.” This is why Onkelos translates these words as וחדי, “he rejoiced.” The proof that the word is to be understood as an expression of joy is that G’d commanded him to name the child יצחק to reflect his joyous reaction to the announcement that he would become a father at that age. Had his reaction been one of disbelief it is hardly likely that G’d would have wanted him to name his son with a name which reflected his disbelief.

	17,19. וקראת את שמו יצחק, “and you will name him ‘Yitzchak.’” Yitzchak was given this name by G’d. This is why we never find that he was given another name such as his father or his son Yaakov who was given the additional name Yisrael. Both Avram’s name and Yaakov’s name had been given them by their respective fathers and not by G’d Himself. I have found a remark confirming this in the Jerusalem Talmud at the end of the first chapter of Berachot. The rhetorical question posed there is: “Why was Yitzchak’s name never amended whereas the names of Avraham and Yaakov were amended?” Answer: ‘’because the latter’s name was G’d-given, whereas the names of the former were given to them by their respective fathers.” The Talmud quotes our verse here as the source for claiming that G’d commanded Avraham to call the name of his son Yitzchak. You might retort that we also encounter Yitzchak’s name spelled with the letter ש instead of the letter צ in Psalms 108,9, and that this is as much of a change as spelling אברהם without the letter ה. Actually, the word ישחק is not a new name at all. The prophet wanted to draw attention to the element fire which was one of the basic elements in Yitzchak’s character as we know from the ספר יצירה where the author writes (edition of Gaon from Vilna chapter 6 Mishnah 2) “there are three אמות which are known as אמ'ש “which are air, water and fire.” Whereas the מ is silent, static, the א is constantly in motion so that the letter ש is an allusion to the great fire, a characteristic of Yitzchak. [Fire is perceived as vanquishing water, rising even during the process of water “extinguishing” fire and remaining behind on the ground. (abbreviated quote from the comment of the Gaon from Vilna). Ed.]
	Another reason why Avram’s name had to be changed whereas Yitzchak’s name did not need to be changed: G’d had given Avraham an additional destiny, i.e. to become a founder of many nations. This had to be reflected in his name being changed. Similarly Yaakov. His additional name Yisrael was in recognition of his having successfully contended with opposing celestial forces as attested to by the angel who struggled with him (Genesis 32,29). Yitzchak had not had similar experiences so that these did not require any changes or additions to his name. He had remained throughout his life on holy soil in the Holy Land.

	17,20. ולישמעאל שמעתיך, “and concerning Ishmael, I have heard (your prayer).” G’d meant that He would bless Ishmael because Avraham had offered a prayer on his behalf but not on account of G’d’s covenant with Avraham which included only Yitzchak.
	שנים עשר נשיאים יוליד, “he will sire twelve princes.” Ishmael had twelve sons and they have been listed by their names at the end of Parshat Chayey Sarah. We read there: בכור ישמעאל נבוית, וקדר, ואדבאל, ומבשם, ומשמע, ודומה, ומשא, חדר, ותימה, יטור, נפיש, וקדמה. This gives you a total of 12. As to the reason the Torah speaks of twelve princes and not of twelve nations, this is to inform us that their distinction lay in their being so extraordinarily fruitful and numerous, far more so than other nations. The word נשיא then reflects their numerical “superiority.” This is precisely what G’d predicted when He said: “Here I have blessed him and made him fruitful and greatly increased his numbers very much indeed. “
	The expression נשיאים also implies that these people will disappear from the world after having attained great stature The word is related to Proverbs 25,14 נשיאים ורוח וגשם אין, ”Clouds, wind and rain are as naught.” Solomon uses this term to describe people or phenomena who achieve a brief moment of glory which soon disintegrates into nothingness. Job 7,9 speaks of כלה ענן וילך, “a cloud fades away and disappears.” You will note that the word נשיאם when used to describe the leaders of the Ishmaelites lacks the customary letterי  in the plural ending (25,16). This shows that the kingdom of the Ishmaelites, while beginning with great fanfare, will gradually fade away into weakness. This is the deeper meaning of what the angel said to Hagar when he described the child she carried in her womb as והוא יהיה פרא אדם. “He will be an undisciplined person.” This meant that he will be like a wild person who initially vanquishes everybody. However, the angel added the words יד כל בו, eventually, “everybody will be against him.”
	ונתתיו לגוי גדול, “and I will make him into a great nation.” Rabbeinu Chananel wrote: we note that this prophecy was fulfilled for them only after 2333 years. [Rabbi Chavell writes that this is an accurate number seeing that Avraham was circumcised in the year 2047 after the creation. The Islamic religion was founded in the year 4374 after the creation. Allow for another ten years until it started spreading throughout the world and you will arrive at the number 2333 after Avraham was circumcised, the date of this prediction.] This delay was not due to their sins as they had been looking forward to fulfillment of the prophecy during all those years. Once the prophecy came true Islam conquered the civilised world like a whirlwind. We, the Jewish people, lost our position of pre-eminence in the world due to our sins. Seeing that at the time of writing we have yearned for the fulfillment of the prophecy that we will be redeemed for a mere 1330 years, we certainly have no reason to abandon hope that it will be fulfilled. 

	17,22. ויעל אלוקים מעל אברהם, “G’d ascended from above Avraham.” The patriarchs on earth are considered as occupying positions parallel to that of the cherubs in the celestial regions. This is why the Torah describes G’d’s departure as “from above Avraham.” We find a parallel expression in Ezekiel 9,3 וכבוד ישראל נעלה מעל הכרוב, “The Presence of the G’d of Israel rose from above the cherub.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 47,6 are even more explicit when they stated: “the patriarchs are the real carriers of G’d’s entourage (מרכבה), i.e. “they are the real cherubs.”

	17,23. וימל את בשר ערלתם, “he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin.” Avraham first engaged in circumcising the male members of his household before circumcising himself. We are told immediately afterwards: “on that very day Avraham circumcised himself.” Had he circumcised himself first he would have been sick and it would have been dangerous for him to proceed to circumcise the other members of his household.

	17,24. בהמולו בשר ערלתו, “when he was circumcised on the flesh of his foreskin.” The procedure followed exactly the instructions he had received in verse 11. The Torah teaches us here that this commandment leaves a permanent mark on the flesh of a person so that this mark can be considered the sign of the covenant. This is why this commandment is known for short simply as אות, “sign.” 
	There are a total of tree commandments in the Torah which are called אות, “sign.” They are: circumcision, Sabbath, and phylacteries. All of them, i.e. performance of them by a Jew are testimony to his belief in G’d and His Torah. It is not appropriate for a Jew to not have at least two of these commandments as his advocates. Maintaining a claim to something successfully requires that the claim be supported by two valid witnesses (Deut.19,15). This is why a Jew needs to constantly move in the company of two such witnesses. They are the circumcision and the commandment of the תפילין, the phylacteries. They should never deport from him. A Jew who is careful to mind this may say of himself as did Rabbi Zeyra (Megillah 28) “I have never walked four cubits without Torah and without the phylacteries.” On the Sabbath, when the commandment to wear phylacteries does not apply, one still has both the Sabbath and the sign of the covenant on one’s flesh as the two valid witnesses which one should never be without. From the above we learn that observing the commandment to wear phylacteries fastidiously means that one is never without the protection of these two witnesses who may testify on one’s behalf.
	A Midrashic interpretation (Tanchuma Lech Lecha 20) on the words בהמולו בשר ערלתו: “the commandment is an important one as anyone who has undergone this procedure will not descend to Gehinom. This is based on the verse here ביום ההוא כרת ה' ברית עם אברהם, “on that day G’d concluded a covenant wirh Avraham,” and a verse in Leviticus 12,3 ובים השמיני ימול, “and he shall be circumcised on the eighth day.” Who is it that is liable to descend to Gehinom? The one concerning whom it is written afterwards את הקיני, ואת הקניזי, ואת הקדמוני, “and the Keyni, the Kenizite, and the Kadmoni all of whom were of uncircumcised heart.” All the wicked people will descend to Gehinom as we know from Ezekiel 32,18 בן אדם נהה על המון מצרים והורידהו....שם אשור וכל קהלה שם משך תובל וכל המונה....כולם ערלים מחללי חרב, שמה נסיכי צפון. “  Ben Adam, wail for the multitude of Egypt and cast it down,....there is found Ashur and all her multitude, there is found Meshech, Tuval and all their multitude; all of them slain who fall by the sword and who descend uncircumcised to the bowels of the earth for they spread their terror in the land of life.” The author quotes verses of similar meaning from Isaiah 5,14, indicating that those who inherit Gehinom are the ones who do not have the legislation of מילה. On the other hand, we have a verse promising those who observe the ברית מילה covenant that they will not experience such a fate. For instance we read in Zechariah 9,11: גם את בדם בריתך שלחתי אסירך מבור אין מים בו,”You, for Your part have released your prisoners who have undergone the blood of your covenant from the pit without water.” Another verse alluding to the same promise is found in Proverbs 31,21 לא תירא לביתה משלג כי כל ביתה לבוש שנים, “her house does not need to be afraid of snow seeing her entire house is insulated with wool.” The Midrash understands the word שלג, snow,” as a reference to Gehinom. Thus far Tanchuma.
	This is why it has become customary to even perform the rite of circumcision on babies who died before this rite could be performed on them while they were alive. (compare Yore Deyah 263).
	The Jewish people merited this commandment as a result of which they have received three promises. 1) The kingdom of the house of David. that would endure forever. 2) the gift of the land of Israel which would remain our inheritance forever. 3) that the Presence of G’d would be manifest over the people of Israel. All these three promises have been hinted at in this paragraph. The promise involving the dynasty of the house of David is alluded to in the words ונתתיך לגוים ומלכים ממך יצאו “I will give you to be nations, and kings will come forth from you.” (17,6). This verse speaks of the consequences of this covenant. We also have a verse in Psalms 89,4-5 concerning David which uses similar language. כרתי ברית לבחירי נשבעתי לדוד עבדי עד עולם אכין זרעך ובניתי לדור דור כסאך סלה, “I have made a covenant with My chosen one; I have sworn to My servant David ‘I will establish your offspring forever, I will confirm your throne for all generations.’”
	The gift of the land of ארץ ישראל is hinted at in our paragraph when the Torah writes  (verse 8 in our chapter) ונתתי לך ולזרעך אחריך את ארץ מגוריך את כל ארץ כנען לאחוזת עולם, “and I have given to you and to your descendants after you the whole land of Canaanas an eternal possession.” The meaning of this verse is that though there may be times when others occupy this land it will never be theirs, and the Jewish people will return to it in due course after their exile.” The proof of the truth of this promise is that no nation which tried to settle in this land ever succeeded to make it a land of milk and honey as it had been when occupied by the Jewish people. It remained largely desolate ever since the destruction of the Holy Temple.
	The reference to he third promise that G’d’s presence would be manifest over the Jewish people  is based on 17,8 והייתי להם לאלוקים, “I will remain as their G’d.” This means that only the Jewish people  will be able to claim G’d as their exclusive national G’d. Hail to the nation to whom three such assurances have been given. No other nation has ever received such a package of promises. This is what David had in mind when he said (Psalms 144,15) אשרי העם שככה לו, אשרי העם שה' אלוקיו “hail to the people who have it so; happy the people whose G’d is the Lord.”
    
   פרשת וירא אליו ה'
    
    18 . באור פני מלך חיים ורצונו כעב מלקוש,”In the light of the king’s face there is life; his favour is like a cloud of spring rain.”
    King Solomon explained by means of this verse the benefit that man derives when a king is well disposed towards him and shows him favour. He compares this goodwill to a cloud which promises to discharge its moisture in the spring, something that everyone looks forward to with anticipation. In another verse Solomon compared such goodwill of the king as dew. In Proverbs 19,12 he writes נהם ככפיר זעף המלך וכטל על עשב רצונו, ”The rage of a king is like the roaring of a lion; but his favour is like dew on grass.” The reason Solomon chose two hyperboles to describe the king’s favour is because the benefit of rain is something which is only noticeable in the future. When there will be a bountiful harvest the benefit of the rain is noticeable retroactively. The benefit derived by dew is noticeable immediately, however. Similarly, there is a difference between the manifestation of G’d’s goodwill. Sometimes its effect becomes visible at once; at other times its beneficial effect is not felt until after a considerable period of time has elapsed.
    On other occasions Solomon teaches us in Proverbs about harm which results to man as a result of G’d’s anger even though man does not actually experiences (becomes aware) that he has been hurt, and even though G’d’s anger may never be translated into action. There is no need to mention that if G’d wants to vent His anger on those who anger Him that He is able to do so.
    Solomon explains that when G’d is angry at someone but does not take action against that person, the person in question will experience fear and general unease as does someone who hears the roar of a lion or some other ferocious beast. Such a person becomes frightened at the mere sound of potential danger. This is an experience which the object of G’d’s anger feels although in the end G’d does not cause him actual harm. Concerning such an experience Solomon said that “the rage of a king is like the roaring of a lion whereas His favour is like dew on the grass.” If, however, G’d is angry and wants to enact retribution from the object of His anger, this means death. Concerning such a situation Solomon wrote (Proverbs 16,14) חמת מלך מלאכי-מות, “The king’s wrath is a messenger of death.” Just as G’d’s wrath spells death for its victim so His goodwill or favour spells life; this is why Solomon says there (verse 15) באור פני מלך חיים, “in the light of the king’s face there is life.” Solomon applies the a fortiori kind of reasoning. He extrapolates from a human king’s power to G’d’s power suggesting that if even a human king’s pleasure or displeasure results in the life or death of his victim, how much more so must this be the case when one attracts the wrath or approval of the King of Kings, G’d Almighty. G’d, after all, controls not only the life of the body in our terrestrial universe but the eternal life or death of the soul in the celestial spheres as well. Isaiah 55,10 underlines that G’d does not “waste” any activity or even utterance. “For as the rain or snow drops from heaven and returns not there but soaks the earth and makes it bring forth vegetation,...so is the word that issues forth from My mouth; it does not come back to Me unfulfilled.” In Psalms 30,6 we are told  כי רגע באפו חיים ברצונו, “for He is angry but a moment, and when He is pleased there is life.” Concerning this Psalm Solomon said in the verse we quoted above that Life is attached to the benevolent manifestation of G’d’s presence.
    We find such manifestations of G’d’s presence on three levels. 1) G’d instructs the prophet concerning one or several commandments in the Torah such as when He commanded Avraham to circumcise himself and his household. 2) G’d manifests His presence in order to protect and defend the righteous such as happened when the people were ready to stone Joshua and Calev for disagreeing with the spies’ majority report. G’d intervened to save them by displaying His glory at the Tent of Meeting (Numbers 14,10). A third level of G’d’s presence manifesting itself is recorded in Leviticus 9,23 ויצאו ויברכו את העם וירא כבוד ה' אל כל העם, “when Moses and Aaron came out of the Tabernacle and blessed the people, the Presence of the Lord appeared to all the people.” Avraham experienced a special manifestation of G’d’s benevolent Presence as a reward for fulfilling the commandment of circumcision. This was a practical demonstration of the meaning of Proverbs 16,15 באור פני מלך חיים “in the light of the king’s face is life.” The word חיים, “life,” includes “healing.” As a result of G’d manifesting Himself to Avraham as recorded at the beginning of our portion, Avraham was healed from the effects of the circumcision on his body. We find a close association of the words חולי, “sickness,” and the word חיים, “life,” in Isaiah 38,9 when King Chiskiyah was cured from his sickness and the prophet describes this in the words ויחי מחליו. Another verse in which sickness and life appear side by side is Isaiah 38,16 ותחלימני והחייני, “You have restored me to health and You have revived me.”
    
    18,1. וירא אליו ה' באלוני ממרא והוא יושב פתח האהל כחם היום “The Lord appeared to Avraham at the terebinths of Mamre and he was sitting at the entrance of the tent as the day grew hot.” This portion is a continuation of the previous portion; this is why the Torah writes: “He appeared to him,” without identifying to whom G’d appeared. In chapter 12,7 where it would not have been clear to whom G’d appeared, the Torah added the word ”to Avram,” although there too the last previously mentioned subject had been Avram. In our situation nothing material had occurred since the circumcision and G’d’s manifestation to Avraham. By not spelling out what, if anything, G’d communicated to Avraham at this time it is clear that G’d’s manifestation was in the nature of someone visiting a sick friend. He had qualified for this “visit” as a result of circumcising himself. Tanchuma 1 on Parshat Vayera confirms this interpretation.
   באלוני ממרא, “at the terebinths of Mamre.” The Torah informs us of the site where the circumcision took place. This was also the place where he received an immediate sign that G’d appreciated Avraham’s deed.
    We find that manifestations of G’d’s presence to the prophets occur by means of 1) fire; 2) wind; 3) water, and 4) earth [either of the four basic raw material the terrestrial earth is made of. Ed.] G’d appeared to Moses in a burning bush (Exodus 3,2). He also appeared to the entire Jewish nation in an environment of fire  (Deuteronomy 4,36: “He let you see His great fire, and you heard His words out of the fire”).  In Exodus 24,17 G’d’s manifestation is described as “a consuming fire on top of the mountain.”
    In connection with the ascent to heaven by the prophet Elijah we read in Kings II 2,1 “when the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind, etc.” In Kings I 19,11 והנה ה' עובר  ורוח גדולה וחזק מפרק הרים, ”there was a great and mighty wind; splitting mountains and shattering rocks by the power of the Lord.” We also encounter a manifestation of G’d through a mighty wind in Job 38,1 “Then the Lord replied to Job out of the tempest and said, etc.” 
    An instance of G’d manifesting Himself by means of water is found in Ezekiel 1,1 “It was in the thirtieth year... when I was in the community of exiles by the river Kevar, etc.” We encounter another example of G’d manifesting Himself by means of water in Ezekiel 1,24 ”I could hear the sound of their wings like the sound of mighty waters, like the sound of Shaddai.”
    We find G’d manifesting Himself in connection with earth in Ezekiel 43,2 “the whole earth is filled with His glory.” We also find a revelation described as “and the earth was lit up by His Presence.” In this instance, G’d manifested Himself to Avraham by means of a tree. The Midrash uses the word אלוני ממרא to emphasise the fact that these were trees, אילנות. Actually, Mamre was the name of one of Avraham’s close associates as we know from 14,13 “Mamre the Emorite, the brother of Aner and Eshkol who were allies of Avram.” Had the Torah only wanted to tell us that Avraham circumcised himself near the place where Mamre lived, it would have been appropriate to describe the area as ערבות ממרא, “the fields of Mamre.” The emphasis on the word אלוני shows that the Torah wanted to draw our attention to the fact that we are talking about a tree or trees. When Avraham told the men who came to visit to rest “under one of the trees,” this shows that there was more than one tree.
    Why did G’d choose a tree to be the site at which He manifested Himself to Avraham on this occasion? It was because the angel was going to tell him that within a year he and Sarah would have a son. He would experience something similar to that which was experienced by an aged tree which still produced fruit. It is written in Job 14,7-9: “There is hope for a tree; if it is cut down it will renew itself; its shoots will not cease. If its shoots are old in the earth, and its stump dies in the ground, at the scent of water it will bud and produce branches like a sapling.” We also have a verse comparing the righteous to trees in Psalms 1,3 “He (the righteous) is like a tree planted beside streams of water which yields its fruit in season.” This is also how Rabbeinu Chananel explains our verse.
   והוא יושב פתח האהל כחם היום, “and he was seated at the entrance to the tent as the day grew hot.” The plain meaning of these words is that seeing Avraham was weakened by the circumcision he took advantage of the heat of the sun to act as therapy for his wounds. This is why he was outside at a time when normal healthy people stay inside to take advantage of the shade. The basis for the sun providing therapy is derived from Maleachi 3,20 כי השמש מרפא בכנפיה, “for the sun brings healing on its wings.”
    A Midrashic approach views this detail as a reference to the fourth hour in the morning which is the time most people sit down to a meal. Avraham was waiting for visitors to share his meal with him.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words “he was sitting at the entrance of the tent” is an allusion to the spiritual counterpart of the Jewish people in the celestial regions soothing Avraham’s  mind when he became aware of its existence in those regions at this time. This is deduced by the wording וירא ה' אליו. We have a tradition that the patriarchs were never addressed directly by the four-lettered name of G’d י-ה-ו-ה. [compare Exodus 6,3. Ed.] If nonetheless, we encounter this name of G’d here in connection with a vision Avraham was granted, we must conclude that this name was revealed to him only indirectly. The words “at the entrance of the tent,” are a hint that he had not yet been able to enter that “tent.”
    
    18,2. וישא עיניו וירא, “He raised his eyes and saw, etc.” At this point he had only a dim vision of someone approaching. 
   שלשה אנשים נצבים עליו, “three men already on top of him.” At this point the Torah repeats the word וירא, as only now did Avraham see these people close up. At this point he also realised that they were angels. This is why the Torah writes that Avraham ran towards them and prostrated himself before them on the ground. The angels were Michael, Raphael, and Gavriel. Michael had been assigned the task of announcing that Sarah would have a child and to save Lot. Both of these assignments were expressions of G’d’s love or mercy respectively, and could therefore be described as being of the same category. Raphael  had the task of healing Avraham. Gavriel’s task was to turn Sodom upside down. This is why the Torah writes (19,1) “the two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening.” This is a reference to Michael and Gavriel. Since it was Michael’s task to save Lot we find that when describing the destruction of Sodom the Torah uses the singular when it writes (19,25) ויהפוך את הערים האלה, “he” turned these cities upside down,” instead of writing “they” turned these cities upside down.” We learn from this that whereas one angel may not carry out two tasks of different categories, such as one that emanates from G’d’s attribute of Justice and another emanating from the attribute of Mercy, he may carry out two assignments when both originate from the same attribute, in this instance the attribute of Mercy. This is why we find Michael performing what appear to be two separate tasks. He gave Sarah, who had previously been unable to conceive, a message of love and hope, and he saved Lot who did not have a valid claim to be saved. Should you ask, if so, why was a special angel needed to heal Avraham? Is not healing another aspect of G’d’s attribute of Mercy? Could not Michael have performed this task also? The fact is that healing, especially people who deserve to be healed, is not part of the heading of performing an act of loving kindness. If Michael had accepted that assignment he would have trespassed on  Raphael’s territory. This is why G’d assigned to each of these angels only tasks which were within their respective spheres of competence. 
    It is not permissible in the celestial regions to have overlapping areas of competence; this is what is meant by Job 25,2 “He imposes peace in His celestial regions.” If you look at our paragraph with an analytical eye you will discover that G’d granted Avraham an insight into he workings of the celestial hierarchies. These three angels were the respective heads of three of G’d’s “armies.” They were part of the four encampments (armies) surrounding the שכינה, “the Divine Presence.”
    We have been told in Shemot Rabbah 2,8 that wherever you encounter the archangel Michael you encounter the glory of the שכינה. When Avraham beheld these three angels and he ran after them he was actually running after the שכינה, trying to welcome it. As to the fourth “army,” G’d’ employs His forces in accordance with the requirements of the occasion. The fourth “army” had already been revealed to Avraham in chapter fifteen during the episode of the covenant between the pieces.
    
    18,3. ויאמר, אדני אם נא מצאתי חן בעיניך, He said: “my lord, if I have found favour in your eyes, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the words (as presented by Rashi) Avraham included all three men in his address and invitation saying to the senior one amongst them: “if I have found favour in your eyes (singular).” The assumption then is that the word אדני is secular and does not refer to someone representing the Divine. 
    The problem with this kind of approach is the vowel kametz in the word adonay. Wherever we find this word vocalised in this manner it always means “my Lord,” i.e. someone is addressing G’d and that is the reason the plural is used. The reason for the plural is that celestial beings always appear in the plural such as elohim, malachim, etc. It is possible to argue that Avraham addressed only the archangel Michael when he said “adonay.” Michael, in his capacity as the angel representing the attribute of love and kindness (Mercy), was the direct superior of Avraham whose outstanding characteristic was this very virtue or attribute חסד. It was no more than right that he should address him as “my lord.” This would also account for the fact that Avraham first offered water and subsequently butter and milk without mentioning wine as part of the meal at all. This is self-explanatory. [ for those to whom it is not so self-explanatory such as this editor, “wine” is considered as part of the domain and emanation גבורה, the opposite of the emanation חסד. “Water,” on the other hand, is the epitome of the emanation חסד, compare chapter 23 in שער ערכי כנויים of Pardes Rimonim. Ed.]
    According to the discipline of vocalisations there are seven gradations in the vowels [not including semi-vowels which are not audible but which nonetheless are not part of the consonants]. The vowel kametz ranks as highest of these seven levels. It is followed in descending order by patach, tzeyre, segol, cholem shuruk, and chirik. The entire Torah is structured around these seven vowels which affect pronunciation of the words. They are also known as s”even syllables, or seven sounds,” concerning which David said in Psalm 29 [known as the hymn in honour of the giving of the Torah. קול ה', “the voice or the sound of G’d,” occurs seven times.] This is also the meaning of Shemot Rabbah 28,4 that the Torah was given with seven קולות, “sounds.” Concerning these seven sounds, Solomon said in Proverbs 9,1  חצבה עמודיה שבעה, “she has hewn her seven pillars.” These seven sounds are the foundation upon which the whole structure rests.
    The difference between the vowel kametz and the vowel patach (otherwise found in the word “adonay”) is merely a single “dot,” and usually such a dot is perceived as an allusion to the original “dot” of matter which was the beginning of the creative process of this universe. [the “dot” is equated in kabbalistic jargon with the letter י, itself an allusion to the ten emanations.] This is the mystical reason why such a dot (in the way we write the vowels) serves seven different purposes. When you place such a dot on top of a consonant it produces the vowel cholam. When you place it in the middle of the consonant ו the result is the vowel shuruk. If you add the dot to the vowel patach, the result will be the vowel kametz. If you add a dot to the vowel chirik, you get the vowel tzeyre. If you add a dot to the vowel tzeyre the result is the vowel segol. If you add a dot to the semi-vowel sheva the result is the vowel kubutz. So you have seven different vowels merely by changing a single “dot.”
    Now to the letters themselves. If you insert (fill in the missing blank) a dot inside the letter ה it turns it into a ח. If you add a dot to the left side top of the letter ו it becomes a ז. If you add a dot to make the base of the letter כ protrude, it turns into the letter ב. If you add a dot on the right top of the letter ר it turns into the letter ד. We can understand therefore what the sages mean when they say that an extra dot or a missing dot is liable to destroy the universe. (compare Sotah 20).
    Although, at first glance, it appears that there is only a minute difference between spelling the word adonay or adonoy, (and in the sephardic pronunciation this difference is not even audible), there are profound differences in the meaning of the word as a result of misspelling it and consequently misunderstanding its meaning. Here are a few examples of where such minor misspellings have a profound effect. Joshua 3,6 speaks of the ארון הברית, ”the ark of the covenant.” When spelled (correctly) with the vowel patach, the word ארון, ark, is a possessive of the word הברית, “G’d’s covenant.” If spelled incorrectly with the vowel kametz, this would convert the ark into being the covenant. In Exodus 23,20 we have the verse הנה אנכי שולח מלאך “here I am going to send an angel.” The word מלאך is vocalised with the vowel kametz as it is not in the possessive clause. Whenever the word מלאך is in the possessive clause it must be vocalised with the vowel patach. At the end of a verse or at the cantillation etnachta, the vowel patach is always changed to kametz to indicate that the word is in its own right and is not a possessive clause which would be presumed otherwise. The patach always points to the word which follows it, making the word with that vowel at the end secondary to what follows. (Rabbi Chavell quotes Mateh Moshe on laws of prayers who quotes our author, and adds that when the word אדני is spelled with the vowel chirik at the end, it means “my ‘personal’ lord,” as opposed to acknowledging that “He is the ruler of the whole universe”). The reason that in our verse you do not find the word adonay vocalised with a patach is best understood  by remembering that if Avraham had indeed addressed only Michael he would have had to say adonee, “my (personal) lord.” Neither the vowel patach nor the vowel kametz would have been appropriate. It would be incongruous to vocalise the word אדני when used as a reference to G’d with the vowel patach, as this would imply that G’d is in some kind of subordinate relationship to anyone as suggested by the possessive clause represented by that vowel. In short, if someone exchanges the kametz under this word for a patach he cannot escape being guilty of one or two things. 1) He is a heretic; 2) or he completely distorts the meaning of the verse in which this word appears.
    Let us use Genesis 18,23 as an example. If someone were to place the vowel kametz instead of the vowel patach under the letter ה in האף תספה (which is perceived as turning what follows into a question), he would completely distort the meaning of the whole verse, turning it into a statement, i.e. an accusation against G’d. Let us look at another example. in Job 8,3. In הא-ל יעות משפט; the letter ה is vocalised with the vowel patach. As it stands the verse is a question and means: “is it possible that G’d will pervert justice?” If you were to place the vowel kametz under the letter ה in the word הא-ל in that verse it would turn the entire phrase into a statement denying G’d’s justice, i.e. into heresy. Another way of explaining what we have been saying is that the vowel kametz describes a true state of affairs, something objective, whereas the vowel patach describes something relative, a subjective truth. (Rabbi Chavell conjectures that the last statement may be based on David Kimchi, though he does not supply a source for this.) An example of the accuracy of this claim is Samuel II 1,10 (where the Amalekite lad relates to David that he had complied with Saul’s wish to give him the coup de grace so he would not fall into the hands of the Philistines as a prisoner) ואעמד עליו ואמתתהו כי ידעתי כי לא יחיה, “so I stood over him and killed him for I knew that he would not live.” In that verse the words ואעמד עליו, “I stood over him,” are an absolute truth; the words כי ידעתי כי לא יחיה, “for I knew he would not live” are a relative truth. The word ואעמד begins with the vowel kametz under the letter ו, whereas the corresponding letter ו in the word ואמתתהו, has the vowel patach  to signify that this statement was only a relative truth. We had read in Samuel I 31,4 that Saul had actually committed suicide when his arms-bearer refused to finish him off. So the statement of the Amalekite lad who claimed to have killed him was not an objective truth. All of the foregoing is part of the wisdom contained in the Holy Torah and the Holy Tongue. This is the reason that the relationship of consonants and vowels to one another has been compared to the relationship between body and soul as pointed out in the Sefer habahir by Rabbi Nechunyah ben HaKana.1 The vowels, i.e. the absence of correct vocalisation invalidates the text just as the absence of a soul paralyses the body. The body is compared to an animal without a rider. The soul supplies the animal with its rider. In a similar manner the vowels are what complete the consonants. We find a statement in Megillah 3 that the words ושום שכל in Nechemiah 8,8 are a reference to what is spelled out in the Holy Scriptures, especially the vocalisation.
    A kabbalistic approach sees in the vowel kametz in the word א-דני a combination of two of the Holy Names of G’d both comprising four letters. The one name symbolises both G’d’s preceding any phenomenon in the universe as well as His Oneness and uniqueness in the world. The second name of G’d in that expression teaches the Nobility of G’d, that He transcends even the highest of the ten emanations. This is why the word א-דני commences with the letter א and concludes with the letter י. The letters דנ in the middle represent the attribute of Justice. You ought to realise that  the three names of G’d  which are comprised of four letters each are all alluded to in a single verse in Exodus 35,17 את קלעי החצר, את עמודיו ואת אדניה, “the curtains of the Courtyard represent the all encompassing name of G’d, the name א-היה which testifies to His being Eternal and unchanging.” The word את עמודיו represent the Ineffable name י-ה-ו-ה; finally, the words ואת אדניה are comprised of the letters in the word א-דני and symbolise His relationship as Master of the universe, i.e. the influence of what is above on what is below. Another verse reflecting a similar message is found in Job 38,6 [where these words have been put in the mouth of G’d Himself. Ed.] על מה אדניה הטבאו? או מי ירה אבן פנתה? “Onto what were its bases sunk? Who sets its cornerstone?” The subject of the verse is the Holy Temple (Holy Tabernacle) and G’d compares its construction to the creation of the universe which He personally had undertaken. The fourth four-lettered name of G’d is alluded to in connection with Rivkah’s reply (24,19) that she as a three-year old would draw water for the ten (or more) camels of Eliezer, contains an allusion to divine assistance based on another less well known name of G’d comprising the letters א-ג-ל-א. This will be discussed in greater detail when we examine that verse.
    
    18,5. ואקחה פת לחם, “and I will take a piece of bread, etc.” This is an example of what the sages said in Baba Metzia 87 that the righteous promise very little whereas they do a great deal, more than they promised. This is why the Torah reports in verse seven that Avraham prepared a sumptuous meal for his guests including meat from his best calves.
   וסעדו לבכם,  “refresh your hearts.” These words are clear proof that Avraham had realised already that the men he was facing were angels though they appeared to him in the guise of ordinary mortals. This is why he spoke of לבכם when he referred to their heart. Had they been human beings Avraham should have said לבבכם, as the heart of a human being is called לבב as we know from Psalms 104,15 ולחם לבב אנוש יסעד, “and bread refreshes the heart of man.” Angels who do not have an evil urge (Megillah 14) have a heart which is simple, not exposed to contradictory demands by two urges, the good urge and the evil urge. 
    The absence of a letter such as this ב has often been the means by which we have learned a variety of lessons. For instance, in Exodus 31,17 the Torah writes כי ששת ימים עשה ה' את השמים ואת הארץ “for on six days G’d completed the making of heaven and earth.” According to correct grammar, the word ששת should have been preceded by the letter ב for this translation to be correct. The absence of that letter teaches that the maximum period of time which this universe is going to endure before undergoing a major transformation is six thousand years, seeing that in G’d’s calendar one thousand years in our time are only considered one day. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 19,14 based on Psalms 90,4 כי אלף שנים בעיניך כיום אתמול “for a thousand years in Your eyes are merely like yesterday.”) This is another example teaching you that not a single letter in the Torah- be it a letter too many or a letter too few- is without profound significance. Moses stressed this point when near the end of his life (Deut. 32,47) he said: כי לא דבר רק הוא מכם, “for not a single word is empty, (devoid of meaning) for you.” Our sages (Jerusalem Talmud Sheviit 1,5) interpret this line as follows: “if a word appears “empty,” the “emptiness” is due to you, i.e. מכם. We find another example of the importance of a single letter in Psalms 48,14 where the psalmist (one of the sons of Korach) writes שיתו לבכם לחילה, “take note of its ramparts;” the letter ב is missing in the word לבכם although it is clear that mortal human beings are being addressed here. The answer is that the psalmist speaks of a distant future when the people of whom he speaks will no longer be troubled by an evil urge. Our sages (Midrash Tehillim 48) were aware of this and pointed out that this is the reason the word חילה (read cheylah) is actually spelled as חולה (from מחול, dance, as well as חולה, sick) to hint at the dancing performed by the righteous (now sick, i.e. Avraham) in a perfect  world of the future. 
   כי על כן עברתם, “this is why you have come by, etc.” Avraham meant that had he been aware beforehand that these men were going to visit him he would have prepared a feast for them.
   ויאמרו, כן תעשה כאשר דברת, they said: “O.K. you may proceed in accordance with what you have said.” They meant for this to be a lesson: “you are quite right; a piece of bread such as you have offered is perfectly adequate. Do not bother to go to the trouble of serving anything additional.” One may prefer to interpret the words of these (men) angels to mean “O.K. you take the piece of bread.” He implied that he would not eat it, however. If this is the correct interpretation, it was an allusion to what happened with the cake which Sarah baked which the angels never ate as Sarah had begun menstruating while making the dough (compare Baba Metzia 87).
    
    18,6. שלש סאים, “three measures of, etc.” The three measures described are known as a single measure called איפה. Our sages in Menachot 76 say that three measures called Sa-ah constitute the measure known as Eyfah. Seeing that the Torah usually ecomomises with its words, why did it not write איפה , a single word, instead of writing שלש סאים in two words? It is possible that the reason Avraham spoke in terms of three measures was due to etiquette. He meant to assure each one of the three angels of a whole measure for him exclusively, which would be made into cake. This would ensure that each of them received equal portions and that there would not be any kind of envy between one and the other during the meal (compare Megillah 12). He may have had yet another consideration. He wanted to attract a crowd in order to demonstrate to them to what lengths he and Sarah would go in order to entertain uninvited strangers. It was similar to what our sages recommended we should do in order to welcome the Sabbath (compare Shabbat 119) where we find a discussion on the manner in which the Sabbath is to be welcomed. The Talmud relates that Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak was constantly busy coming and going on the Sabbath eve (making a commotion). When asked why he was in such an uproar on account of the Sabbath, he replied that if the two leading scholars of his time Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Assi were to be his guests would he not go out of his way to honour them? The Sabbath does not deserve any less honour.
    Another thing we can learn from this detail the Torah provides us with when mentioning the amount of flour used by Sarah to bake cakes for her guests, is that Avraham was of a generous disposition. Had he used the expression איפה, the impression created would have been that he wanted to limit the amount of flour to be used, i.e. “one measure, not more.” In order to prevent such an impression being created the Torah decided to write an extra word in order to preserve Avraham’s image as a generous person. 
    
    18,7. ואל הבקר רץ אברהם, “while Avraham himself ran to the cattle, etc.” He could easily have sent one of his numerous servants to go to the stables and to select the animals for slaughter. After all, we know that he had a minimum of 318 male servants (14,14). He refrained from doing so, however, and went himself, and with accelerated gait, in order to honour his guests. All this in spite of the fact hat he was both aged and weakened by the circumcision. The Torah reports all this to round out the picture of Avraham as a generous person.
    
    18,8. ויקח חמאה וחלב ובן הבקר, “he took butter, milk, and a young calf, etc.” No mention is made of Avraham serving the bread. Our sages (Baba Metzia 87) use this to surmise that at that time Sarah became a menstruant, (although she had long ceased to be), and that since Avraham was in the habit of eating even ordinary food only if it could have been eaten by a priest in a state of ritual purity, he did not want to offer such food to his guests either. Some people ask that seeing there was no halachic reason that Avraham should impose such restrictions on people other than himself, it seems unreasonable for him to not serve the very thing he had first said he would offer. These scholars suggest a different reason for Avraham not serving the bread. They claim it was the date on which Passover would occur in the future and that this was the reason he spoke of the bread in terms of עגות, cakes, i.e. unleavened cakes. Whereas in this instance the Torah spoke only of עגות, “cakes,” the Torah completes the expression by adding the word מצות, “unleavened bread,” when the same men arrive at Lot’s home in Sodom the same evening (19,3) and the Torah reports that this is what Lot served these men. It is typical of the Torah to reveal hints of something here and there. Something  not made clear in one part of the Torah can often be understood properly only when comparing two different sections of the Torah.
   ויאכלו, “they ate.” The plain meaning of the text is that the subject of the word are those who were in the habit of eating, i.e. Ishmael and the other members of Avraham’s household. We encounter something similar in Isaiah 5,12 והיה כנור ונבל תף וחליל ויין משתיהם “and their banquets consisted of lyre and lute, timbrel and flute and wine;” it is obvious that people do not drink musical instruments such as the ones mentioned in that verse, but that these instruments provide only background music to the banquet whereas the wine is fit to drink.
    A Midrashic approach: The word ויאכלו is not to be understood literally (Bereshit Rabbah 48,14); the angels appeared to eat seeing that the meat was the first thing to disappear. This was not unlike Judges 6,21 in an incident involving Gideon. We are told there: וישלח מלאך ה' את קצה המשענת אשר בידו ויגע בבשר ובמצות, ותעל האש מן הצור ותאכל את הבשר ואת המצות, “The angel of the Lord held out the staff that was in his hand, and touched the meat and the unleavened bread with its tip. A fire sprang up from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread.” The term אכילה, “eating, consuming,” is applied to matters which disappear. A classic example of such use of the word is found in Deut. 32,42 וחרבי תאכל בשר, “my sword will consume flesh.” Another such example is also found in Deut. 7,16 ואכלת את כל העמים, “you will consume all the nations, etc..”
    There are conflicting views concerning the nature of this entire paragraph. Some (including Maimonides in his Moreh Nevuchim 2,42), hold that the entire story is merely a description of a prophetic vision which Avraham experienced. People who hold this view believe that human beings never see angels in the flesh but only experience visions of angels. According to the people who believe this, Sarah never baked any cakes for these angels, neither did Avraham prepare animals for slaughter and cook the meat. If we accept this view as a consistent approach, Lot never entertained any angels but instead attained the level of prophecy in order to see the kind of visions which resulted in his leaving Sodom at a crucial moment. We would even have to believe that the inhabitants of Sodom were given prophetic insights in spite of their wickedness and that they assailed Lot and his daughters. If all this were so, how is it possible that G’d refrained from communicating with Avraham as long as Lot was in his company because he did not qualify for such visions while voluntarily in the company of an evil person such as Lot? (compare 13,13 where the Torah emphasised that G’d spoke to Avraham “after Lot had separated from him?”)
    There is no doubt in my mind that in the main the whole paragraph has to be understood literally, i.e. according to the plain meaning of the text. All the experiences related as having happened to Avraham, to Sarah and to Lot, were not figments of their imaginations but actually happened.
    If your heart chafes or your mind boggles at such happenings and you find it difficult to credit that mere mortals had such encounters with heavenly beings, you have a point; this is why we need to fall back on kabbalistic interpretations seeing that normal human beings are unable to cope with such encounters on a purely rational basis. 
    We will therefore consider that if our sages have given these angels “names” corresponding to human beings and have made them appear as if they were dressed as human beings, this did not mean that the garments perceived by Avraham were garments made of fabrics such as used by human beings. Rather, these celestial beings wrapped their essence within “robes,” much as G’d Himself is perceived as having surrounded His essence with “light” which serves as something parallel to our garments. [After all, our garments are also designed to hide our essence. Ed.] Celestial beings known as אד'ם, a term reflecting three superior characteristics, are composed of these characteristics which serve as their מלבוש “garment.”  Ever since the Temple was destroyed, this kind of מלבוש has no longer become visible to people on earth; in other words, apparitions of celestial beings such as the angels who visited Avraham or even Lot, are no longer part of the human experience. In this context we must not forget that our own bodies are nothing but the מלבוש, the “garments” of our soul. In fact, we have a verse which testifies to the truth of this perception (Job 10,11) עור ובשר תלבישני, “You have clothed me in skin and flesh.” The verse means that the body is merely the garment and the soul uses it to dress itself in it.
    The meaning of the word אנשים when applied to these phenomena in our verse as well as in other similar occurrences of angels not only being “seen” by humans but interacting with them,  means that during those appearances these angels were “dressed” in such “garments.” To show us that this is the case, the authors of the respective Books of the Bible called such celestial phenomena אנשים, “men.” To indicate that the term אנשים should not be misunderstood by us to mean that these angels assumed real human-like form, the Torah uses the term מלאכים, “angels” for them such as in 19,1. The word מלאכים means that in spite of  appearances to the contrary, these phenomena were true celestial beings. On the other hand, they were also called אנשים, to reflect the fact that they were wearing these “garments.” If you reflect on a statement in Chagigah 3 עשה אזנך כאפרכסת, “make your ear like that of a grasshopper,” [according to Rashi this means that we must carefully study all the opinions offered on a problem and then decide which of the approaches to the problem is most acceptable before ruling how to act in practice. Ed.] you will realise how carefully our eyes and ears must be tuned to notice all these nuances in the text.
    It is interesting that when these angels appeared to Avraham the Torah refers to them as אנשים, whereas when they appeared to Lot they are referred to as מלאכים. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 50,2 explain the reason for this as follows: As long as the benevolent Presence of G’d (שכינה) was accompanying them they are called אנשים; when the benevolent Presence of G’d was no longer accompanying them they had to “dress up” as מלאכים, as “angels,” in order to be perceived as of celestial origin. A minor detail in the text, demonstrating the deep insight of our sages is verse 33 where it says: “G’d went (away) from Avraham.” Remember that we had never even been told that “G’d came to Avraham” in the first place. We had only been told about אנשים, “men” visiting him. In connection with Lot we find that initially the angels are called מלאכים (19,1) whereas in the ensuing verses we also find them referred to as אנשים (19,10; 19,12), whereas in 19,15 when Lot is being urged to finally leave Sodom before it is too late the same אנשים suddenly again appear as מלאכים. If the Torah had referred to these “men” when they were in Sodom as מלאכים exclusively, the reason provided by the Midrash we have quoted would be adequate. The constant change of appellation that the Torah uses in the narrative describing both the destruction of Sodom and the saving of Lot forces us to look for further enlightenment on the subject. What this appears to show is that these phenomena, i.e. the angels/men operated on two “wavelengths” simultaneously. Whatever these “men” did they did as “agents” of the angels.
    Let us now explain these verses as truly corresponding to the text as the Torah presents them to us (what we are in the habit of calling פשט). The visible aspect of what happened, i.e. the appearance of “men” is true; however the term מלאכים whenever it appears in the text is literally true also. This is a classic example of both the “hidden” and the “revealed” aspect of Torah being equally true,” i.e. relevant. The intelligent reader will understand what I have said.
    Our sages in Baba Metzia 85 have told us that an appearance by the prophet Elijah was something with which the students in the academy of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi were quite familiar. One day, it was New Moon, Elijah did not arrive at the usual hour and when he arrived considerably late Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi asked him why he had been late on that occasion. Elijah explained that he had to awaken Avraham, wash him, wait while the latter said his prayers, and then put him to bed again. He then had to repeat the same procedure with Yitzchak, and again with Yaakov. Thereupon Rabbi Yehudah Hanasssi asked why he could not have awakened all three patriarchs at the same time? (after all, they are all buried in the same cave). Elijah replied that if he did this they would all pray simultaneously and as a result the Messiah would arrive prematurely. Rabbi Yehudah then asked if there were any great men alive in his own time whose combined prayers could have such an immediate and powerful effect. Elijah replied that Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi’s nephew Rabbi Chiyah and his sons were such individuals. Thereupon Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi ordered a general fast and he appointed Rabbi Chiyah accompanied by his sons to act as the ones to lead the others in prayer. As soon as Rabbi Chiyah intoned the word מוריד הגשם, “Who causes rain to fall,” rain started falling. When he mentioned the words  מחיה מתים “Who revives the dead,” a terrible storm started shaking the world. At that moment the celestial beings in heaven asked: ”who has revealed this secret?” The answer was that Elijah had revealed it. Thereupon they punished Elijah by disciplining him with 60 fiery brands. At that point Elijah descended to earth and appeared in the guise of a bear (on the attack). As a result, the assembled  worshipers fled for their lives and Rabbi Chiyah never got as far as completing the benediction with the words “the One who revives the dead,” I am sure you will understand the point of this story.
    
    18,9. ויאמרו אליו איה שרה אשתך, They said: ”where is your wife Sarah?” According to our sages in Baba Metzia 87 the dot  on the letters יו א in the word אליו indicate that the angels also asked Sarah about Avraham’s whereabouts. It would have been appropriate to place a dot on the letter ל of that word. Seeing that there is no such dot we must draw some inference from the absence of such a dot on that letter [instead of having to put dots on three letters of that word. Ed.]. Actually, the reason  the dot was not placed on the letter ל is the fact that it already has the tone-sign zakef katan. Placing an additional dot on that letter would have resulted in confusion. (i.e. a third dot and where exactly to place it. Ed.] This is why the chachmey hanikkud decided to place the dots on the other three letters of the word אליו instead.
    I believe that in addition to the fact that the word אליו provides a reason for interpretation beyond its plain meaning, there is a compelling mystical message contained in that word. The angels hinted to Avraham that the bounty of blessing from G’d descends from the higher regions to the emanations, thence from the emanations to the disembodied intelligent creatures (such as the angels), and only via these disembodied intelligent creatures does it descend to our regions in the terrestrial part of the universe. After Avraham had sanctified himself by undergoing circumcision and putting the sign of the holy covenant on his flesh, the angels were anxious to convey to him the mysteries of how and by what routes G’d’s bounty reaches His creatures on earth. They wanted him to know that they themselves, as well as all other celestial beings, derive their specific powers from the tenth (i.e. the lowest, מלכות) emanation. This “tenth” emanation receives its input via what is called the קו, “the line.” The קו itself receives its input via the א. This is the reason the letters י=10, ו and א all of which symbolise stations in the conduit of G’d’s bounty to man on earth have been provided with these dots. In short, the route is: from the א to the י via the ו which represents the קו, the “line.” From that point on the שפע travels via the disembodied celestial beings and from there via the prophet who bestows the blessing on earth. Seeing that Avraham was about to receive a promise of G’d’s bounty for himself and Sarah from the angels, they  considered this an appropriate moment to take Avraham into their confidence and to reveal these mysteries to him.
    
    18,10. ויאמר שוב אשוב אליך, He said: “I will most certainly return to you again, etc.” The angel who said this was the one who had revealed that Sarah would bear a son. He said this, meaning that his prophecy would come true in the following year. Nonetheless, we do not find a mention anywhere that the angel did in fact return to Avraham in the following year although he had said so twice. [the repetition of שוב אשוב plus verse 14 Ed.] Perhaps the angel had not meant that he, personally, in his present manifestation, would return to visit Avraham but that the fulfillment of his prophecy would be equivalent to his return. After all, what would be the purpose of the angel returning in person when he did not have a specific message for Avraham? 
    Another approach to the problem: The word שוב אשוב was not used in the sense of returning, but in the sense of שובה ונחת, as in Isaiah 30,15 where the meaning is “you will be helped by means of quiet and stillness.” The word נחת refers to נחת רוח, “a serene state of mind, a state of mental satisfaction.” The angel meant to tell Avraham that his message would lead to his attaining such a mental state within a year seeing that a son would be born to him and Sarah. He indicated that seeing he was the angel in charge of conveying messages of mercy, he was in a position of promising this to Avraham.
   כעת חיה, “in a year’s time.” Although, normally, a pregnancy does not exceed nine months, there are exceptions. The angel  alluded to the maximum period of time that could elapse between now and the fulfillment of the prophecy. We are told in Yevamot 80 that Ravah Tospha-ah once ruled that a baby which according to the mother’s testimony was born 12 months after her husband had left for overseas was indeed fathered by her absent husband. The angel simply may have told Avraham that by the following “Passover” his mind would be at rest as he would have a son by his wife Sarah.
   והוא אחריו, “and he was behind it.” This verse tells us that Sarah was sitting inside the tent as it says: והנה באהל (verse 9); she had meanwhile risen from her chair in order to listen to what was being said at the entrance of the tent. The angel who relayed the message stood on the other side of the entrance to the tent. 
    
   ויאמר ה' אל אברהם, “G’d said to Avraham, etc.” The messenger is given the title of the Sender. This is the reason why the Torah calls the angel “G’d.” It was also he who said in verse 14: היפלא מה' דבר “is anything too wonderful for G’d?” If G’d Himself had spoken in  verse 14 (and here) then the Torah should have written there: “is anything too wonderful for Me?” This is also the meaning of למועד אשוב, “I will return at the appointed time.” He, the angel, and not G’d had challenged Sarah’s laughter. It makes sense therefore that he speaks about returning. Seeing G’d Himself had never come to visit Sarah how could He have mentioned ”returning?”
   היפלא מה' דבר, ”is anything too wonderful for G’d?” This was the angel Michael speaking. He meant: “is anything concealed  and beyond performance so that the letter ה in your name which alludes to G’d’s אצילות, transcendental powers,  and which was added in order for G’d to be able to make your siring a son with Sarah a natural process would have been wasted?” He implied further: “Just as you complement the attribute of חסד on earth, so G’d  will give you a son who will be able to complement the attribute of Justice.” [I believe our author meant that Yitzchak would prove that man can lead the sort of life on earth which even the attribute of Justice cannot find fault with. This is why Yitzchak is always considered the representative of the emanation גבורה. Ed.]
    
   ותכחש שרה, “Sarah denied having laughed;” How is it conceivable that our matriarch Sarah should not have believed the words of the angel? Was she not a prophetess? (compare Megillah 14) Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 1,1 explained that even Avraham was secondary in his stature of a prophet to Sarah! They derive this from 21,12 where G’d told Avraham: “whatever Sarah tells you to do, listen to her instruction!” Surely there is no prophet who is not aware that the angels are messengers of G’d., and that everything they say emanates from G’d. Furthermore, assuming that she had indeed not believed that the prediction of the angel would come true, surely she had no reason to deny what her reaction to the prophecy had been! This especially after the angel had demonstrated that he could read her thoughts and quoted her reaction back to her? What was the point of denying something the angel knew to be true?! 
    The answer is that Avraham was well aware that these visitors were men; however, he had realised that they must be angels due to his superior wisdom. I have already hinted at this in my commentary on verse two of this chapter. Sarah, however, did not have that sort of insight. She was under the impression that these were ordinary human beings. This is why she had laughed (silently) at what she considered a preposterous prediction. As to her denying that she had laughed when challenged, she did so out of fear of Avraham; she thought that Avraham had challenged her laughter (not the angel) not because he heard it but because he knew her psyche. When the angel insisted that Sarah had indeed laughed, it suddenly became clear to her that Avraham had been given a prophetic insight which had revealed to him that she had laughed. At that point she kept quiet. This is the interpretation of Nachmanides of these verses.
    
    18,16. ואברהם הולך עמם לשלחם, “and Avraham walked with them to see them off.” Immediately afterwards the Torah writes: “and G’d had said shall I hide from Avraham, etc.” It appears that Avraham merited this visit from G’d because he had performed the מצוה of accompanying his visitors some distance on the next part of their journey. Our sages in Sotah 46 have derived from here that a student has to accompany the teacher when the teacher departs from him as far as the outer perimeter of the town. The Talmud adopts guidelines as to the respective distances  which people of different degrees of prominence need to be accompanied. It is all based on a specific verse in Psalms 91,11 כי מלאכיו יצוה לך, “for He will command His angels to (guard, accompany) you.”
    
    18,17. המכסה אני מאברהם, “shall I hide from Avraham?” G’d spent a great deal of verbiage praising Avraham whereas Avraham did not allow these praises to go to his head; on the contrary, he put himself down so much that he referred to himself as “dust and ashes” in verse twenty-four. From here we should learn that if a person receives praise he should not allow this to inflate his ego but on the contrary, he should act even more humbly than previously. [I find this whole comment less than convincing as  whereas the Torah tells us that G’d thought highly of Avraham there is absolutely no evidence that G’d spoke in this fashion to Avraham himself, in contrast to the way G’d had spoken to Noach at the time. The entire passage speaks of Avraham in the third person. Ed.]
    
    18,19. כי ידעתיו, “for I know him intimately,” The root ידע is used here in the sense of bestowing recognition on someone, just as in Psalms 144,3 מה אדם ותדעהו, “what is man that You should put him on a pedestal?” Alternatively, the meaning of the word is that “I have supervised him closely.” When G’d “knows” a person this implies that He keeps careful track of all that this person does and He protects him. The words כי ידעתיו single out Avraham from other ordinary human beings who do not enjoy the constant supervision by G’d of what they do and what happens to them. The righteous enjoy this advantage over their secular-oriented  fellow human beings.
    You should appreciate that G’d operates in this universe by means of both השגחה כללית and השגחת פרטית, “supervision of a general kind,” and “supervision of a particular, personal kind.” We have a verse in Jeremiah 32,19 which spells this out. The text is: גדול העצה ורב העלילה אשר עיניך פקוחות על כל דרכי בני האדם לתת לאיש כדרכיו וגו', “wondrous in purpose and mighty in deed, whose eyes observe all the ways of men, so as to repay every man according to his ways, and with the proper fruit of his deeds!” Considering other living creatures, however, G’d’s supervision of their fates is of a more general nature; it concerns itself only with preserving the respective species.
    The השגחה פרטית, personalised supervision of mankind,  operates in the following manner. 1) There is supervision in the sense that G’d is aware  of all of man’s actions and thoughts; this extends both to Jews and to Gentiles alike. We know this from Psalms 33,15 היוצר יחד לבם, המבין אל כל מעשיהם, “He who fashions the hearts of them all, who discerns all their doings.” The supervision becomes manifest in G’d protecting people against mishaps. This type of benevolent supervision does not extend to Gentiles and not even to all Israelites except the righteous among them. G’d saves the righteous from experiencing the kinds of disasters which non-deserving people are prone to experience. This is meant by the words כי ידעתיו in our verse (according to the view of Nachmanides).
    The words כי ידעתיו are words by G’d directed at man, i.e. G’d is informing our patriarchs that in order to qualify for this kind of benevolent supervision of their individual fates it is essential to be righteous. Once Avraham was aware of this he would have powerful incentive to command his offspring to observe G’d’s commandments. This is spelled out in the words: “so that G’d may indeed bring upon Avraham all that He has promised him concerning them.” The reference once again to the four-lettered Ineffable Name  י-ה-ו-ה  is an allusion to the same attribute of G’d with which the patriarchs had not become familiar as guiding their own fates, as G’d dealt with them on the basis of the attribute Shaddai as we have explained already in connection with 17,1.
   למען אשר יצוה את בניו ואת ביתו אחריו, “in order that he may command his sons and household after him, etc.” Rabbeinu Chananel writes as follows concerning this verse. “The “mere” words of the patriarchs in their lifetime were as binding as what is recorded in the written Torah at the time of the revelation.” This teaches you that oral traditions handed down from the times of the patriarchs are as binding as laws written down in the text of the Torah as direct commandments from G’d. After all, only the Ten Commandmnents were heard by the people directly from the mouth of G’d. The remainder of the written Torah was communicated to us by a prophet, i.e. Moses, who wrote them down and taught them to the people. Just as there is no qualitative difference between the Ten Commandments and the other commandments in the Torah, so there is no qualitative difference between traditions taught by Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov (who were all prophets) and by Moses.” Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel [clearly these words were aimed specifically at the Karaites.]
    18,20.  ויאמר ה' זעקת סדום ועמורה כי רבה, ארדה נא ואראה וגו'  “G’d said: ‘the outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah is indeed great, let Me descend and investigate, etc.’” These verses (30+31) are closely linked to one another. It is as if the Torah had written: “the outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah and their sins which have become great are such that I have to descend and investigate if they are all guilty or not; if not all are guilty I will determine who the guilty ones are.” The word חטאת in verse 20 covers a multitude of sins and negative characteristics. Our sages in Sanhedrin 109 have interpreted the word רעים as referring to sins involving money, i.e. asocial behaviour, based on Deut 15,9 ורעה עיניך באחיך האביון, “and your eye will be mean against your destitute brother,” whereas the word חטאים referred to sins committed by their bodies as illustrated by Genesis 39,9 וחטאתי לאלוקים “and I would commit a sin against G’d;” (Joseph explaining why he could not sleep with Potiphar’s wife) The additional word לה', refers to the sin of blasphemy. The word מאד, “very much,” refers to the sin of murder, bloodshed by indirect means. We know of this word מאד being used elsewhere in the same context from Kings II 21,16 וגם דם נקי שפך מנשה הרבה מאד “and King Menashe was also guilty of shedding much innocent blood.” The sin which sealed the fate of the Sodomites  was that they despised charity, i.e. they legislated against people who practiced the virtue of giving charity or being otherwise charitable. They did not even take care of their own needy who were suffering from hunger.
    The meaning of our verses based on the simple explanation of the text is: “the men of Sodom were very evil and they sinned greatly against G’d, so much so that the echo of their sins reached the ears of G’d.” We find a warning in the Torah concerning the needy and oppressed crying out to G’d complaining about their condition in Deut. 15,9 וקרא עליך והיה בך חטא, “when he cries out about your conduct you will be guilty of a sin.” We find a specific verse about the sins of the Sodomites in Ezekiel 16,49  הנה-זה היה עון סדם אחותך גאון שבעת-לחם ושלות השקט היה לה ולבנותיה ויד עני ואביון לא החזיקו ותגבהינה ותעשינה תועבה לפני ואסיר אתהן כאשר ראיתי. “See! This was the sin of Sodom: pride, surfeit of bread, and undisturbed peace were hers and her daughter’s but the hand of the poor and the needy she did not support. And they were haughty and committed abominations before Me. So I removed them when I perceived it.” They were dealt with so harshly because they persisted in their evil ways more so than anyone else. There is no other nation on earth which does not practice some degree of charity towards its own members. The people of Sodom not only considered such an attitude as pandering to the economically unsuccessful, but they treated the victims with cruelty to boot. Even though the Torah and its social legislation had not been given as yet, the commandment of giving charity belongs to the group of commandments which one’s intellect dictates, and it is something despicable when a human being watches another human being suffering from hunger without trying to relieve his condition. When G’d destroyed the people of Sodom He avenged the poor who had been allowed to die from hunger or whose condition had been deliberately aggravated by those people in order to accelerate their death. This is why our sages in Ruth Rabbah 5,9 stated that “the vengeance of the Gentile nations has been entrusted to the people of Israel whereas the vengeance of Israel has been entrusted to their poor.” They quote Ezekiel 25,14 to support the first part of the statement. The prophet writes: ונתתי את נקמתי באדום ביד ישראל ועשו באדום כאפי וכחמתי. “And I shall take My vengeance from  Edom by the hand of My people Israel, and they shall act upon Edom in accordance with My anger and My fury.” They quote Deut. 15,40 in support of the second half of their statement. The Torah writes there: וקרא עליך אל ה' והיה בך חטא, “when he (the helpless) calls out against you to G’d it will be accounted a sin for you.” The lesson to be drawn from all this is that wealth is not something that has been bestowed on the wealthy to do with what he pleases, but it has been given to him to test him if he knows how to handle it, how to employ it most usefully. Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi in that paragraph in Ruth Rabbah adds: “when this poor man appears at your doorstep asking for a handout, G’d Himself stands on his right. If you, i.e. the wealthy man give a donation to the poor, he  will bless you; if not, the One standing on his right side will exact payment from you for your insensitivity.” He based this on Psalms 109,31 כי יעמוד לימין אביון, “for He is standing on the right side of the destitute,” and on Proverbs 22,2 עשיר ורש נפגשו עושה כלם ה', “the rich man and the poor man meet; G’d has made them all.” There is another verse (Proverbs 29,13)רש ואיש תככים נפגשו מאיר עיני  שניהם ה', “when the poor and the fraudulent meet G’d gives light to the eyes of both.” How can we reconcile these verses?  One verse describes a situation when the poor receives a handout, the other when he did not.
    A Midrashic approach to our verse: The word  רבהis understood to refer to a young and kind-hearted girl. According to tradition as related in Sanhedrin 109, this girl had been feeding a poor beggar in Sodom until suspicion fell on her because the poor (who had been given money but whose money had not been accepted by the local merchants in exchange for food and drink) had somehow refused to die. When it was found that she had indeed broken the local law by feeding the beggar she was bound, placed on the roof, smeared with honey all over so that the bees stung her to death. The outcry from that girl’s (רבה) soul came to G’d’s attention and this is what triggered His reaction as described in our verse.
    
    18,21. הכצעקתה הבאה אלי, “if it is indeed like the outcry that has come to Me, etc.” The plain meaning of the text is exactly in line with the way Onkelos translates it, “if as the complaint that has come to Me they have done I will make an end of them.” This is the meaning of the word כלה, “they are guilty of extinction.” Unless they would repent G’d would now punish them. The words ואם לא, “and if not,”  mean “if they will not repent.” The word ואדעה in this instance means punishment as it does in Judges 8,16 ויודע בהם אנשי סכות, “he punished them with them (the briers).” The author quotes additional examples of the root ידע appearing in that sense.
    A Midrashic approach: the word הכצעקתה is unusual as we would have expected it to be in the plural, הכצעקתם, referring to more than one single outcry, complaint. It appears therefore that the Torah had in mind a special outcry, namely the one by the soul of the girl they had murdered in such a cruel manner (Bereshit Rabbah  49,6).
    A kabbalistic approach: The words הכצעקתה הבאה אלי mean that the people of Sodom refused to accept any celestial authority, were atheists in the truest sense of the word, just as the people who had built the Tower before G’d dispersed them and confused their language. The Torah wrote here that “G’d descended,” just as it had written וירד ה' לראות “G’d descended in order to see, etc.,” in Genesis 11,5 before G’d meted out the punishment. The Torah means that the reason G’d “descended” was to demonstrate His power on earth. The attribute of Mercy is perceived as being “at home” in a higher celestial region than the attribute of Justice. When G’d is described as “descending,” this means that whereas before He had operated by means of the attribute of Mercy, He now “descended” from that region to activate the attribute of Justice. Nonetheless, the attribute of Mercy would not be totally excluded, hence G’d added the words ואראה, “and I shall see, i.e. evaluate before I decide.” We find something similar (in reverse fashion) in Exodus 2, 25 וירא אלוקים את בני ישראל, “and G’d (the attribute of Justice) ‘saw’ the children of Israel.” In that instance the Israelites who had experienced mostly the attribute of Justice at work, were now going to experience the attribute of Mercy, as a result of their prayers and G’d’s response as related in Exodus 2,23-24). The word הכצעקתה would have to be understood as הכצעקת ה-"אלף"  “if as its outcry to the א, i.e. to the מדת הדין, to the attribute of Justice, עשו, “they have done,”...”I will finish them off with the attribute of Justice, i.e. כלה.” The verse continues: ואם לא אדעה, “if not I will continue to employ the attribute represented by דעת” such as in Exodus 2,25 וידע אלוקים, “G’d became aware, i.e. His attribute of Mercy became actively aware.” To sum up the meaning of Exodus 2,25: “Here the outcry from the children of Israel has come to Me and outcry the people address to the King, G’d, due to the great pressure to which the Egyptians have subjected them.”
    
    18,23. ויגש אברהם ויאמר האף תספה, “Avraham approached and said: ‘Are you reaIly going to destroy, etc.?” If you will take an analytical look at this paragraph you will observe that Avraham was under the impression that G’d wanted to destroy everybody and everything in these towns by employing the attribute of Justice. This is why he phrased his question as “are You really going to destroy the just together with the wicked, will You indeed destroy and not forgive the place?” The word תספה is not to be understood as in the second person i.e. Avraham addressing G’d in dialogue, but as third person feminine, a reference to the attribute of Justice, as if to say: “will the attribute of Justice indeed kill both the guilty and the innocent?” It would be analogous in construction to Hoseah 14,3 כל תשא עון וקח טוב, which the author understands as “address your words to the One (the attribute of Mercy) who can tolerate all kinds of guilt, etc.” All of Avraham’s prayers in this paragraph must be perceived as addressing themselves exclusively to the attribute of Justice This is also why he prefaced his remarks in verse 27 by saying (employing the name א-דני) “here I have already agreed to speak up, etc.” [It takes a great deal more courage to appeal to the attribute of Justice than to appeal to the attribute of Mercy. Ed.] Avraham therefore repeatedly used words to justify his intercession on behalf of the people of Sodom altogether (compare verse 30, “do not become angry,” or verse 31, “I have already begun, etc.” and again in verse 32 “please do not become angry.”) Avraham repeated the words חלילה לך מעשות כדבר הזה, “may it be far from You to do such a thing.” By repeating the word חלילה, Avraham made it plain that he addressed both the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy. He meant that even the attribute of Justice must not be perceived as killing the Just together with the guilty, etc. This would only result in an increase of the number of people who denied that there is a G’d and that this G’d practices Justice. There would be no point in the exercise of free choice, i.e. to choose being good rather than evil, and there would also be a decrease in the number of people devoting their lives to the service of the Lord. The second חלילה is an exclamation underlining that if the destruction of all the people in Sodom had been decreed by the attribute of Mercy, the argument Avraham had just presented would be even stronger, even more powerful. After all, the One who claims to be the Judge of the whole earth must certainly be perceived as practicing Justice! We repeatedly point out on New Year’s Day in our prayers that G’d practices Justice. A few examples of such statements: ויגבה ה' צבאות במשפט, “and the Lord of Hosts is exalted by Justice” (Isaiah 5,15); at the conclusion of a benediction in the principal prayer  עמידה  we refer to G’d as המלך המשפט, “the King who represents absolute Justice.”
    In response to Avraham’s question and concern, G’d informed him that man’s considerations and G’d’s considerations are not identical. Contrary to what Avraham thought, He would relate to the people of Sodom by invoking the attribute of Mercy even while performing Judgment, i.e. Justice. As proof of this you will note that G’d is referred to throughout this paragraph by His attribute as the merciful One, by the four-lettered name י-ה-ו-ה.
    18,24. אולי יש חמישים צדיקים בתוך העיר, “supposing there are fifty just people inside the city, etc.” Rashi writes on this that there were a total of five towns in the valley and that by selecting the number fifty, Avraham did not a pick a random number but meant that each of these towns could boast of at least ten righteous people. When Avraham continued speaking about the “missing five righteous people” (verse 28), he meant if G’d would not be prepared to consider Himself as completing the necessary quorum of ten good people in each town by adding Himself to the nine good people who were there already. When, in verse 29, Avraham spoke about only forty good people being found in those five towns, he pleaded for the saving of four out of five of these towns. The same applied when he spoke about thirty good people being found in verse 30 and about twenty good people in verse 31.
    
he referred to thirty good people in three of the towns. When he spoke about twenty good people being found there he meant that there was a quorum of ten good people in two of the towns. Finally, when Avraham pleaded on behalf of ten good people, he meant that there was at least one town which could prove it had such a quorum. Avraham did not bother to mention a smaller number as he knew from Noach’s experience that a lesser number could not suffice to save a generation. When the number of righteous people is below the quorum of ten only the righteous themselves may qualify for salvation. They do not have the power to confer salvation or even a delay of the impending disaster on their peers. Eight people had entered the Ark. Had there been another pair of deserving human beings at that time the deluge might have been delayed or might not have occurred at all.
    Furthermore, Avraham had reason to believe that there were ten righteous people in Sodom. He counted Lot and his wife, his four daughters and their respective husbands (or fiances) as making up that quorum. Seeing there were fewer than ten good people whose presence could protect their town against impending doom, G’d departed (verse 33) as soon as He had heard Avraham speak about ten good people. G’d knew that there were no ten good people in Sodom, and He also knew that Avraham would not continue to plead for a lesser number to protect the town they lived in. If Avraham had quasi asked permission to continue for a number fewer than fifty each time he continued, this was because though he thoought that ten people might be sufficient to save a single one of these towns, he nevertheless assumed that the greater the total number of good people the more their combined presence would count to stir G’d’s mercy. We have a comment by Rashi on Leviticus 26,5 that when a great number of people perform the Torah their collective impact on G’d’s response to their conduct is disproportionate to their actual number; in other words, the more people keep the Torah the progressively greater is their influence. Avraham may have reasoned similarly in reverse. In our instance, G’d informed Avraham each time that even the smaller number that Avraham had mentioned would still be sufficient for Him to invoke the attribute of Mercy.
    Now to the reason G’d’s response to Avraham’s plea varied, i.e. at first He said: “I will forgive the entire place for their sake (the fifty), whereas later on, G’d once said: “I will not destroy,” and  another time He said: “I will not do (it).” When G’d said “I will not destroy, He meant that though the people deserve to be destroyed, He would impose a different kind of punishment as a disciplinary measure. When He said; “I will not do it,” He meant that in the event discussed He would neither destroy the town nor subject it to harsh disciplinary measures. The reason for such mildness was the assumption that there would be ten good people in each of the towns. This entire paragraph teaches us a valuable lesson about the importance of a minimal congregation of ten good people and their impact on the fate of the larger community.
    
    18,27. ואנכי עפר ואפר, ”though I am only dust and ashes.” The plain meaning of these words is: “I started out as עפר, “dust,” and I am destined to become אפר, “ash.” This is part of the standard confessional of the righteous. David also used similar phraseology in Psalms 103,14 כי הוא ידע יצרנו זכור כי עפר אנחנו, ”for He knows our various urges; He is mindful that we are dust.” Job 42,6 also made a similar comment על כן אמאס ונחמתי על עפר ואפר, “Therefore I recant and relent, being but dust and ashes.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Sotah 17: The descendants of Avraham were given two commandments as a reward for Avraham having described himself as “dust and ashes.” One is the commandment of Sotah, (the dust put in the water such a woman has to drink to prove her innocence. Numbers 5,17 and 24); the second one being the commandment of the red heifer whose ash purifies people who have become ritually impure through contact with he dead (Numbers 19,9-19). In fact we find that the Israelites collectively are referred to as אפרים (Jeremiah 31,19). The word may be understood as the plural of אפר, ash, afarim. {In that verse it is clear that the term אפרים is applied to the Jewish people as an endearment. Ed.] The reason for the plural may be a reference to the ash which Yitzchak almost turned out to be, as well as the ash Avraham would have been (if G’d had not miraculously saved him) when he submitted to a test of his faith  at the time Nimrod threw him into a furnace.
    18,33. ואברהם שב למקומו “and Avraham went back to his own place.” According to the plain meaning of the text, “his own place” is a reference to Eloney Mamre. This is where he had first separated from the angels. One may also understand the word למקומו as “to his customary preoccupation of entertaining visitors and guests.” Having fulfilled this מצוה in respect of the angels who had now departed he went back to his tent to look for other visitors to entertain. This was Avraham’s central virtue and whenever he was able to practice it he is described as “being in his element”, i.e. במקומו.
    Another way of explaining the word למקומו, is “to his regular emotional state.” As long as Avraham had been in a dialogue with G’d he was on a totally spiritual and intellectual level, not allowing for normal emotional responses which are part of the human condition. Now that  the immediate benevolent presence of G’d had departed he resumed his customary frame of mind and his approach to matters of a more terrestrial nature. The word מקומו של אדם “a person’s place,” defines the parameter within which certain people operate, are at home, and where they know their  place within the society they live in.
    A kabbalistic approach to this expression: the verse is a reference to the attribute of חסד, “loving kindness.” Seeing that attribute had failed to find within Sodom any deserving individuals who would enable it to become active on behalf of the town they lived in, this attribute now returned to its former place and left the field to the attribute of Justice. This is the mystical aspect of the words ויבאו שני המלאכים סדומה, “the two messengers (angels) arrived at Sodom (19,1).” Shortly afterwards (19,29), the Torah writes: ויהי בשחת אלוקים את ערי הככר, וג', “when Elohim destroyed the towns in the valley, etc.” The attribute of Justice is not allowed to operate until it has received “authority” to do so from the attribute of Mercy. In 19,29 we find for the first time since Avraham had begun to plead that the name of G’d used by the Torah is the name representing the attribute of Justice. At this point in the story the attribute of Justice became active against people concerning whom the die had already been cast.
    When Avraham is described in 22,6 as ויקח בידו את האש ואת המאכלת, “he took in his hand the fire and the knife (in preparation for slaughtering Yitzchak),” this expression also indicated that at that point the attribute of Mercy had handed over Yitzchak to the attribute of Justice. The words וילכו שניהם יחדו, “they both walked together,” which follow the expression that אלוקים יראה לו השה, “that G’d in His capacity of the attribute of Justice will select the lamb for Himself,” are a strong hint that what was about to happen was being orchestrated by the attribute of Justice. In that episode Yitzchak was the willing object of the attribute of Justice. We must not forget that basically, the attribute of Justice remains “bound,” before the attribute of Mercy as otherwise the world would be destroyed by the attribute of Justice. This is the mystical dimension of the words ויעקד את יצחק בנו, “he bound his son Yitzchak” (22,9),  and this is the meaning of the words ורב חסד, in Exodus 34,6, i.e. that the attribute of חסד, “love, kindness, mercy,” is stronger than the attribute of דין, “Justice.” 
    [Rabbi Chavell quotes commentaries on this which explain the words “he took the knife in his hand” to mean that Avraham took in his hand the combined attributes and spiritual forces of his son Yitzchak which are symbolised by “fire and knife.” When Yitzchak is in full possession of these two spiritual forces of his no creature could prevail against what is known in Rabbinic parlance as פחד יצחק. By Avraham gathering in his own hands these spiritual weapons of his son Yitzchak, such as at the time when he pleaded for the people of Sodom, the attribute of Justice (Yitzchak) could not operate at full capacity until Avraham again released these “weapons of Yitzchak” (after he had completed his plea).Yitzchak had not been born yet, it is clear that such terms as פחד יצחק used by the kabbalists, are not to be understood as something exclusively Yitzchak’s, but as similes for these spiritual forces. Ed.]
    
    19,1. ויבאו שני המלאכים סדומה “When the two angels arrived at Sodom, etc.” At this point the Torah calls the men “angels.” In order to understand why the Torah switches between the terms “men” and the term “angels” according to the plain meaning of the text, we would have to say that whenever these messengers performed a mission involving mundane matters, matters which are the exclusive domain of terrestrial beings, the Torah refers to them as “men.” After they had completed their respective tasks on earth involving earthly creatures, the Torah reverts to calling them “angels.” They then assumed their original lofty stature. As far as a kabbalistic approach is concerned I have already dealt with this on 18,8 (page 291).
   וירא לוט ויקם לקראתם, “Lot saw and rose to meet them.” Avraham had beheld these “men” already from afar as it was full daylight, i.e. “during the heat of the day,” and this is why the Torah had underlined “he ran towards them.” Lot, however, did not see them until they were close by as they arrived in the evening. This is why the Torah merely mentions that “he arose (from his seat) to welcome them.”
    19,3. ומצות אפה ויאכלו, “and he had baked unleavened bread, and they ate.” The reason the Torah mentions the kind of bread being served was to contrast it with the fact that Avraham never did serve bread to the angels. Here the Torah wanted to alert us to this. Here the angels did eat the bread as opposed to the meat which disappeared when it was served by Avraham to the angels. The “meal” when the angels were at Avraham’s resembled a sacrifice on the altar (compare our comments on 18,8 page 289).
    
    19,4. ואנשי העיר אנשי סדום, ”and the men of the town, the men of Sodom, etc.” The Torah wanted to hint that the men of Sodom and the men of “the city and the Tower” (in Genesis 11,4) had a great deal in common. Both were absolutely wicked. The men here described as “the men of the city,” were survivors of that episode [less than 100 years earlier]. (According to another view, these men were re-incarnates of the people who had died at the time of the Tower and they resurfaced a third time as re-incarnates and formed the rebels who joined Korach in his uprising. (Compare our author’s comment on Numbers 27,29)
    
    19,8. הנה נא לי שתי בנות וגו'...רק לאנשים האל וגו’, “See here, I have two daughters, etc;...only to these men, etc.” Lot went to great lengths to protect the people who were his guests from any harm. Nonetheless his attempt to assuage the illegitimate demands of the townspeople to save these men at the expense of the chastity of his daughters revealed that his heart was not in the right place. He could not have performed a greater act of abandoning his own flesh and blood to the perverted lust of his compatriots than by his offer to let them do whatever “was good in their eyes” to his daughters. This is why our sages (Tanchuma Vayera 12) said: “according to standard civilised conduct a father risks his life in order to protect the innocence of his daughters. Lot, by contrast, tried to buy his own safety at the expense of the honour of his daughters.” This is why G’d said to him: “you are only preserving them from the men of Sodom in order to violate them yourself.” [a reference to the end of our chapter where Lot sired two sons who were mothered by his daughters. Ed.]
    You should know that what happened here was similar to the incident known as Pilegesh be-Givah” (Judges chapter 19), which triggered a civil war. In fact, Lot’s conduct was even worse than that of the aged host in that chapter. In that instance the local inhabitants were satisfied with violating the guests’ concubine, not molesting the host’s daughter who was a virgin. (Judges 19,23-25). In our instance the men of Sodom could not even be appeased when they were offered Lot’s two daughters to make sport with. Furthermore, in the incident at Givah “only” the men in their prime participated in that outrage, whereas here all the men “from young to old” participated in the attempt to commit this foul deed. Thus far the commentary of Nachmanides. Bereshit Rabbah 50,6 understands the words לאנשים האל to mean “these ‘men’ are messengers of G’d.”
    
    19,13. כי משחיתים אנחנו, “for we are about to destroy, etc.” They should have said: “G’d is about to destroy this place.” Instead they made it appear as if they had a free hand in the matter. This is why G’d did not allow them to move from the town until they had made an admission that they themselves were unable to do anything by themselves, but that they merely carried out a mission from G’d. This is the meaning of the line (verse 13) “and G’d has dispatched us to destroy it.“ What happened in this instance with the angels lends support to what we read in Job 4,18 הן בעבדיו לא יאמין ובמלאכיו ישים תהלה, “If He cannot trust His own servants, and casts reproach on His angels.” Another verse along similar lines is found in Job 15,15: הן בקדושיו לא יאמין ושמים לא זכו בעיניו, “He puts no trust in His holy ones; the heavens are not guiltless in His sight.”
    We find that even Moses was guilty of a similar slip of the tongue when-concerning the appointment of the chiefs of tens, fifty, hundred and thousands in Deut. 1,17- he said: ”any matter which is too difficult for you, bring it to me so that I can hear it;” He was punished for this arrogant-sounding comment by being unable to resolve the problem posed by the daughters of Tzelofchod without first inquiring from G’d about their status as potential heirs. The prophet Samuel also once became guilty of such arrogance when he described himself to King Saul as “I am the Seer” (Samuel I 9,19). G’d showed him that he had been arrogant when he was unable to pick the son of Yishai who was to replace Saul as King. He had picked Eliav (Samuel I 16,6). G’d had to tell him that whereas he, Samuel, was only able to judge exteriors it was reserved for G’d to judge a person’s interior (Samuel I 16,7). David too was once guilty of such arrogance when he said ותורתך בתוך מעי , “and your Torah is in my entrails.” [he meant I can divine Your law as a gut-feeling. Ed.] (Psalms 40,9). David was punished in that he forgot the kind of commandment which even children in elementary school are familiar with. [I presume that the author refers to David having forgotten that the Holy Ark must be carried only on the shoulders of the Levites and not in a carriage. This law is clearly spelled out in Numbers 7,9. Had he not forgotten, Uzzah might not have died. compare Samuel II 6,7. Ed.] 
    The prophetess Devorah who complimented herself even in the song of thanksgiving when she said עד שקמתי אם בישראל “until I arose to function as a mother for Israel,” (Judges 5,7). According to our sages the moment she said these words the Holy Spirit departed from her and she regained it only in verse 12 of the same chapter when she said: עורי עורי דבורה דברי שיר, “awake, awake Deborah utter a song;”
    As to the verse in Job 4,18 in which we heard that G’d even has occasion to rebuke the angels, this was a reference to the incident here where the angels arrogated to themselves the right to say: “we are going to destroy the place.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 50,9 the angels who were guilty of this statement were not allowed to return to their celestial habitat nor to perform another function on earth for 138 years, i.e. not until “and here angels of the Lord were ascending and descending on it,” (the ladder in Yaakov’s dream in Genesis 28,12). This vision is taken as proof that only at that time were these angels allowed back to earth to perform a function there. From all the above we learn that if someone makes use of G’d’s glory to enhance his own reputation he will face a major punishment.
    
    19,17. אל תביט אחריך, ”do not look behind you!” Rashi comments on these words: “you have been an accessory to their evil deeds and you have only been saved by the merit of Avraham. Hence you are not entitled to watch them die.
    Nachmanides claims that the reason the angel forbade Lot and his family to look behind them was that the air behind them was potentially lethal, and when they would turn around to look they would themselves become victims of the poisoned atmosphere. He argues that even looking at any other diseases, i.e. the microbes which bring them about, are in themselves a danger to those who look at them. Nachmanides singles out rabies, claiming that looking at the urine of a person bitten by a rabid animal is liable to infect the person who has looked. He claims that the mere thinking of this is liable to produce such an infection. Apparently, in those days, when someone had been bitten by a rabid dog he was not allowed to drink any liquids at all. Also, if people had been bitten and were desperate to have something to drink they would see a reflection of the dog that bit them in the liquid.
    A Midrashic interpretation: The reason the angels forbade Lot to look back was that he would see the presence of G’d as it was pouring sulphur and brimstone on the valley. Such a vision would prove fatal for him. Irith, Lot’s wife, had feelings of compassion for her married daughters whom she had left behind, and this is what caused her to turn around. She wanted to see if these daughters now followed them. She beheld the שכינה instead and turned into a pillar of salt.
    
    19,24. וה' המטיר, “and G’d had made it rain, etc.” We find three divergent opinions amongst our sages as to the meaning of the words in this verse. [The basic difficulty is the repeated mention of the name of G’d, i.e. the attribute of Mercy in this verse.] Rabbi Yehudah bar Seymon in Bereshit Rabbah 51,2 understands the angel Gavriel as being the subject of the words וה' המטיר, “and G’d made it rain.” The second expression: מאת ה' מן השמים, he understands as referring to G’d personally; Rabbi Eliezer said that wherever the name of ה' is introduced with the prefix ו, it refers to “G’d with His celestial court.” Rabbi Yitzchak said we find in both the Torah, the Books of the Prophets, as well as in the Hagiographa that ordinary individuals are apt to repeat their own names. He quotes the following verse as example Genesis 4,23: “Lemech said to his wives: ‘wives of Lemech, etc.’” Thus far the quotation from the above Midrash. So you see that there are three interpretations of this verse. Rabbi Yehudah considers Gavriel as the messenger of destruction and he feels that this angel was so described by the words וה' המטיר על סדום ועמורה גפרית ואש, “G’d (His messenger) had made it rain sulphur and brimstone on the city.”
    Rabbi Eliezer feels that the verse testifies that both G’d Himself and His celestial court agreed to this form of punishment, but that it emanated from G’d directly.
    Rabbi Yitzchak sees no need to read between the lines of the text but considers the syntax as perfectly normal.
    A kabbalistic approach: The opinion of Rabbi Eliezer is the correct one. Shemot Rabbah 12,1 postulates as an important rule  that every place we encounter the word וה', this is a reference to “G’d plus His celestial court of advisors.” You need to appreciate that the “so-called celestial court,” is referred to by G’d as אנכי האל בית א-ל, I am the G’d of Bet El” (31,13). Yonathan ben Uziel translates the words קדוש קדוש... קדוש Isaiah 6,3 as קדיש בשמי מרומא עלאה בית שכינתה, “the Holy One in the lofty heavens in the house of His residence.” Yonathan ben Uziel distinguishes there between the expression “house” and “residence.” Concerning such a “house” G’d had said of Moses (Numbers 12,7) “He is at home in My entire ‘house.’” This is the בת which has been emanated from the יסוד העולם as mentioned by Nachmanides in his commentary on Genesis 24,1 וה' ברך את אברהם בכל, “and the Lord had blessed Avraham with “something called בכל.” This is also what the Torah had in mind when it writes in Exodus 13,21 וה' הולך לפניהם יומם “and G’d was walking ahead of them by day,” and this is followed a short while later by ויסע מלאך האלו-הים “and the angel of the Lord traveled, etc.” (Exodus 14,19). According to Nachmanides the words מלאך האלוקים in that verse are not to be understood as a possessive clause, but the meaning is similar to 18,17  where G’d had spoken of “Himself” in the third person, i.e. the words המכסה אני מאברהם “shall I hide from Avraham, etc., followed by: “seeing that they will observe the path of the Lord, etc.” (instead of My path), as you would have expected if G’d personally had said the words “shall I hide from Avraham, etc.” did not really refer to Himself but to an agent, a מלאך, who because he spoke in the name of the Lord is described as if it were the Lord Himself speaking. The verse there goes on to speak about למען הביא ה', “in order that G’d may make come true all that He said to Avraham.” Had G’d’ personally been the speaker in that verse, the Torah would have written אביא, “in order that I may bring upon Avraham all that I said concerning him.” As pointed out previously, every time the prefix ו appears before the name of G’d it is an allusion to the angel who at that particular time acts on behalf of G’d. You are already aware that the angel who runs G’d’s universe on His behalf is called מטטרן so that it is easy to recognise an allusion to him in the very word המטיר.
   מאת ה' מן השמים, “from G’d from heaven.” This is a reference to the “great” name of G’d. We find something similar in Kings I 8,32 when Solomon offered a prayer to G’d on the occasion of dedicating the Temple he had built. He appealed to the G’d in heaven to listen to his prayer by saying ואתה תשמע השמים, “You, the heaven, will hear,” instead of saying ואתה תשמע בשמים, “You will hear in heaven.” Clearly, Solomon did not pray to “heaven,” he prayed to G’d. The wording of Solomon’s prayer indicates that he expected an agent of G’d  whom he referred to as “heaven,” to hear his prayer. The reason the Torah referred to the agent of G’d who carries out G’d’s judgment as G’d is because for the moment he acts in lieu of G’d Himself. We have encountered the expression “I will go down,” or “we will descend,” both in Genesis 18,21 and Genesis 11,4 prior to such judgment being carried out. In each such instance the reference is to the agent of G’d carrying out the punishment.
    
    19,25.ויהפך את הערים האל , “He overturned these towns.” The choice of the word האל to describe “these” instead of the more common ההם, is somewhat puzzling. The reason the Torah chose this expression may be that two of the names of the towns had been named before. By using the prefix ה before the word האל the Torah may hint that actually five towns were being overturned by the angel in charge of this destruction. The reason that Avraham at the time had commenced his plea by mentioning the number fifty was also because he was aware that each of five towns required a minimum quorum of ten good people each in order for the whole town to have any hope to escape immediate judgment.
    
    19,26. ותבט אשתו מאחריו ותהי נציב מלח, ”his wife looked behind him and was turned into a pillar of salt.” It is possible to understand the word “behind him” as referring to the angel who overturned these towns, seeing the angel has already been credited with this activity in verse 25 where the Torah mentioned sulphur and fire being rained on the towns. The reason Lot’s wife was turned into a pillar of salt may have had to do with the power of the fire [which dehydrated all fluids and left only solids which endure like salt? Ed.] When we find Moses refer to this event in Deut. 29,22  where he credits “G’d” with having turned that area into uninhabitable sulphur and salt, something completely burned, he refers to the agent of G’d who performed this as אפו וחמתו. The fact that he first mentioned “G’d,” and then “אף and חמה,” indicates that these were the names of the respective angels who had carried out this destruction.
   ותהי נציב מלח, “she became a pillar of salt.” Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra wrote that the word ותהי in our verse refers to the “earth.” In other words, the earth beneath her turned into a pillar of salt, not she herself. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 51,5 understand that Lot’s wife turned into salt herself as punishment for having asked her neighbours for salt on the previous evening to alert them to the fact that her husband was entertaining guests, against the law of the town.
    
    19,29. ויהי בשחת אלוקים, ”it was when G’d destroyed, etc.” The word אלוקים here refers to the angel of G’d who performed this task.
   ויזכור אלוקים את אברהם, “G’d remembered Avraham.” Here the word אלוקים refers to G’d Himself. 
   וישלח את לוט, “He sent away Lot, etc.” As soon as the name of Avraham is mentioned G’d saves those who cleave to him. The meaning of the verse is that had it not been for Avraham, Lot would still have been in Charan, his land and his birthplace. He left his birthplace only for the sake of Avraham and in his honour. This is what the Torah testified in Genesis 12,4 “Avraham went as G’d had told him, and Lot went with him.” Having this in mind, the Torah says here that G’d remembered Avraham and that as a consequence He saved Lot. The Torah is careful not to say that  Lot was saved because G’d remembered Avraham. This what our sages meant when they said (Tanchuma Vayera 9) “one may save the cover of a book together with the book itself just as one may save the bag containing the phylacteries together with the phylacteries contained therein even if there was also money inside that container at the same time” (in case of a fire on the Sabbath). The reason for this is that the container or cover respectively lend additional distinction to the phylacteries or the sacred text inside the cover. From these words of the Tanchuma we learn “hail to the righteous as well as to those who support them.” We can support this from Genesis 8,1: “G’d remembered Noach and all the creatures that were with him inside the Ark.”
    
   בהפוך את הערים אשר ישב בהן לוט, “when He overturned the towns in which Lot used to reside.” The question arises why G’d chose such a drastic means of punishing the people of Sodom. It is likely that other nations or the inhabitants of people in other times throughout history have been guilty of similar or even worse conduct and neither they nor the earth they lived on have been wiped out. Besides, seeing that Avraham the most successful exponent of the efficacy of repentance was alive, why was he not encouraged to try and influence the lifestyle of the Sodomites? If he would have achieved a measure of success this would have prevented this human disaster!
    
    The principal reason that the judgment of the Sodomites was so harsh was the fact that they lived in the Holy Land. This land cannot tolerate sinful people for long and has always expelled them as one vomits indigestible food. What happened to the Sodomites was an illustration of how the very earth of ארץ ישראל responds to the perversion of all human and religious values such as practiced by the people who live on it. Sodom’s destruction was to serve as a warning to the Israelites in the future not to become guilty of similar acts. Before the Israelites conquered the land they themselves became witnesses to the manner in which the land vomited the Canaanites. Even the spies had described the land as “consuming its inhabitants,” (Numbers 13,32) but they had misinterpreted the cause for this. For all these reasons Moses recalled what happened to Sodom and the Sodomites in his parting address to the Jewish people in Deut. 29,22. He warned his people of what would happen to them if they failed to adhere to the Torah and would forsake its laws.
    
    19,30.וישב בהר ושתי בנותיו עמו , “he settled in the mountains and his two daughters with him.” The action which the daughters of Lot took in order to receive semen from their father was something novel. They were chaste and were too shy to ask their father outright to impregnate them, something which  was perfectly permissible in their time. It had never been forbidden for a father to have a child from his daughter (Sanhedrin 58). Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 51,10 give these daughters credit for having wanted to preserve the human species as they thought they and their father were the sole survivors during that generation. Seeing that their mother had died during the flight from Sodom, their father was left without a mate and had no other chance of perpetuating the human species unless his daughters would give birth to a male child  by being impregnated by him. This is why they went on record with the words: “there is no other man on earth to have intercourse with us” (verse 31) in order to justify what would otherwise appear as frivolous conduct.
    This is why the Torah refrained from using any expression criticising their conduct as incestuous or licentious. Their intentions were absolutely pure. This is also why the older daughter was granted the distinction of becoming the ancestor of Ruth, eventual great-grandmother of King David who accepted the 606 commandments of the Torah which Gentiles are not obligated to observe. The younger daughter’s offspring included  Naamah from the kingdom of Ammon who became a daughter-in-law of King Solomon when she married his only son Rechavam (Kings I 14,31). In this manner both of Lot’s daughters acquired a share in the Kingdom of David. This is also why our sages in Baba Kama 38 have said that the reason G’d commanded the Israelites not to harass either the Moabites or the Ammonites when they were traveling through the desert (Deut. 2,19) was the conduct of these peoples’ founding mothers, i.e. Lot’s daughters.
    Our sages go so far as to quote G’d as saying that it had only been these two פרידות טובות, “good seeds,” which emerged from these two nations which justified Him in keeping these people alive in history. This particular portion of the Torah is one of a small number concerning which the sages said that it may be read both in the original Hebrew and may be translated into the language the readers are familiar with. To the question why this is not obvious, the sages answered that there was a contrary consideration, namely that out of concern for the honour of the family purity of Avraham this passage should not be read in translation for unlearned people. The Talmud decided that such a consideration was not sufficient to withhold the information in our portion from wider audiences.
    
    19,32. לכה נשקה, ”let us give a drink of wine.” The daughter should have said לכי (feminine form) instead of לכה (masculine form), as the older daughter urged her sister to do something which is the prerogative of the male who initiates such an activity. Our sages in Yevamot 65 interpreted the words וכבשוה in Genesis 1,28 as meaning not only that the human species is to subjugate nature and the animals, but as reference to the fact that “conquering” is the prerogative of the male rather than that of the female. This is why the word is spelled defectively, the letter ו being missing. This is a hint that the male also “conquers” the female. The words “for there is no man on earth, etc.” were the older daughter’s way of saying that since it is impossible to proceed in the way civilisation and nature had decreed, they, the daughters, had to initiate the act of procreation in this instance. The Torah reflects what had happened by writing לכה instead of לכי when describing the introductory remark by the older daughter to her younger sister.
    
    I believe that the letter ה in the word לכה is justified as it is a reference to the attribute of Justice. We find other examples of such usage of the letter ה such as in Exodus 3,10 when G’d sends Moses on his mission to Pharaoh and says to him: לכה ואשלחך אל פרעה, “go on and I will send you to Pharaoh.” This was a hint that the attribute of Justice would be invoked against Pharaoh. When the Torah continued in that instance with the words וזה לך האות, “and this will be the sign for you,” a better translation would be: “this extra letter ה which I, G’d, have added to the word לך, ”go!” is your sign that I will invoke the attribute of Justice against Pharaoh.” The wine which the daughters gave Lot to drink is an allusion to the attribute of Justice (see our commentary on Genesis 9,20). This is why the Kabbalists have said that we are not to recite a benediction over wine unless water had first been added to it. [They meant that undiluted red wine represents an undiluted attribute of Justice, not a symbol we want to raise to our lips. Ed.]
    
    Actually, in doing what they did, the daughters of Lot copied what the first woman Chavah had done when she seduced her husband Adam. According to the Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 19,5) she had squeezed the juice from the grapes of the tree of knowledge and thus made Adam drink from the fruit of the forbidden tree. The blood of menstruation which women suffer from was the punishment for that particular sin. The appearance of blood is so similar to the colour of red wine that it serves as a reminder of the sin. This is also the mystical dimension of the verses in which blood and wine are linked linguistically such as in Deut. 32,14 ודם ענב תשתה חמר, “and foaming grape-blood was your drink.” Another verse demonstrating a similar affinity between grapes (wine) and blood is Genesis 49,11 כבס ביין לבושו ובדם ענבים סותה, “he washes his garments in wine, his robe in blood of grapes.” The additional letters ה in this verse are not gratuitous; this is what our sages meant when they said in Niddah 31: “man fertilises the white part of the ovum whereas woman fertilises the red part.” In this instance the sin committed by the mother (Chavah) and the daughters (Lot’s) was identical in that it was committed by means of wine which has brought much tragedy on mankind. Possibly, the additional word אבינו, “our father,” in this verse is even an allusion to the father of mankind, Adam. It reminds us that he too had been given wine to drink by his wife.
    19,33. ותשקין את אביהן יין בלילה הוא, “they gave their father wine to drink in that night.” Actually, the Torah should have written בלילה ההוא instead of בלילה הוא. The absence of the prefix ה suggests that the word הוא is a reference to G’d, i.e. that it is one of G’d’s names. This is why the sages said that Lot’s daughters enjoyed a divine assist in their undertaking. The wine itself was found in their cave. They had not brought it with them. G’d had provided it to make their undertaking easier. [G’d’s interest was to commence the process which would ultimately result in the birth of King David.]
    
    19,37. ותלד הבכירה בן ותקרא שמו מואב, “the older one gave birth to a son whom she called Moav (from the father).” Our sages say: “do not read this name as מואב, but as מאב, “from the father.” The naming of the baby was certainly not a chaste thing to do. The younger daughter, by contrast, displayed more discretion when she named her son בן עמי, “a member of my people.” Our sages in Horiot 10 taught that G’d does not withhold a reward even for such minor things as appropriate conversational expressions. When G’d told Moses not to harass either Moav or Ammon, He used different terms for the type of harassment the Israelites were not allowed to employ. In the case of Moav (Deut. 2,9), G’d said אל תצר את מואב ואל תתגר בם מלחמה “do not harass Moav and do not provoke them into war,” whereas in the case of the בני עמון G’d said:  אל תצורם ואל תתגר בם “do not harass them or start a fight with them (Deut. 2,19).” The latter were not to be harassed in any shape or form by the Israelites. This added prohibition was the way G’d rewarded their ancestral mother for employing discreet language when naming her son. 
    
    20,2. וישלח אבימלך מלך גרר ויקח את שרה, “Avimelech the King of Geror sent (servants) and he abducted Sarah.” Seeing that Sarah had once before been abducted by Pharaoh in Egypt and G’d had performed great miracles punishing Pharaoh by means of afflictions so that he had returned her to Avraham, why did Avraham repeat the same mistake in Gerar which he had committed once before and which had resulted in Sarah’s almost being raped? Why did he again describe Sarah as his sister? Was he really entitled to assume that G’d would once again perform a miracle for him to extricate him from a situation which he had brought about by his own machinations?
    
    Rabbeinu Chananel wrote that this time Avraham divorced Sarah when he came to Geror because he was afraid that the local people might kill him if he were to admit that Sarah was his wife. Nonetheless, G’d did not allow her to be separated from Avraham. Neither did He allow the righteous woman Sarah to remain with the wicked Avimelech as it is not G’d’s way to “allow the scepter of the wicked to rest upon the land allotted to the righteous” (Psalms, 125,3). The divorce was considered invalid as it had been prompted only by Avraham fearing for his life. This is what the Torah meant when G’d described Sarah as בעולת בעל, a married woman,” in the dream in which He appeared to Avimelech. He made it plain to Avimelech that the technical status of Sarah as a divorced woman was caused only by circumstances over which Avraham had not had any control at the time.
    
    When Avimelech challenged G’d by saying: “will You kill people although they are innocent?” He referred to the status of Sarah as a divorced woman, claiming that he could not have known that her divorce was legally invalid. By using the expression הגוי, he implied that amongst the Gentiles there is no distinction between divorces which result from the free will of the husband and others which were the result of duress. Furthermore, he claimed that he was totally righteous not having violated her. So why would G’d threaten to kill him? Another factor in his favour was that her brother Avraham had personally told him that Sarah was his sister, something which Sarah herself had confirmed time after time so that he could claim he had taken her not only in innocence but that even his hands were clean seeing he had not forced his attentions upon her!
    
    
    20,4.  הגוי גם צדיק תהרוג,“are You going to kill also innocent people?” It is entirely possible that Avimelech referred to himself when he said: “are You going to kill a “people?” He meant that as a result of killing him, G’d would cause the death of the צדיק, the righteous Avraham, seeing that the king’s servants would then kill Avraham. 
    
    20,12. וגם אמנם, “and besides, indeed, etc.” The word אמנם is equivalent to אמונה בפי, “I spoke truthfully; she is my sister seeing that she is the daughter of my father.” Actually this was not quite so seeing Sarah was a daughter of Haran, Avraham’s brother, a son of Terach, as we know from Genesis 11,29 “the daughter of Haran, father of both Yiskah (Sarai) and Milkah.” We learn from here that grandchildren may be described as children. The words “daughter of my father” therefore meant “daughter of my father’s son.”
    
    20,13.ויהי כאשר התעו אותי אלוקים מבית אבי , “it was when G’d made me wander from my father’s home, etc.” By the choice of the word התעו, which also means “led me astray,” Avraham hinted that his father Terach was an idolater and that his emigration was due to his father’s teachings and the making of strange gods he had been forced to leave that environment and to move to another country and to say to his wife: “this is the loving kindness you can perform for me, etc.”
    
    20,16.הנה נתתי אלף כסף , “here I have already paid one thousand pieces of silver to your brother, etc.” Avimelech mentioned this seeing that the Torah had reported earlier (verse 14) that he had given to Avraham both livestock and both male and female slaves at the time he returned his wife Sarah to him (as compensation for mental anguish?). Here the Torah put a value on these gifts Avimelech had given to Avraham, i.e. that the combined value was 1,000 pieces of silver. The word “your brother” may be understood as a form of sarcasm, i.e. the one whom you described to me as your “brother.” Avimelech described this money as הוא לך כסות עינים, “it will serve you as vindication.” He meant that the fact that he gave this money to Avraham instead of to her would make it plain to all who became aware of this that it was not a payment for sexual favours received.” Now that he had given the money (or the presents) to Avraham instead, it would be plain to all that he, Avimelech, had been forced to part with this money against his will, as a penalty for having illegally abducted Sarah. People know that their King hates Avraham and wishes him dead. The object of the exercise was to convince the entourage of Avraham and Sarah as well as everybody else in the world that she was quite blameless in the whole episode.
   ואת כל ונוכחת, “and you are cleared before everyone.” Neither Avimelech’s gifts to Avraham nor his conciliatory words to Sarah had sufficed to put her at ease. In spite of all this Sarah still argued with Avimelech and was not willing to forgive him for the shame of having been abducted. This was due to Sarah’s extreme modesty. If we understand the verse in this fashion the words ואת כל belong to the following word ונוכחת. Another way of understanding these words is to assume that they belong to the previous words לכל אשר אתך, “for all the people that form part of your entourage.” In that case the word ונוכחת means that “as of now you are vindicated.”
    
    The Talmud Baba Kama 93 understands the words כסות עינים, “cover for the eyes,” as a curse Avimelech applied to Sarah’s offspring. The Talmud claims that this curse was fulfilled when Yitzchak became blind in his old age (Genesis 27,1). The Talmud uses this example to teach that one should never discount the curse uttered even by seemingly unimportant people. Another lesson learned from this incident is that Avimelech criticised Sarah with these words saying: “let the fact that you incorrectly described your husband as your brother be a lesson to you. Act more honestly in the future.”
    From a moralistic point of view the words לכל אשר אתך imply that in the future if you want to call Avraham “my brother,” do so within the confines of your home, people who are familiar with you. As far as the world at large is concerned do not make such misleading statements, as they are apt to boomerang and you will become their victim.
    
    Bereshit Rabbah 52,12 takes the words literally and interprets that Avimelech advised Sarah to keep even her eyes covered so that her dazzling beauty should not arouse sinful thoughts in those who looked at her. Still another meaning of the words כסות עינים is: “something made of embroidered material with patterns known as עינים.”
    
    20,17.  ויתפלל אברהם אל האלוקים, “Avraham prayed to G’d, etc.” Using a kabbalistic approach, the (unusual) name for G’d used here by Avraham is a reference to the tenth emanation. [this is the “lowest” of the ten emanations and therefore closest to our world. Ed.] As a result, his prayer was answered immediately as we read in the very same verse that “G’d healed Avimelech, his wife, his maidservants, and all those who were expecting to give birth could do so again and did so successfully.” As a result of Avraham’s prayer the attribute of Justice which had been active in that region was supplanted by the attribute of Mercy. We had previously read that the attribute of Mercy i.e. ה', had been exchanged for the attribute of Justice as you will see by reading the text carefully. In verse three G’d appears to Avimelech as אלוקים, i.e. as the attribute of Justice in honour of Avraham. When Avimelech justified his behaviour he addressed the attribute א-דני. G’d responds to him as ה-אלוקים, the definite article ה indicating that it was the same attribute that had appeared to him in verse three. At that point G’d tells Avimelech that He too is aware of Avimelech’s thoughts as well as his deeds. G’d used the אנכי rather than the pronoun אני when referring to Himself. This word אנכי refers to the One who is invisible, who was instrumental in preventing Avimelech from committing any sin with Sarah. This aspect of G’d is less manifest than that represented by the term אני when employed as G’d speaking, or identifying himself to His creatures. Perhaps the absence of the letter א in the word מחטו-לי  in verse six is a hint that when someone commits a sin against G’d [as distinct from a sin against his fellow man, Ed.] he actually rebels against G’d in His Uniqueness, Oneness, i.e. against the invisible non-manifest G’d. 
    
    20,18. כי עצור עצר ה' בעד כל רחם ”for the Lord had closed fast every womb, etc.” This refers both to large and small orifices. This is why the Torah repeats the verb עצר. The words בעד כל רחם are a reference to the closing of the birth-canal; it included all orifices amongst man and beast. Our sages in Baba Kama 92 state that even the hens in Avimelech’s palace stopped laying eggs. At this point the Torah spelled out the afflictions suffered by both Avimelech and his household, whereas up until now it had not specified the nature of these afflictions. It had also not mentioned Avimelech by name until he was healed in order to preserve as much of the Royal Dignity and as a sign of respect for Sarah. These names were mentioned only when they served the immediate purpose of enhancing the stature of Sarah. 
    
    21,1. וה' פקד את שרה כאשר אמר, “and G’d had remembered Sarah just as He had said.” This means  she became pregnant.
   ויעש ה' לשרה כאשר דבר, “and G’d did for Sarah as He had spoken.” This is a reference to her giving birth. This is why the Torah immediately follows by recording: “she became pregnant and gave birth.” The reason the Torah wrote this paragraph immediately after having informed us of the closing of the birth-canals in Avimelech’s household, etc., is to remind us that both the “so-called” natural process of becoming pregnant and giving birth and the inability to do so are in G’d’s hands. He alone is in charge of who becomes pregnant and who does not.
    The Midrash (Tanchuma Vayera 15) uses this verse to remind us of Ezekiel 17,24: “Then shall all the trees of the field know that it is I the Lord who have abased the lofty tree and exalted the lowly tree, who have dried up the green tree and made the withered tree bud. I the Lord have spoken, and I will act.” According to this Midrash the prophet referred to Sancheriv when he spoke about G’d “abasing the lofty tree,” seeing that in Ezekiel 31,3 Ashur (Sancheriv’s country) is described as “a cedar in Lebanon with beautiful branches of lofty stature.” On the other hand, the words: “I have exalted the lowly tree,” are a reference to the Jewish people who debased themselves as we know from Maleachi 2,9: “I too have made you despicable and vile in the eyes of all the people...said the Lord of Hosts.” The words: “I have dried out the green tree,” are a reference to Avimelech of whom the Torah said that G’d had closed up all his orifices, whereas the words “and I have made the withered tree bud,” refer to Sarah. The words: “I the Lord have spoken and I have acted,” refer to our verse in which G’d is reported as having remembered Sarah.
    As to the choice of the word והשם, “and the Lord,” Rabbi Yitzchak said: we find that the Torah writes in connection with the Sotah, the wife suspected of infidelity who had secreted herself with another man (Numbers 5,28), “but if the woman had not defiled herself and remained pure, etc.” Such a description fits Sarah who had been alone  with Pharaoh in Egypt and Avimelech in the land of the Philistines and had retained her purity on both occasions. Such a woman had certainly established a claim that G’d should remember her. This is why the paragraph starts with the prefix ו, i.e. “and” in front of the word השם, “The Lord.”
    
    21,2. למועד אשר דבר אותו אלוקים, “at the appointed time G’d had spoken of.” In this instance the word מועד is a time which G’d announced directly to Avraham when he was about to circumcise himself (compare 17,21) when He said “at this time in the coming year.” It was when Sarai’s name was changed to Sarah and Avram’s name to Avraham.
    
    21,8. ויעש אברהם משתה גדול, “Avraham prepared a great feast.” There is no doubt that the notables in the land were invited to this feast seeing that the birth of Yitzchak had been a most remarkable event. Also, Avraham was a very wealthy man, and it is quite possible that even kings of surrounding countries attended this feast. We know that kings and other rulers sought out Avraham’s advice and made a point of being on good terms with him (compare 21,23). As the occasion was one of physical indulgence, the names of the participants have not been mentioned by the Torah. We find that Scripture does make a point of mentioning who went to a house of mourning as these people troubled themselves to share in someone’s else’s grief. This is why the Book of Job mentions not only who came to visit him but also that these people traveled a great distance in order to offer their support to Job in such a time. (compare Job 2,11) This caused Solomon to say in Kohelet: 7,2 “it is better to go to a house of mourning than to a house of feasting.” By not mentioning the names of the participants the Torah hints that  all pleasures in this life are only vain and pointless.
    
   ביום הגמל את יצחק, ”on the day Yitzchak was  weaned.” It is customary for people to throw a party when a baby is born or on the day it is being circumcised, in order to honour the fulfillment of the commandment. We need to explore why Avraham had waited so long (24 months according to Rashi) before throwing this party. It is possible that he delayed because he wanted to wait until the day Yitzchak would begin to study the Torah. This is not as strange as it may appear at first glance as according to tradition Avraham himself was only three years old when he first recognised that there is a G’d in heaven who is the prime cause of the universe’s existence (compare Nedarim 32). This is why he did not make this festive meal either on the day of Yitzchak’s birth or on the day he was circumcised. He wanted the weaning to coincide with the joy of introducing his son to Torah-study, a joy of which David said פקודי ה' משמחי לב, “The Lord’s commandments fill the heart with joy” (Psalms 19,9). We have another verse in Isaiah 28,9 את מי יורה דעה, ואת מי יבין שמועה? גמולי מחלב, ”to whom would he give instruction? To whom expound a message? To those newly weaned from milk.” As soon as the baby is weaned it becomes sanctified to be separated and trained in the service of the Lord. 
    From that point on Yitzchak would become potentially ready to be a burnt-offering for G’d according to Bereshit Rabbah 64,3. As such he was not allowed to leave the sacred precincts of the Holy Land just as such an offering must not leave the sacred precincts of the Holy Temple. Furthermore, it is a well known fact that a father’s love for his son is not usually something that develops strongly from the day he is born or is weaned, but after he has been weaned and begins to grow up.
    A Midrashic interpretation sees in the words ביום הגמל את יצחק an allusion to ביום ה'ג מל יצחק, that Avraham circumcised Yitzchak on the eighth’s day. This would be the basis for our tradition to make a festive meal on the day we circumcise our children, seeing that according to that Midrash  (Pessikta Zutrata on this verse) the meal described in the Torah did take place on the day Yitzchak was circumcised. The custom is perfectly legitimate. Moreover, concerning this David said (Psalms 50,5) אספו לי חסידי כורתי בריתי עלי זבח, “Bring in My devotees. who made a covenant with Me over sacrifice!”
 
    21,9. מצחק, “making sport.” The word is a euphemism for idolatry, as well as murder and incestuous sexual relations. The subject of Ishmael’s and Yitzchak’s quarrel concerned the inheritance. Ishmael said to Yitzchak: “I am the firstborn and as such I am entitled two thirds (two parts) of the inheritance.” When they were out in the field Ishmael would shoot arrows aimed at Yitzchak. This is the true meaning of Proverbs 26,18-19: כמתלהלה היורה זקים חצים ומות. כן איש רמה את רעהו ואמר הלא משחק אני. “Like a man who throws firebrands, arrows and death; is who deceives his neighbour claiming “I am only joking.” We can derive this from Sarah’s reply: “the son of this slave-woman will not inherit together with my son “ This is the way Rashi explained these words.
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra explains the word מצחק as meaning “playing.” The activity was normal for any young boy but Sarah was jealous of the fact that Ishmael was senior to her son in years.
    Nachmanides understands the word to mean that Ishmael was disparaging Yitzchak, insulting him by belittling him. This is why Sarah emphasised that Ishmael was “the son of the Egyptian woman Hagar,” i.e. the son of a slave. The Torah need merely have written that “Ishmael was mocking,” and we would all have known to whom the words referred. The Torah used this introduction to justify Sarah’s request to expel both the mother and her son as the penalty for a slave who mocks his master is death. Sarah did not demand that the death-penalty be imposed but was satisfied if Avraham would expel both Ishmael and his mother. The whole episode caused Avraham a great deal of anguish; he was in a dilemma. The Torah underlines that his dilemma was על אודות בנו, ‘on account of his son’, not on account of Hagar who had served as his concubine when he slept with her and she conceived Ishmael. Had Sarah demanded only that Ishmael’s mother be expelled, thus neutralising her negative influence on her son, Avraham would not have objected at all.
    
    21,14. וישכם אברהם בבוקר ויקח לחם וחמת מים, “Avraham rose early in the morning; he took bread and a skin-bottle of water, etc.” He should have given Hagar silver and gold and camels to transport both her, Ishmael, and their belongings seeing he had plenty of money to spare. After all, had he not prayed for his son’s welfare in 17,18 saying to G’d: לו ישמעאל יחיה לפניך, “if only Ishmael live (a good life) in Your presence?” However, seeing that Sarah had told him to expel Hagar and her son, and G’d had told him to obey everything that Sarah said to him (verse 12), Avraham complied and expelled them with the minimum of creature comforts plus a survival kit only. This is Nachmanides’ view.
    One may view the fact that Avraham provided Hagar with bread and water as an allusion to something that he foresaw concerning the future when his descendants would be oppressed by the Arabs. He foresaw that the Ishmaelites would hate the Jews more than any other nation on earth hated them. Avraham was careful not to deny Hagar and Ishmael the necessities to ensure their survival, something with which Jews provide even their enemies. He modeled himself after Proverbs 25,21 “If your enemy is hungry feed him bread; if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.”
    
    21,17. כי שמע אלוקים אל קול הנער באשר הוא שם, ”for G’d has heeded the cry of the lad in his present state.” This means  that “I” will give him water and he will drink it before leaving this site. Our sages in Rosh Hashanah 16 learn from here that a person is not judged or convicted for sins which G’d foresees that he will commit in the future. He is judged merely on the basis of his present state of guilt or innocence. This is the meaning of the otherwise redundant words באשר הוא שם.
    
    21,18. קומי שאי את הנער, “arise and lift up the lad, etc.” The angel meant that after Ishmael had drunk from the well Hagar should lift him and lead him by her hand. According to the sequence of the story as related in the Torah Ishmael must have been between 16 and 17 years of age at that time. He was born when Avraham was 86 years old (16,16). Yitzchak was born when Ishmael was 14 years old as the Torah describes Avraham as being 100 years of age when he was born. Two more years (minimum) had elapsed until Yitzchak was weaned. This means that this episode took place when Ishmael was at least 16 years old. This raises the question why Avraham placed a 16 year old on his mother’s shoulder when he expelled them? (verse 14)
     Should you argue that the words ואת הילד in verse 14  do not refer to the words על שכמה, “on her shoulder,” the fact that the Torah describes Hagar as “throwing the child under one of the bushes” (verse 16) makes it clear that she must have been carrying him first. Alternatively, she had held him in her lap and when he cried too much she threw him off her lap. Another difficulty in this verse is that the Torah suddenly refers to Ishmael as הילד, “the child,” although previously (verse 12, G’d speaking) he had been referred to as הנער, “the lad, the adolescent.”  The word ילד is usually reserved for very young children, certainly not for a sixteen-year  old boy. (compare ויגדל הילד ויגמל, “the child grew up and was weaned.” This suggests that already when being weaned the description ילד no longer applies, verse 8) Furthermore, the angel had told Hagar to lift up the נער, “the lad,” not the ילד. In addition we see that in verse 20  the Torah speaks of “G’d being with the נער, “the lad,” and that “he grew up.” We can only fall back on the principle of אין מוקדם ומאוחר בתורה that the Torah is not obligated to relate events in their chronological order.
    
    
    21,23.אם תשקור לי ולניני ולנכדי , “that you will not deal falsely with me nor with my son nor with my grandson.” Avimelech demanded two separate covenants. 1) That Avraham would not drive his children out of the land. 2) Avraham’s descendants should not destroy the fruit and produce belonging to the Philistines. This is why he added: ועם הארץ אשר גרת בה “and the land wherein you have dwelled.” Avraham acceded to both requests and said: “I swear an oath.” You should note that this was the first oath that is recorded in the Torah. Seeing that the word שבועה, “oath,” is derived from the word שבעה, “seven,” Avraham set aside seven sheep to symbolise this and called the name of that site באר שבע, “the well of the oath.” The mystical dimension of the number seven is that the person who has been made to swear or who has volunteered to swear does so by promising to forfeit צרור החיים, ”the “bundle” of life (his terrestrial life as well as his life in the celestial hereafter) if he does not abide by the oath he has sworn. This “bundle of life” consists of the seven emanations from חסד at the top to מלכות at the bottom. He who violates his oath places himself outside the circle of responsible human beings; his denial of the oath is equivalent to the denial of G’d and such a person forfeits all claim to an afterlife.
    
    The lower six emanations all bear the stamp of G’d’s name on them. This is why the Kabbalists (Shevuot 39) claim that violating the commandment not to render a vain or false oath results in the whole earth undergoing violent tremors. No such claim is made concerning the violation of any of the other commandments in the Torah. 
    
    It is important to understand the philological construction of the word as this root does not occur in the conjugation kal. The normal conjugation is a form of the passive, the nifal, and that is why we always find constructions such as נשבע, or נשבעו, meaning “he swore,” or  “they swore.” The reason for this is that the person who renders an oath has entered the circle of “seven” who will enjoy afterlife if they keep the oath they have sworn. On the other hand, if such a person fails to keep his oath, נשבע, he has become ostracised from this circle of the seven emanations which represent these various forms of life including lofty areas in the hereafter. The word has two totally opposite meanings just as the word דשן when applied to the altar; the latter word sometimes means “to remove the ash from the altar, such as in Numbers 4,13, whereas on other occasions the same word means “to grow fat.” [another example of dual meanings is the word משביר which may mean “seller of grain or “buyer of grain,” all according to the context of the verse. Ed.] Similarly, נשבע may mean: ”to swear,” or “to be  sworn.”
    
    21,33.  ויטע אשל, “he planted an orchard.” The word אשל is the name of a certain type of tree. This is why the Torah writes that Avraham “planted it.” Seeing there was a well nearby he considered it appropriate to plant orchards to take advantage of that source of water. He meant to enjoy the fruit of these trees both himself and together with any guests whom he would entertain. Seeing that such agricultural activities when undertaken by a righteous individual such as Avraham (who was a shepherd by profession) are merely a preparation for spiritual activities in their wake, the Torah immediately testified to this by writing ויקרא שם בשם ה', “He called out there in the name of the Lord.”
    A Midrashic approach: The three letters in the word א-ש-ל are an acronym for אכילה- שתיה- לויה that true hospitality involves providing one’s guests with food,-drink, - and an escort when they depart. [some versions have the word שכיבה, “lodging”, instead of שתיה “drink.”]. Avraham was in the habit of saying to his guests: “ask whatever I can do for you and I will endeavour to do it.” We know already from Genesis 18,16 where Avraham escorted the angels who had visited him, that he was in the habit of escorting his guests. This last stage in fulfilling the commandment of being hospitable is in fact the part for which the host receives his true reward. We find, for instance, that immediately after Avraham had escorted the angels away from his house, G’d rewarded him by revealing to him the impending fate of Sodom and giving him a chance to plead for their lives. We find something similar in Psalms 135,4 where the psalmist wrote כי יעקב בחר לו י-ה, and the reading of the last two words is one word, i.e. לויה, suggesting that the reason G’d chose Yaakov as His people was because they practice the virtue of escorting their guests. We find that the Torah also provides a hint of this when relating the journey of Eliezer to get a bride for Yitzchak. In Genesis 24,56 Eliezer is quoted as saying to his hosts: אל תאחרו אותי וה' הצליח דרכי, “do not delay me seeing that G’d has made my mission successful.” (The respective last letters in the words spell אל תאחרו אותי וה-י-ה-ו-ה spell the word לויה, “escort.”
   ויקרא שם בשם ה', “he preached there in the name of the Lord.” The expression used here by the Torah refers to both “calling on,” and “proclaiming.” We have the expression קרא in Proverbs 20, 6 רב אדם יקרא איש חסדו, “He calls most people true friend.” We also encounter this word in Deut. 32,3 where Moses says כי שם ה' אקרא, and the meaning is: “I shall proclaim the name of the Lord.” In our verse the meaning of these words is that Avraham was proclaiming that G’d had created the world, that it had not preceded Him, that there is a “Director” of the fate of mankind who has always existed. When the Torah adds the words בשם ה' “in the name (singular) of the Lord,” it alerts us to the fact that Avraham was at pains to emphasise the Oneness and uniqueness of the Lord, something that would not be suspected if the Torah had used the word אלו-הים which has a plural ending. The words א-ל עולם, mean that G’d was eternal, not preceded by any physical phenomenon. Another way of interpreting the word ויקרא could be in accordance with Onkelos who views the word as reflecting prayer. It would be analogous to Psalms 30,9 אליך ה' אקרא, “I call upon You O G’d (in prayer).”
    
    22,1. והאלוקים נסה את אברהם, “and G’d had tested Avraham.” This is the portion dealing with the binding of Yitzchak, an event which is the cornerstone of the Jewish faith throughout the ages. Jews have placed their trust in their eternal future in the merit accumulated by both Avraham and Yitzchak as protecting them against extermination by their enemies.
    We must not make the mistake of thinking that G’d tested Avraham in order to find out for Himself how Avraham would respond to this trial. It was a “test” only when viewed from the vantage point of his contemporaries who could not have known in advance how Avraham would respond to a trial which conflicted so absolutely with everything he thought he knew about what G’d wanted from man. G’d used this “test” in order to demonstrate to the people of his own time as well as to his descendants the greatness of this man’s devotion to G’d. He did not flinch for a moment nor even argue with G’d as he had done when advised of the impending judgment of the people of Sodom. We read of a general principle
    We must not make the mistake of thinking that G’d trusted Avraham in order to find out for Himself how he would respond to this “trial.” It was a test only when viewed from the vantage point of his contemporaries who could not have known in advance how Avraham would cope with a command which contradicted so absolutely everything he thought he knew about what G’d wanted from man. G’d used this “test” in order to demonstrate to the people of Avraham’s time as well as to his descendants the greatness of this man’s devotion to G’d. He did not flinch for a moment nor even argue with G’d as he had done when advised of the impending doom of the people of Sodom.
    We read of a general principle that G’d tests the righteous in Psalms 11,5 ה' צדיק יבחן, “G’d will examine (test) the righteous.”
    The reason why this paragraph follows the report about what happened to Avraham and Sarah when they were in Gerar with Avimelech has been explained in the Midrash. The word נסה is an expression similar to זעף, “to be angry, displeased.” Onkelos translates it thus in 40,6 where he explains the word זועפים as נסיסים. G’d had been displeased with the oath Avraham swore to Avimelech guaranteeing future immunity of Avimelech’s offspring from incursions by Avraham’s descendants. He should not have given the seven sheep to Avimelech. Eventually, (during the time of the High Priest Eli) the Holy Ark was captured and remained in the hands of the Philistines for seven months before the latter returned it having found that it was a source of curse for them. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 54,4).
    The incident of the binding of Yitzchak was designed to demonstrate the extent of Avraham’s reverence for G’d as well as his love for G’d. Love is something which can exist on three levels. 1) Someone loves his king and because he loves him he tells others about the king’s virtues and his accomplishments. Such a tribute to his king does not involve the one who extols the king’s virtues in any sacrifice. It does not cost him a penny to tell others complimentary things about his king. 2) Love on a higher level is someone who spends a great deal of his own money to make his king popular; however, even he draws the line at laying down his life on behalf of that king. 3) This subject not only tells the world about the greatness of his king and spends all his money advertising this fact, but he is also prepared to lay down his own life on behalf of his king. Avraham’s love for G’d, the king of Kings, included all the levels we have just described. We know from 21,33 that he publicly proclaimed the greatness of G’d. He did so because the other people of his generation attributed the order in the universe to horoscopes, etc. (Maimonides Hilchot Avodah Zara 1,2). Avraham guided people along the path of true religion and monotheism. We are told in Job 5,8 saying exactly this, i.e. ואל אלוקים אשים דברתי, “I aim my words as proving that G’d is the cause of events.” The speaker, Eliphaz, makes the point that fate is not blind but that an all-seeing G’d guides it. He does not assign your fate to the stars, leaving it all to them.
    Avraham had also demonstrated the second level of love for G’d by the manner in which he entertained guests lavishly at great cost to himself, all in order to proclaim G’d’s greatness. Our sages (Midrash Tehillim 110) illustrate this when they said that Avraham’s tent had an entrance in all four directions. Any guest who entered by one door would leave by another so as to avoid feeling embarrassed by other travelers who would see him. We find support for this in 21,33: “he planted an orchard at Be’er Sheva;” we had already explained that this referred to Avraham providing food, shelter and escort for his visitors. Not only would he welcome guests but he would actually run after them to make sure they did not pass him by; He did this even while still suffering from the after-effects of the circumcision (18,2)
    He had demonstrated the third and highest level of love for G’d when he laid down his life and preferred to be burned in Nimrod’s furnace rather than desist from preaching the greatness of his Creator. This is why G’d called him (Isaiah 41,5) אברהם אוהבי, “Avraham who loves Me.”
    In the matter of his binding Yitzchak in preparation for slaughtering him as an offering to G’d, Avraham demonstrated  his love for G’d in a manner which is quite beyond comparison to any of the three levels we have mentioned. This was a level which goes way beyond martyrdom. Had Avraham even possessed 100 bodies, it would have been appropriate that he sacrifice all of them for the sake of his son Yitzchak. What he did here bears no resemblance to anything he had ever done before. This “test” was totally different from any previous tests which Avraham had passed with flying colours. Our imagination is quite inadequate to properly grasp the enormity of what was demanded of him and how he complied.
    Avraham had longed to have a son such as Yitzchak for many decades. When Yitzchak was finally born, his love for him grew from year to year, and the certainty that such a miracle would not be repeated and that he would not have another if anything were to happen to Yitzchak must have crossed his mind many times. When he was suddenly commanded to kill Yitzchak with his own hands, we can hardly imagine how he must have felt on a journey of three days towards the unnamed site of the sacrifice, and how his reason must have assailed his feelings of reverence for G’d which alone could prompt him to go through with such an act. Avraham realised that in spite of all his love for Yitzchak, his love for G’d must take precedence in a situation where the two loves could not be reconciled. Had G’d told Avraham to slaughter Yitzchak immediately, without giving him three days during which he had to reflect on what he had been asked to do, the command would have been far easier to comply with. On the other hand, seeing that G’d gave Avraham three days to think about the enormity of what he had been asked to do made the decision to go through with it one that could not be attributed to a momentary spiritual high, to a spontaneous act, but it was an act which had been carefully considered and which reflected Avraham’s deep-seated feelings of overriding reverence for G’d. This is what the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 55,5 must have had in mind when they said: “why was Avraham to offer Yitzchak only on the third day and not on the first day of his journey? Answer: in order not to give the gentile nations an opportunity to claim that he had been emotionally disturbed, that G’d’s command had overwhelmed him so much that he went and slaughtered his son. This is why he performed this task with his own hands as a demonstration of both his love and reverence for G’d.” The element of reverence referred to has nothing to do with the fear of being punished for non-compliance, and the love demonstrated had nothing to do with any compensation he hoped to receive from G’d in return for displaying this degree of love for His Creator. Any act dictated by love which looks forward to some kind of reward be it only at the back of the person’s mind performing the deed, is not truly an act of love. There are people who drink a bitter-tasting medicine because they hope that in the end the beneficial results will compensate them for the galling experience. When G’d said to Avraham (22,12) at the end of the paragraph עתה ידעתי כי ירא אלוקים אתה, “now I know that you are indeed a G’d-fearing individual,” (and we know that G’d knew beforehand that Avraham would not flinch), this simply meant that as of that moment Avraham’s potential had been converted into an actuality. Not only had G’d had proof of Avraham’s deed, but He had observed with what alacrity and single-mindedness of purpose Avraham had applied himself to the task. 
    He could have taken with him a number of members of his household. He had taken only the two “lads” the Torah spoke of i.e. Eliezer and Ishmael (according to Targum Yonathan as well as Rashi). Even these two “lads” did not accompany him to the top of Mount Moriah (22,5) as Avraham had told them: שבו לכם פה עם החמור, “remain here with the donkey, etc.” He did not want them to come with him on “the last mile,” in order that neither of them should attempt to stay his hand at the last moment.
    22,2. קח נא את בנך את יחידך אשר אהבת את יצחק, “please take your son, your only one, the one whom you love, etc.” The Torah describes G’d’s command as particularly long-winded in order to lend extra importance to the fulfillment of this commandment. Our sages in Tanchuma Vayera 22 phrase it thus: “When G’d said: ‘take your son,’ Avraham asked: ‘which son?’ When G’d continued: ‘the one whom you ‘love,’ Avraham countered: ‘I love them both.’ Finally, G’d said: ‘Yitzchak.’”
   ולך לך, “and go for yourself, etc.” Avraham underwent ten trials of his faith. The first one commenced with the words לך לך, “go for yourself,” and the last one concluded with the introduction לך לך, “go for yourself.” Avraham scored perfect marks each time (Avot 5,3). The first trial was “leave your country;” the last one was the binding of Yitzchak.
   אל ארץ המוריה, “to the land of Moriah.” Mount Moriah is Jerusalem. G’d called the entire land around it “the land of Moriah” because Mount Moriah is situated within it. (compare Chronicles II 3,1). The reason why Jerusalem is called ”mountain,” is because Solomon refers to it by this name in Song of Songs 4,6 when he wrote: אלך לי אל הר המור, “let me proceed to the mount of myrrh, (Moriah) etc.;” cinnamon and other categories of spices used to grow there. Our sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Peah 7,3 stated that cinnamon was something consumed by the goats and the Israelites used to grow it. Onkelos translates the word as ארע פולחנא, “land of Temple service.” He appears to derive the word מוריה from מורא, “fear, reverence,” the place where in the future the Jewish people would demonstrate their reverence for G’d by serving Him there. Bereshit Rabbah 55,9 derives the word from הוראה, “instruction.” From this place G’d’s instructions would be transmitted on a permanent basis (a reference to the seat of the Jewish Supreme Court being in one of the offices of the Temple Mount)
   והעלהו שם לעולה, “and offer him there as a burnt-offering.” The letter ל in front of the word עולה is somewhat puzzling. Why did the Torah not simply write והעלהו שם עולה, and I would have known exactly what was meant? According to the plain meaning of the text the letter ל here means “instead.” The verse means: “offer him there in lieu of a burnt-offering.” The meaning of the letter ל in this word is similar to Genesis 11,3 הלבנה לאבן, “the brick would serve in lieu of stone.” If the meaning of our verse had been that G’d actually wanted Avraham to sacrifice Yitzchak as a burnt offering, how could He have countermanded His own instructions afterwards? Avraham misunderstood G’d out of his great love for Him. He thought G’d really wanted him to slaughter Yitzchak and burn his remains as a burnt-offering. Seeing that G’d had only wanted to “test” Avraham, He did not command him to actually slaughter Yitzchak. This is the mystical dimension of Jeremiah 19,5 אשר לא ציויתי ולא דברתי ולא עלתה על לבי, “which I did not command, nor ever said, nor had it ever occurred to Me.” [The prophet speaks of the abominable cult of human sacrifice. Ed. The Talmud Taanit 4, adds that the words: ”it had never occurred to Me,” refer to the actual slaughtering of Yitzchak].
    It is also possible that the wording of this commandment contains within it the mystical dimension applicable to the offering of any (animal) sacrifice. The word לעולה would be an allusion to the tenth emanation, the emanation which is the “link” from a terrestrial to a celestial dimension. The word לעולה then means: “as a means of rising to spiritually lofty dimensions.” It is remarkable that the same formulation appears again when Avraham had offered a ram in lieu of Yitzchak. The Torah writes; ויעלהו לעולה תחת בנו, “he offered it as a burnt-offering in lieu of his son.” By rights the Torah should merely have written ויעלהו עולה. We also find that when Yitzchak had inquired about the absence of the lamb for the offering, that he had said: ואיה השה לעולה “and where is the lamb for the offering?” When his father answered him he also used the word לעולה in his reply. It seems clear from the repeated use of the letter ל when there was no need for it, that we are dealing with an additional dimension of what underlies the entire episode of the עקדה, i.e. it was intended to be a preamble to ascension of the participants to a higher, loftier spiritual dimension. The Torah teaches here that the attainment of such loftier spiritual dimensions is tied to the offering of the bodies of the animals being sacrificed. We may combine the extra letter ל with the letter ה in the word המזבח in verse 9 [which was also superfluous seeing we had not previously heard about “the” altar], to make לה' “for G’d”, i.e. for a loftier spiritual dimension.” The intelligent reader will draw the correct conclusions.
    22,3. ויבקע עצי עולה, “he split the wood for the burnt-offering.” Avraham did this already at this stage as he was concerned that when he would arrive at the site he might not find suitable kindling. This demonstrated that he was so eager to carry out G’d’s command that he carried the wood with him a distance of three days’ journey.
    It is also possible that Avraham was aware of the halachic ruling that firewood for the altar which is worm-infested is unfit, and that this is the reason he took wood from his home which  he had had a chance to examine for the presence of worms. According to Bereshit Rabbah 55,8 G’d paid Avraham his reward for having troubled himself to split the firewood when He split the sea of reeds for Avraham’s descendants to walk through on their march out of Egypt. This is alluded to in the text when the Torah describes the splitting of the waters in terms of splitting wood, i.e. ויבקעו המים, ”the waters were split” (Exodus 14,21). There is an opinion expressed in the same Midrash that such an interpretation does not do justice to the event, but that both G’d and Avraham respectively each did what they could to bring about a desired result.
    22,4. וירא את המקום מרחוק, “he saw the place from a distance.” According to Tanchuma Vayera 23, at that point Avraham asked Yitzchak: “Do you see what I see?” Yitzchak answered: “I see a beautiful mountain which has a cloud attached to it.” Thereupon Avraham said to the two lads: “Do you see anything unusual?” They said: “we do not see anything unusual at  all, only deserts and a bare mountain.” Thereupon Avraham said to them: “you and the donkey stay here,” (seeing they had not noticed anything beyond what also the donkey must have seen). He added that he and Yitzchak would go somewhat further, i.e. ואני והנער נלכה עד כה. Avraham may have unwittingly chosen the expression כה (a Freudian slip) seeing that at the covenant between the pieces in Genesis 15,5 G’d had assured him כה יהיה זרעך, “so will be your descendants.” He must have wondered how this statement could be reconciled with what he was being asked to do at that time. Alternatively, he meant he would go to face the G’d who had assured him of numerous offspring at a time when he had not yet fathered even Ishmael.
    It is remarkable that the Torah describes a man of 37 years of age such as Yitzchak as נער, “lad.” When you peruse Scripture you will see that this is not as remarkable as it appears at first glance. Joshua is described as a נער at a time when he was 56 years old (Exodus 33,11).
    22,5. ונשובה אליכם “and we will return to you.” At that time Avraham intended to bring back Yitzchak’s bones (for burial) and this is why he said “we will come back.”
    22,7. ויאמר יצחק אל אברהם אביו ויאמר אבי, ויאמר הנני בני, “Yitzchak said to his father ‘my father!’ His father said: ‘I am here my son.’”  This verse contains four statements and I do not know why. In Bereshit Rabbah 56,5 the words “Yitzchak said to Avraham” are understood to mean that Samael came to Avraham and challenged him: “what kind of  father are you? Are you really going to slaughter a son who has been born to you when you were already one hundred years old?” Avraham answered “nevertheless.” Thereupon Samael addressed Yitzchak saying: “you son of a disappointed mother! He (your father) is going to slaughter you!” Yitzchak answered: “nevertheless.” This is why the Torah wrote twice: “Yitzchak said to his father.” Why do the words “my father” appear twice? In order that his father’s parental mercy be stirred; the exclamation was like that of a man who is in difficulties and, referring to himself, says: “woe to me, woe to me.”
   ויאמר הנה האש והעצים ואיה השה, “he said: ‘here are the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for the burnt-offering?’” Avraham answered him that “G’d will select the lamb for the offering,--my son.” From the way Avraham placed the colon in this verse, Yitzchak understood that he had been chosen to be the “lamb.” In spite of this realisation, the Torah continues: וילכו שניהם יחדו, “they continued to walk together”, i.e. they were of one mind. In order to make this point clear, the Torah had to repeat the sentence: “they walked together.” The release of the information that Yitzchak was going to be the victim did not drive a wedge between his relations with his father. At the time the Torah wrote these words for the first time, Yitzchak did not yet know that he was going to be the sacrifice.
    Many people asked who of the two principal characters in this drama displayed greater love and devotion vis-a-vis G’d? Was it Avraham who had to perform this commandment of slaughtering his son with his own hands, or was it Yitzchak who had to submit to being slaughtered? Some people argue that Avraham displayed greater strength seeing that it is easier to suffer something passively without resisting than to summon the emotional fortitude to kill one’s beloved son with one’s own hands. Besides, according to the general principle that שב ואל תעשה, that passive participation in a sin or in the performance of a מצוה is inferior to active participation, there can be no question that Avraham’s  part in this drama was by far the greater of the two.
    Those who argue that Yitzchak’s (“sacrifice”) was the greater of the two, point to the difference between fulfilling a command by G’d and one by one’s father. Avraham, after all, had been commanded to do what he set out to do by G’d Himself, whereas Yitzchak had to take his father’s word for it that he had been so commanded. If, nonetheless, Yitzchak did not make an issue of the matter, this demonstrates his absolute faith both in G’d and in his father. 
    Personally, I believe the argument which claims that Avraham displayed greater strength of faith is the correct one. Yitzchak, though he had not been commanded to lay down his life by G’d directly, knew that his father was an accredited prophet, and that therefore he was under an obligation to consider his father’s instructions as equivalent to G’d’s instructions. We are told in Deut.18,19 concerning the commandment to listen to the instructions of an accredited prophet: והיה האיש אשר לא ישמע אל דברי אשר ידבר בשמי אנכי אדרוש מעמו, “it shall be that the man who will not hearken to My words which he shall speak in My name, I shall exact it from him.” This is the reason that Avraham and not Yitzchak was given this commandment; G’d wanted to give Avraham the opportunity to fulfil His commandment and to demonstrate the power of his faith.
    22,9.ויבן שם אברהם את המזבח , “Avraham built the altar there.” The letter ה at the beginning of the word המזבח, shows that a specific altar was meant, i.e. the altar. According to the plain meaning of the text it means that the altar corresponded halachically to the rules governing such altars in Jewish law, i.e. that they must not be constructed from stones which had been treated with iron tools (compare Exodus 20,22).
    A Midrashic approach: (Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer 31) sees in the letter ה which is a definite article an allusion to the altar which Adam had built and on which also Cain and Hevel had offered their respective sacrifices. The site of this altar had been known to be at Mount Moriah. This was also reputed to be the altar on which Noach had offered his thanksgiving to G’d after the deluge.[The latter detail is difficult to reconcile with the distance Noach would have had to travel from Mount Ararat in North Eastern Turkey to offer his thanks to G’d. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: The meaning of the Midrash we quoted is that the original “recipient” is the final product of the “structure.” In other words, there is a causal relationship between the words ויבן, “he built,” and the word מזבח, “altar.” [I believe a good way of phrasing this may be this. As soon as G’d had completed “building” the universe with the creation of man, the time had come for man to reciprocate in some form by offering gifts to the Creator by means of the altar. Ed.] Kabbalists view this altar as one on which both terrestrial beings and celestial beings offered sacrifices. I will have more to say on the subject in my commentary on Parshat Vayikra 1,9. [The altar is viewed as a place where benevolent celestial input to the terrestrial world evokes input by terrestrial man addressed to the celestial spheres. Ed.] 
   ויערך את העצים, “and he arranged the fire-wood.” The letter ה at the beginning of the word העצים is a reference to the wood which Avraham had taken with him from home with which we are already familiar. On the other hand, the letter ה may simply teach that not all kinds of wood are acceptable as the kindling for an offering on the altar.
   ויעקד את יצחק בנו וישם אותו על המזבח, “he bound his son Yitzchak and placed him on top of the altar.” We are told in Tanchuma Vayera 23 that when Avraham was about to slaughter his son, that Yitzchak asked to be bound hand and foot in order that he should not invalidate the offering if he were to move at the moment his father would cut his throat.
   ממעל לעצים, “above the wood.” Rabbi Chanina is reported to have said that Avraham built the altar facing the throne of G’d’s glory in the heavens. He derived this from the wording here i.e. ממעל לעצים, and Isaiah 6,2 שרפים עומדים ממעל לו.
    22,10. ויקח את המאכלת, “he took the knife.” According to the Tanchuma quoted above, Yitzchak told his father: “when you tell my mother about what happened, do not tell her while she is standing on the roof or near a well so that she will not fall into the well or to the ground from shock.” When Avraham was about to slaughter Yitzchak, an angel called to him from the heaven calling out his name twice. The reason the angel had to repeat Avraham’s name was to stop him in time as Avraham was in such a hurry to complete his task and to slaughter Yitzchak. (compare Tanchuma Vayera 23) 
    He said: “do not stretch out your  hand, etc.” Avraham replied: “who are you?” The angel responded: “I am an angel of G’d.” Avraham retorted: “when I was instructed to offer Yitzchak as a sacrifice G’d told me personally. Now that He apparently wants me to desist, He would have to tell me personally.” Thereupon the Torah (verse 16) writes: “An angel called out to Avraham a second time from the heaven saying to Avraham: “I have sworn an oath by Myself says the Lord, etc.” When Avraham heard this he said “You have sworn;” “I have also sworn an oath that I will not descend from this altar until I have said to You what is on my mind. Did You not first say to me כה יהיה זרעך, ‘this is how numerous your descendants will be?’ Who did You have in mind would be the one from whom these descendants would come forth?” G’d answered “from Yitzchak.” Thereupon Avraham said This is the sort of thing I meant to answer you: ‘Yesterday You told me that my descendants will be known though Yitzchak and now You told me to offer him as a burnt-offering! I suppressed my impulse to ask You all these questions. Now, if and when my descendants will sin and they will experience difficulties, I want You to suppress Your feelings when You punish them remem- bering that I suppressed my inclination to ask You some embarrassing questions. I want You to consider as if Yitzchak’s ashes had already been piled up on this altar, as if his blood had been sprinkled on it and as a result You will forgive the transgressions of my offspring.”
    22,13. וירא והנה איל, “and he saw, and here there was a ram, etc.” This ram was one of the ten things which were created on the original sixth day of creation at dusk (according to Avot 5,6). This is why this animal was called איל instead of כבש. Normally, when the Torah refers to these types of animals in connection with their being used as sacrificial animals they are always referred to as כבש or כבשים בני שנה “one year old sheep.” The word כבש suggests that this animal (when offered as a sacrifice) is כובש, “suppresses” the sins of the Jewish people. When this animal grows to maturity it is known as איל,  when it is only a day old it is referred to as כבש, as we know from Leviticus 22,27 שור או כשב או עז כי יולד, “when an ox, a sheep or a goat is born, etc.” Another reason why this ram which was sacrificed as a burnt-offering was called איל  is the similarity of this word with the word אילת השחר, a complimentary name applied to the כנסת ישראל, “the spiritual concept represented by the Jewish people” (compare Psalms 22,1). Allegorically speaking, this ram repre- sents Israel which receives its spiritual input via שחר which protects it generation after generation due to the merit accumulated by Avraham as a result of his having bound his son. [the word describes something which precedes the light of the morning. G’d preceded everything in this world. Israel receives its spiritual and material input from such pre-historic sources. Ed.]
   אחר נאחז בסבך בקרניו, “subsequently, caught by its horns in the thicket.” The plain meaning of the text is that after the angel had told Avraham not to touch Yitzchak he saw this ram. The  word בסבך suggests that the part of the mountain on which the binding took place was full of trees and low brush, a place also known in Kings I 7,2 as יער לבנון, a type of Cedar forest. In Psalms 132,6 David said of the שכינה, G’d’s benevolent presence, מצאנוה בשדי יער, “we found it in the fields of Yaar.” This place was within the boundaries of the territory of Benjamin of whom it is said (Genesis 49,27) בנימין זאב יטרף. These words are translated by Onkelos as “G’d’s benevolent presence will reside in the territory of Benjamin, and His Holy Temple will be built there.” 
    A Midrashic (Bereshit Rabbah 56,9) approach: the words אחר נאחז בסבך בקרניו, “after Israel has become enmeshed by its sins all year round, and as a result find themselves in deep trouble, they will blow the horn of the ram, i.e. the שופר on New Year’s Day appealing to G’d to remember the binding of Yitzchak.” Another allegorical interpretation: After Israel has become “enmeshed” in sins and as a result has been exiled amongst the “thicket,” the kingdoms of Babylon, Medes, Greece and Rome, they will ultimately experience redemption. This will be heralded by the blowing of the ram’s horn as we mention in our daily עמידה prayer in the paragraph commencing with the words תקע בשופר גדול לחרותנו, “blow the great horn to announce our freedom.” This prayer is based on Zechariah 9,14 who assured us that G’d Himself will blow this Shofar. Our sages (in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer at the end of chapter 31) believe that we are dealing here with an allusion to the Shofar that G’d was going to blow during the revelation at Mount Sinai (19,16). It is written of that Shofar that its sound was very strong (Exodus 19,16) and that it was the Shofar of the ram found during the binding of Yitzchak. We are commanded to blow the Shofar on New Year’s Day. Although, halachically speaking (Rosh Hashanah 26,1), a number of horns from a number of animals are acceptable for this ceremony, the best way to fulfill the commandment is by means of a ram’s horn.
    When the sages described this Shofar which was blown on the occasion of the revelation as “the Shofar of Yitzchak,” they referred to the virtue of Yitzchak, to his outstanding characteristic. They did not mean to imply that the horn used on that occasion (some 360 years after the binding of Yitzchak) was physically the same horn as the one belonging to the ram which Avraham slaughtered. In fact, this would have been impossible as the rules of the burnt-offering include that the entire animal be burned (except its skin and hair). The horns and hooves are included in the parts which need to be burned.
    Our sages alluded to the attributes of גבורה, power, we heard from G’d’s mouth directly when He addressed the entire assembly of the Jewish people and told them the first two of the Ten Commandments, i.e. “I am the Lord, etc.,” and “you must not have any other gods, etc.” G’d revealed this attribute at that time and it  is called by our sages פחד יצחק, (compare Genesis 31,53). This attribute of G’d to which Yitzchak more than any other of our patriarchs related, is what we call upon in times of distress when we say עננו פחד יצחק, “answer us ‘attribute’ which Yitzchak related to with utmost reverence.” This is the voice of the soul which was audible at the time when the Torah was given and we allude to this voice when we blow the Shofar on New Year’s Day, the anniversary of the creation (completion) of the universe.
    You should understand that the day on which the Torah was given was the first day G’d’s kingdom had been accepted as such by the Jewish people, seeing that there cannot be a king without an army. [The Jewish people in their capacity as G’d’s people, are considered G’d’s “army.”] 
    You also need to know that the apparently strange phenomenon in this paragraph, i.e. that G’d is the one who subjects Avraham to the trial whereas the angel prevented him from going through with it, needs to be understood as follows: The “angel” mentioned in our paragraph is not of the category of the נפרדים, ”disembodied spiritual creatures,” but it belonged to what are known as the נטיעות, “the emanations of G’d.” [a divine voice much closer to G’d’s Essence than “mere” angels. Ed.] Had the angel who called out to Avraham and instructed him to desist belonged to the category known as נפרדים, Avraham would have ignored him, would not have allowed himself to be countermanded by a subordinate of the One who had instructed him in the first place. Moreover, it is quite unthinkable that an angel of the “lower” category נפרדים would have been allowed to say to Avraham ולא חשכת את בנך ממני, “and you did not withhold your son from Me.” He would have had to say: “you have not withheld your son from Him.” All of this proves that the voice which the Torah describes as emanating from an “angel of G’d,” was of a superior divine level. This “angel” is also known as the “great angel,” who manifested himself in Exodus 14,19 when the Torah describes him as traveling in front of the encampment of the Jewish people (performing all kinds of miracles). The words מלאך האלו-הים employed there by the Torah do not mean “angel of the Lord,” i.e the word מלאך is not a possessive clause, the angel being merely an attribute of G’d. The word האלו-הים in that verse must be understood as an explanation of the word מלאך. When the Torah describes this divine emanation as מלאך, the meaning is that G’d is “contained, present,” within this divine emanation. We encounter something similar in Exodus 23,21 where G’d explains to Moses that the מלאך who will be accompanying the Jewish people needs to be related to with the utmost reverence as “My Name is within him.” Apparently, the word substituted for this attribute of G’d we called פחד יצחק, an attribute which brooks no defiance of any sort. When we read in Genesis 48,16  when Yaakov blesses before his death המלאך הגואל אותי....בקרב הארץ “the angel who has rescued me, etc. etc.  is in the midst of the terrestrial world,” this is an allusion to the אדנות, the attribute of “mastery” which this “angel” represents. He has authority בקרב הארץ within the whole terrestrial universe.
    Seeing that this attribute contains also the element of mercy, “He” suddenly describes Himself as י-ה-ו-ה when He says בי נשבעתי נאום ה' “I have sworn by Myself says Hashem, i.e. the attribute of Mercy, etc.” Up until this moment the attribute mentioned in this chapter had only been the attribute אלו-קים, i.e. G’d manifesting Himself as the attribute of Justice. Whereas before the binding Avraham had spoken of אלוקים יראה לו השה, that the G’d known as elokim would select the lamb for Himself, after the episode Avraham begins to view this elokim as Hashem when he said  בהר ה' יראה, “at the mountain of the (merciful) G’d He may be seen (experienced).” At that time this attribute promises Avraham that He would bless his descendants making them numerous and bestowing powerful blessings on them. The repetition of the words ברך  אברכךand הרבה ארבה are proof that these blessings will be more numerous and more powerful than ordinary blessings. 
    Such expressions always mean that the power from which such blessings emanate contain another power within the overall attribute from which such blessings emanate. The Torah drew attention to this subordinate “power” by comparing it to the “stars of the heaven” and “the sand on the beaches of the sea.” G’d also describes the result of such powerful blessings as being that not only would Avraham’s seed be numerous, but that it would take permanent possession of the gates of its enemies. When the blessing concludes with the words עקב אשר שמעת בקולי, “as a result of your having hearkened to My voice,” it becomes plain that G’d Himself is the One bestowing this blessing.
   ויעלהו לעולה תחת בנו, “he offered it as a burnt-offering in lieu of his son.” Rashi explains the words תחת בנו, as meaning that from that time on every time Avraham would perform a sacrificial service he would commence the ceremony by saying: “may this act of service be considered as equivalent to my offering up my own son.” In other words: “may the act of slaughtering the animal be considered as if I were to slaughter my son. May the act of sprinkling its blood on the altar be considered as if I were to sprinkle the blood of my son on this altar, etc.”
    
    22,14. ה' יראה, “the Lord (attribute of Mercy) may be experienced.” He “renamed” G’d as ה' יראה, i.e. that this attribute of G’d may be manifest  for all future times. In other words: “the merit acquired by the act of binding Yitzchak will endure  throughout the generations.”
   אשר יאמר היום, “of which it is said (already) today, etc.” Even this day that I find myself on this mountain, what I have done is already reflected in G’d responding to my righteousness. Avraham prayed both for the present and for the future. This is how Nachmanides explains this verse.
    Personally, I would divide the verse into two parts. The words ה' יראה refer to the present, whereas the words אשר יאמר היום refer to the future, i.e. a future which will be influenced by the new-found insight of this day that G’d primarily relates to the Jewish people as the attribute of Mercy. This would be an allusion to the homiletical explanation I quoted already on verse ten where I quoted Avraham as engaging G’d in a dialogue where he retroactively tells G’d of the various questions concerning this whole episode which he had refrained from asking though it had not been easy for him to do so. At this point the Torah presents these words of Avraham as a form of prayer. 
    Shem had called this site שלם, (Bereshit Rabbah 56,10) whereas Avraham called the same site now יראה. G’d decided to call it ירושלים, thus combining the names given to it by both Shem and Avraham.
    According to a Midrash, Yitzchak saw the image of a lion while he lay bound on the altar. The meaning of this “lion” is to illustrate to us the concept of פחד יצחק. [His reverence or fear of the Lord was comparable to a person who faces a ferocious lion. Ordinary people do not relate to invisible sources of danger in the same way as they relate to visible and immediate dangers facing them. Ed.] It is also possible that the “lion” referred to in that Midrash is the same as that referred to in Chulin 59 where the Talmud relates that the Roman Emperor insisted on seeing the lion called the “lion of Ilai.” When he was warned that he might not like what he would see, he still insisted and finally, the roar of that lion was heard from 400 miles away and it made the towers of Rome tremble and pregnant women lose their fetuses, etc. These occurrences became even more frightening as the lion drew somewhat closer with the result that the Emperor begged to have that lion return to its lair. We may see an allusion to this in our verse where we are told: “it (G’d’s attribute) will be manifest on the mountain of the Lord.”
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 56,11 the words בהר ה' יראה refer to two visions Yitzchak experienced of the two Temples being built as well as being in ruins. They base this on the verses (Lamentations 5,18) על הר ציון ששמם, “on the mountain of Zion which is in ruins”, and on Deut. 16,16 יראה כל זכורך, “everyone of your males shall appear there” ( the site of the Temple). A third verse describing the Temple as rebuilt is found in Psalms 102,17 כי בנה ה' ציון נראה בכבודו, “for the Lord has built Zion, He has appeared in all His glory.”
    
    22,20. ויגד לאברהם לאמר הנה ילדה מלכה גם היא, “Avraham was informed that ‘here Milkah too has given birth, etc.’” Nachmanides explains that this news concerning his older brother being blessed with children which Avraham is reported to have received at this time was reported now as both Nachor and Milkah were already quite advanced in years when they were blessed with offspring. They too were beneficiaries of such a miracle in their old age. The miracle occurred due to their sister Sarah’s merit. This is why the Torah wrote the extra words גם היא, “she too,” when reporting that Milkah had born children. If all this is so, how does Nachmanides explain that Nachor’s concubine gave birth? Surely, even granting that Sarah’s merit may have sufficed for G’d to work a miracle for her sister, why would G’d trouble Himself to perform a miracle for Nachor’s concubine so that the Torah wrote the words “she gave birth also?” The Torah reports that Milkah bore eight sons. These eight sons corresponded to the eight sons born to Yaakov by his two major wives Leah and Rachel. The four sons born to his concubine corresponded to the four sons born to Yaakov by Zilpah and Bilhah. The Torah compares Nachor’s family to that of Avraham The point of informing us about all these details is to relate to us that Rivkah  who became the mother of Yaakov, the founding father of the Jewish nation, was born to a member of Avraham’s family. All of this was related to stress that members of Nachor’s family were suitable to intermarry with the descendants of Avraham. who cleaved to the Lord G’d as testified by Moses in Deut. 4,4 “and you who have cleaved to the Lord your G’d are all alive as of  this day.”
    
    
    
   ויהיו חיי שרה
    
    
   אורח חיים למעלה למשכיל למען סור משאול מטה , “for an intelligent man  the path of life is upward, so that he may turn away from heading towards hell, downwards” (Proverbs 15,24)
    In this verse Solomon informed us that an intelligent human being is aware that terrestrial life, by definition, is headed for destruction, for disintegration. He is aware that the true life is to be found only in the “upper regions,” in the celestial spheres, in an environment which is eternal. As a result of such knowledge the intelligent man removes himself from the attractions of the terrestrial world, performs such tasks as are necessary only because they preserve his health and life without making them an objective in themselves. He does so in order to escape the prospect of שאול מטה, “hell and eternal damnation.” 
    Let me explain this by means of a parable. A person lives in a certain city, aware that his dwelling is only a temporary one. He craves to move to another town where he may be able to secure for himself a permanent residence. While such a person has hope to secure a permanent residence in another city he is certainly not going to make investments in fields, buildings, and other properties which he cannot transfer to the city which he hopes to move to. He will limit his investments and efforts in the city in which he dwells presently to a minimum, conserving his strength to acquire things useful to him when he does make the move.
    The intelligent person is aware that the עולם הבא, the hereafter, is the only permanent residence; he will therefore prepare himself in this life for his hereafter so that when he arrives there he will find that a suitable residence has been prepared for him. Having this in mind, Solomon began his book Kohelet with the words הבל הבלים, “vanity of vanities,” whereas he concluded it (Kohelet 12,13) by exhorting his listeners to practice יראת השם, reverence for G’d.
    Another way of understanding the verse we have quoted from Proverbs is this: אורח חיים למעלה למשכיל, Solomon is addressing the intelligent person saying to him: ”you, intelligent person that you are, should know that there is a path of life which leads upwards. In order to secure this path of life for yourself you have to abandon the path that leads to hell, downwards.” In other words, you have to abandon your cravings for all kinds of physical pleasures and indulgences as otherwise these physical pleasures will drag you down to hell. According to this interpretation, the word סור is a command, not an infinitive. The whole verse then has to be understood as a warning and commandment to the intelligent human being that if he is really interested in something enduring, something of infinite duration, he must abandon his preoccupation with transient values. The worst danger is to be preoccupied with physical pleasures. 
    As to the meaning of the word אורח instead of the normal דרך which we would have expected to describe a “path,” the reason for that choice of word is that it suggests something  temporary, i.e. a “visitor.” Any human being who lives on earth is nothing but a visitor, a transient (compare Jeremiah 14,8 “why should you be like a stranger on earth, like a guest in need of lodging”). Just as a guest who enters a tavern knowing that he will continue his journey on the following day and that therefore he will stay only for a brief period at that tavern, all the while longs for his proper home, so the intelligent person on earth is aware that there is a life beyond this earth where he will experience proper life. The reason the נפש, “physical life-force,” is known as חיה, is that it operates (lives) only within the domain known as טבע, nature.
    Philosophers/researchers have said  that this נפש which lives as part of nature dies due to a quirk of fate. Such “quirks” of fate are triggered through sins. The body lives only through being inhabited by such a נפש. The reason that the mortal body ever lived was only because it was connected to this disembodied life-force we call נפש. Separation of this נפש from the body is equivalent to death of the body. It is also known that the death of the body causes the “life” of the נפש, i.e. releases it from imprisonment in a body. This is why Solomon said (Kohelet 7,1) “better the day of death than the day of birth.” He praised the day of death when compared to the day of one’s birth on two counts. On the one hand, dying in this life means transferring to the hereafter. Once the נפש has arrived in that region, it can no longer accumulate merits which will help its stature in the eternal world. Therefore, seeing that death of the body implies birth of one’s afterlife, such a “birthday” spells finis to any moral/ethical achievements of the נפש. At the same time, death of the body puts an end to the trials and disappointments which are an inevitable part of life on earth; achieving freedom from such troubles is preferable to being born to them. Hence, from that angle too the day of death has much to be said for it. Only when a person dies do his achievements during his life on earth become visible, appreciated and irreversible. As long as he is alive we can never be sure that he will not undo any good he may have done previously. Our sages have illustrated this concept in connection with the blessing provided for mankind during the lifetime of Sarah (compare Rashi on 24,67). We are told there that as long as she was alive there was a light burning in her tent which burned from one Friday to the next. Her dough was always blessed and a cloud was seen to hover over her tent. When Sarah died these phenomena disappeared. Only then did her merit become public knowledge, i.e. only then did it become clear that these blessings had been due to her all the time. Moreover, she died on holy soil [the first of the patriarchs or matriarchs of whom death and burial in Eretz Yisrael is reported. Ed.] and was buried in the holy soil of Eretz Yisrael after she had lived a long life.
    The Torah writes: “Sarah lived for 127 years, these were the years of the lives of Sarah.” The Torah continues: “Sarah died in Kiryat Arba which is Chevron in the land of Canaan.” This whole passage should have appeared immediately after the Torah concluded its narrative about the binding of Yitzchak seeing that according to Bereshit Rabbah 58,5 the immediate cause of her death were the rumours that her son Yitzchak had been slaughtered. We know that the order in which the various passages of the Torah have been arranged are not accidental, nor are they necessarily chronological. The sequence in which the Torah relates matters to us is of crucial significance to our proper understanding of the message the Torah wishes to teach us.
	On occasion, the very order in which the Torah relates matters reveals such important truths as that the existence of G’d preceded the universe, or some secrets about the composition of the creatures G’d has created as in this paragraph, or, the Torah takes us into its confidence concerning laws of nature by the wording and the positioning of certain passages such as the first part of Parshat Tazria, where the secrets of who will be born male and who female appear next to the paragraph dealing with certain skin diseases caused by meta-physical rather than natural considerations. The reason why the Torah interrupted its report about the repercussions of the binding of Yitzchak also including the death of his mother Sarah was in order to bring us up to-date on Nachor’s family, seeing that Yitzchak was going to replace his mother with his future wife Rivkah who had been born now so that there would be continuity in Yitzchak’s life and he would continue to experience the blessings he had enjoyed while his mother had been alive. 
    According to a Midrash cited by Rashi the report of Sarah’s death follows immediately upon the report of Rivkah’s birth to inform us that Sarah and Rivkah were viewed as if the younger one was merely the embodiment of the virtues of the senior one, i.e. as if Sarah and Rivkah were virtually one. Had Rivkah’s birth preceded the death of Sarah this would have been impossible; as it were, Sarah had to die first so that her soul could resurface in the body of Rivkah. The word אמו in 24,67 is unnecessary as we all know that Sarah had been Yitzchak’s mother. The reason the Torah wrote this word was to hint that her soul had been reincarnated in the body of Rivkah. When the Midrash stated that as soon as Rivkah moved into the tent of her mother-in-law, the light started burning again and the various phenomena which had been commonplace during Sarah’s lifetime began to manifest themselves anew, this is proof of the metaphysical continuity between Sarah and Rivkah.
    
    23,1. מאה שנה ועשרים שנה ושבע שנים, “one hundred and twenty-seven years.” Ordinarily, the Torah should have written מאה ועשרים ושבע שנים. Still, it is quite acceptable to write the word “year” or “years” after every unit of years. There are three good reasons to separate these different parts of a person’s life by inserting the word “year,” or “years” between each group. 1) It is appropriate to separate a century from a decade and a decade from individual years lived. We find such patterns when the Torah describes the lifetime of Avraham as well as when it describes the lifetime of Ishmael.
    The unusual way about describing Sarah’s lifetime is only the repetition of the words שני חיי שרה, “the years of the lives of Sarah.” From these words our sages derive the message that all her years were lived in the same state of piety, etc.
    A Midrashic approach (Bereshit Rabbah 58,1) to these words: “at 100 she was as free from sin as at 20; at 20 years of age she was as beautiful as at seven years of age.” The meaning of these words is that just as a girl’s looks are apt to improve after she has reached the age of seven, Sarah’s looks kept improving even after she had reached the age of twenty (which is usually the time when physical beauty is at its best). Man’s life is divided into three periods. 1) youth, i.e. the period when one grows towards maturity. 2) maturity; roughly the period between 20-30 before one’s physique begins to decline. 3) old age, a period when decline becomes visible.
    Another Midrashic approach: The verse may be divided into the sections ויהיו חיי שרה, that the numerical value of the life of Sarah was equivalent to the numerical value of the word ויהיו, i.e. 37. These were the 37 years during which she was able to practice motherhood, having given birth to Yitzchak when she was 90 years old. The second part of the verse which mentions the number 127 records the number of years she lived not from her point of view but from an historian’s point of view.
    We find something similar when the Torah reports the years of Yaakov’s life in Genesis 47,28. The numerical value of the word ויחי is 34, i.e. a combination of the 17 years Yaakov enjoyed Joseph’s company after he had been born and the last 17 years of Yaakov’s life when he again enjoyed Joseph’s company. These 34 years were the only truly happy ones he experienced.
    Another way of looking at the words ויהיו חיי שרה is that they refer to the hereafter. This would reflect the fact that the Torah reported her death immediately after she had heard that Yitzchak’s soul had “flown” to heaven as a result of his having been offered to G’d as a sacrifice. The form ויהיו would hint that both her soul and that of Yitzchak departed from earth at the same time to take up permanent residence in the celestial regions. The word ויהי or ויהיו basically means that something exists permanently. The word שני, “years of,” is deliberately omitted at that point as the very word “year” implies something of limited duration. The same word does, however, appear at the end of our verse, as at that point the Torah underlines another aspect of the message it tries to convey. At that point the Torah speaks about Sarah’s life on earth. Naturally, in that context the words “years of” are very relevant.
    
    23,2. ותמת שרה בקרית ארבע, “Sarah died there at Kiryat Arba, etc.” The main thrust of the verse is to alert us to the fact that this righteous woman died and was buried in Eretz Yisrael. The Torah emphasises that the place called קרית ארבע at that time was renamed חברון afterwards in order that no one should forget that we speak about a town inside Eretz Yisrael. At the conclusion of Sarah’s burial in verse 19, the Torah repeats once more that the cave of Machpelah where she is buried is situated היא חברון בארץ כנען, “at Chevron in the land of Canaan.” The Torah teaches that it was a great privilege to be buried in the same burial ground reserved for such outstanding individuals as Adam, Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, a place which would later on (28,17) be called “the gateway to heaven.” [The author apparently views the site where Yaakov had the dream as being Chevron rather than Mount Moriah. Ed.]
    The reason the town was called קרית ארבע, “the city of Four,” is because four pairs of outstanding human beings were buried in the cave of Machpelah there. They are: Adam and Chavah, Avraham and Sarah, Yitzchak and Rivkah, and Yaakov and Leah. The mystical dimension of the name חברון is that the soul of everyone buried in that cave joins (מתחבר) the celestial city of G’d, i.e. the four encampments of the שכינה. Our patriarchs would not have made great efforts to be buried there had they not been aware of a profound spiritual dimension involved. They knew that transfer to the עולם האמת from that site would be a crucial experience for them. It is the place from which the souls return to their origin, the throne of G’d’s’ glory. 
    
   ויבא אברהם לספוד לשרה ולב-כ-ותה, “Avraham came to eulogise Sarah and to weep for her.” If it had been the intention of the Torah to inform us that Avraham came from elsewhere, i.e. from another town, the Torah would have written: “he came from such and such a place.” The meaning of the word ויבא is simply that Avraham roused himself (from his shock) in order to eulogise Sarah. When a person rouses himself to undertake a certain activity, this is described as בא אליה, “coming to it, i.e. coming to grips with the planned activity.” The Talmud in Tamid 4,3 when discussing the skinning and cutting up of of animals which had been slaughtered in preparation for being offered on the altar, uses the expression בא לו לגרה והניח שתי צלעות, בא לו לעוקץ וגו', “when the officiating priest got ready to deposit two ribs near the neck, etc.” The expression בא לו cannot mean “that he came to a certain location,” as a single animal is discussed. All parts were in the same place. It must refer to something different. In Bechorot 20 we encounter Rabbi Akiva saying: לא באתי למדה זו, and it certainly cannot mean “I have not come to this measure,” or something similar. It is clear that the meaning of the word is: “I have not (yet) begun to work on this subject,” or something similar. In our verse too, the Torah describes that now Avraham would attend to the task of eulogising his wife. Had the meaning been that Avraham came from afar, the Torah would have written ויבא אברהם ויספוד את שרה, “Avraham came and eulogised Sarah.”
    The two words לספוד לשרה i.e. mentioning her name which was well known to all those present, need clarification. We would have expected simply לספדה ולבכותה, “to eulogise her and to weep for her.” The reason the Torah did not write this abbreviated version is that it is the custom of the professional eulogisers to again and again mention the name of the departed whom they eulogise. We find that when David eulogised King Shaul and his own intimate friend Yonathan, that he spoke of שאול ויהונתן הנאהבים והנעימים,  “Shaul and Yonathan the beloved and the cherished ones.” Seeing that in the same chapter (Samuel II 1,18) David already had mentioned both Shaul and Yonathan by name, he could have now referred to them by the pronoun “they.” Nonetheless, during the course of that eulogy David mentions both Shaul and Yonathan by name no fewer than six times. 
    In our verse, all the Torah had to write was that Avraham set out to “weep for her, and to bury her.” After all, burial is the principal act of true kindness one performs for one’s dead  and concludes the acts of eulogising and  weeping. Burying a human being is one of the great acts of kindness which G’d Himself performs on occasion. Had the Torah written the sequence of the words we mentioned, the impression this would have created amongst the readers  would be that all these activities occurred one immediately after the other. The truth is that whereas eulogising and weeping occurred consecutively, there was quite an interval before Sarah was finally laid to rest. Avraham first had to secure a plot of land in which to bury Sarah.
    I believe further that if Avraham and Yitzchak came from out of town in order to eulogise Sarah, etc, then the Torah should have written that “Avraham and Yitzchak came to eulogise, etc.” Yitzchak most certainly should also have eulogised his mother and wept for her. In fact, his duty to do so would have been even greater than Avraham’s seeing that he was her flesh and blood. In addition, the love Sarah must have lavished on Yitzchak whom she bore after waiting for him for 90 years must certainly have evoked reciprocal feelings in Yitzchak so that he would have eulogised her. Perhaps, at this point in the story Yitzchak had not heard yet that his mother had died. Seeing that Sarah’s death had been attributed to the binding of Yitzchak, people might have tried to withhold the information from him as long as possible. This is most likely the reason why we do not hear a single word about Yitzchak in the whole paragraph, neither during the eulogy and weeping nor even during the burial ceremony. In fact, we have not heard a word about Yitzchak ever since he took part in the binding on the altar. Although Avraham had told the lads that both he and Yitzchak would return to them from the mountain, the Torah did not report that this happened. All we were told is that “Avraham returned to his lads” (22,19). We would have expected the Torah to write that “Avraham and Yitzchak returned to the lads.” Possibly, Yitzchak had decided to remain for some time on Mount Moriah until he became forty years of age when he married Rivkah. At that point the Torah does mention that Yitzchak had come fromבאר לחי רואי,  “from the well of the Living One who Sees,” the well at which Hagar’s prayers had once been answered. According to Bereshit Rabbah 58,5 the words “Avraham came,” mean that he came from Mount Moriah, that Sarah heard about what had transpired there, as a result of which her soul departed from her. This is the reason why this paragraph follows the one of the binding of Yitzchak.
    
    23,3. ויקם אברהם מעל פני מתו...וידבר אל בני חת, “Avraham rose up from the presence of his dead and he spoke to the Hittites, etc.” The local inhabitants were members of the tribe of the Hittites. The Torah had reported in Genesis 10,15 that Chet (Heth) was one of the sons of Canaan. All of the tribes residing in the land described as the “land of Canaan,” were sons of Canaan, the grandson of Noach.
    The Torah taught us something concerning good manners, namely, that if one addresses an assembly of people one needs to be standing upright rather than sitting down. The Torah repeats the formula ויקם אברהם, “Avraham rose, etc.” again in verses 7-8. It appears to have been an established custom that when an individual addressed a community that the individual first rose in order to do so. When he concluded whatever he had to say, he would resume his seat. When Avraham referred to himself as a resident stranger (verse four), he did so while standing up. In verse five he  apparently already resumed his seat. Had he not done so, why would verse 7 again mention that Avraham rose, etc.? Whenever Avraham wanted to say something in front of the people assembled at “the gate of the city,” he rose from his seat first.
    As to the unusual masculine construction in the words מעל פני מתו instead of מתה seeing that Sarah had been a female, the reason for this is that the word גוף, body, is masculine. Now that Sarah had died, she was only a body. The soul of a person does not die. Hence, the word מתו is absolutely appropriate here.
    
    23,4. תנו לי אחוזת קבר עמכם, “let me have possession of a burial ground amongst you, etc.” It was the custom for every family to have its own field as a burial ground for its members, whereas they had set aside a special plot of land on which to bury aliens. This is what prompted Avraham to use the preamble: גר ותושב אנכי עמכם, “on the one hand I am an alien, seeing that I have come here from a distant land, and this is why I do not own a burial plot of my own. On the other hand, I have been very willing to become a resident amongst you, etc.”
    They answered him: “Listen to us, my lord etc.” On the one hand they addressed him as a group, saying: “listen to us.”  On the other hand, they continued with the singular “my lord.” The reason for this was that a single individual was conducting this conversation though he spoke in the name of a multitude. When this individual, i.e. the spokesman, continued by saying: “you are a prince in our midst, choose from the choicest of our burial grounds, etc.,” adding the compliment: “you are a prince of G’d,” he spoke in the name of the people who had made him their spokesman.
    The term גר, “stranger, alien,” is demeaning, whereas the expression נשיא אלוהים אתה בתוכנו, “you are a prince of G’d amongst us,” is a compliment, contrasting Avraham’s stature amongst them with that of a stranger. They suggested that they themselves as well as their land was at Avraham’s disposal. (compare Genesis 47,19 where loss of land is equated with the status of subservience). As a result of their considering Avraham as royalty, he had the right to choose whatever piece of land he desired as his burial ground. Nobody would deny him even land he had previously reserved for his own eventual interment. When Avraham heard this, he immediately responded with the words: “if indeed you wish me to bury my dead, etc.” He meant that he had no intention of burying his dead in any unknown  field; rather, he had a particular spot in mind for which they needed to speak to Efron son of Tzochar, the owner of that particular piece of property. This is Nachmanides’ version of what transpired here.
    
    23,9.ויתן לי את מערת המכפלה,  “so that he may give me the cave Machpelah which adjoins his field.” The reason it was called מכפלה is related to the expression כפל, “double.” Apparently G’d had “doubled” the height of the cave in order to bury Adam’s remains inside it. The local residents had been unaware of this. Efron himself was also unaware of any special significance of the cave in spite of its name. He had had no reason to suspect who, if anybody, had previously been buried inside that cave. [seeing that this had occurred before the deluge, how could anybody have been aware, unless Noach had found the land of Israel intact after the deluge. Ed.] 
    When Avraham repeatedly spoke about Efron “giving” him the cave, he did not mean that he was unwilling to pay for it. He meant that he would consider transfer of the title to that cave to him as a gift, regardless of any commercial transaction they would conclude concerning it. In order not to be misunderstood, Avraham added the words (verse nine)  בכסף מלא יתננה לי, “in return for full monetary compensation he shall give it to me.”  Avraham neither asked for a gift, nor even for the field (which would have meant a loss to Efron, [seeing he could no longer till it. Ed.] All he asked for was the cave at the edge of Efron’s field.
    Efron’s answer was couched in ethical/moral terms. “I have donated the field to you as well as the cave which is situated on it; it would not be fitting for someone of your stature to own merely the cave and not the field of which it is part.” He continued: “this is why I have given you the whole package as a gift, field as well as cave.” When Efron used the expression “I have given,” he meant “it is equivalent to a gift.” Avraham took him up on this expression and that is why he said: “I have given the money for the field, take it from me,” although Efron had not even named his price yet (verse thirteen). The entire transaction was intended to create the impression that Avraham had received a tremendous bargain by being allowed to pay an outrageous price. 
    
    23,15. ארץ ארבע מאות שקל כסף, “a piece of land worth four hundred silver shekel,” etc. This is the meaning of the words according to Onkelos.
    Another meaning of these words could be that Efron suggested that either he or his ancestors had paid this sum of money for this piece of land. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 58,7 took the view that the piece of land in question was not worth anywhere near the price Efron was charging Avraham. This is why his name is suddenly (verse sixteen) spelled without the letter ו, to show that instead of becoming rich by overcharging Avraham, Efron became impoverished as a result of his greed.
    On the words ביני ובינך מה היא, “what is such a paltry sum between me and you,” the Midrash (Baba Metzia 86) says that the righteous promise little and perform in excess of what they promise. An example is Avraham who promised to serve his guests only a piece of bread, whereas he prepared a sumptuous feast (Genesis 18,8), instructing Sarah to bake cakes from the finest flour, while he himself ran to the stables to prepare the best calves for the meal. The wicked, on the other hand, promise a lot and do not keep any of it, such as Efron who kept speaking about what he was going “to give” to Avraham whereas when it came to the conclusion of the transaction he overcharged him. The Torah testified that Avraham paid him in hard cash, the price being exorbitant. As proof of the miserly and avaricious attitude of Efron the sages in the Talmud draw our attention to the numerical value of the name עפרון which the Torah abbreviated to עפרן when it became clear that he did not give Avraham anything. The remaining letters in his name amount to 400, the same as the numerical value of the letters in the expression רע עין, grudging, envious.
    Avraham did not want to accept any gifts from him but to pay full value, בכסף מלא, as is the custom of righteous people. We find that King David (Samuel II chapter 24) also did not want to accept any gifts and paid handsomely for the threshing ground of Arnoyeh the Jebusite, although offered the site plus animals to serve as sacrifices as well the animals’ yokes to serve as fire-wood. David paid 50 shekels for the threshing ground plus the animals and their yokes as he did not want to appear cheap in the eyes of G’d (Samuel II 24,24).
    
    23,20.ויקם השדה והמערה אשר בו , “and the field and the cave  which is in it ‘rose.’” The Torah appears to repeat itself as we had been told already in verses 17-18  that the field and the cave passed from the possession of Efron to that of Avraham and the Torah specified its precise location. However, verses 17-18 speak about what happened to the field and the cave before Sarah was buried in there. At that time the property passed to the hands of Avraham only as a מקנה, a “purchase.” Now that Sarah had been buried in the cave of Machpelah the Torah speaks of it becoming an אחוזה, an inalienable piece of property. By burying Sarah in that cave Avraham had performed an act of permanent acquisition. The reason the Torah again stresses מאת בני חת, as if the sellers had been a whole group of people instead of merely Efron is of crucial importance. The Torah wants to forestall anyone ever raising any objection against this sale. This is why the Torah repeats the story of the acquisition of this piece of property again at the end of the Book of Genesis (49,32) prior to Yaakov being buried there. The Torah speaks about this transaction no fewer than eight times in this portion, and twice more at a later date, making a total of ten references to what should be viewed as a simple transaction. [Anyone living in our own times realises that all this was not enough to safeguard our claim to make it universally recognised. Ed.] Our prescient sages in Bereshit Rabbah 58,8 have already foreseen such spurious counterclaims when they wrote: “how much ink has been spilled, how many styluses have been broken merely in order to write the words בני חת, ‘the Hittites.’” Ten times did the Torah repeat its reference to the Hittites. The Torah did so in order that anyone who acknowledges our title to the cave of Machpelah be considered as if he had observed the Ten Commandments.” We find similarly excessive sounding verbiage in Chronicles I chapter 21 where David’s purchase of the threshing ground of Arnon the Jebusite is described by Ezra Hasofer. The word  Arnon appears no fewer than ten times in that report!
    One of the moral lessons to be derived from our chapter is that even if man may conquer the whole of the inhabited part of the earth during his lifetime, in the end, when it is time to be buried, all he will own are the four cubits where he has been laid to rest. Avraham had been given the entire earth as a gift from G’d and what he had acquired by paying for it was only the cave of Machpelah in the “city of four, i.e. in Chevron.” Even though the Israelites conquered the whole of the land of Canaan by the sword, we find that three locations in that country are distinguished especially. This was so because they had not been acquired by force of arms but by legal tender, the previous owners having willingly forfeited their claim to these properties. They are Chevron, Mount Gerizim and Mout Eyval, and Mount Moriah. The Torah has documented our claim to Chevron in this portion. Mount Gerizim and Mount Eyval were the mountains where G’d concluded a covenant with the Jewish people (the generation which had not been of age or had not been born at the time of the Exodus). This area had already been bought by Yaakov when the Torah reported in Genesis 33,19: “Yaakov bought the piece of land, etc.” Mount Moriah’s purchase has been documented in Chronicles I chapter 21,
    
    24,1. ואברהם זקן בא בימים, “Avraham was old, getting on in years, etc.” The meaning of the verse is 1) seeing Avraham felt that he had aged he was afraid that he might die before Yitzchak had married. He did not want to send off his servant without an oath in the event he would not return from his mission before he, Avraham, had died. By making Eliezer swear he assured himself that Yitzchak would do what he wanted as Yitzchak was in the habit of listening to Eliezer’s advice.
    The reason Avraham did not impose an oath on Yitzchak instead was so that the servant would not be able to fool Yitzchak by presenting any number of arguments seeing hat he was not under oath to Avraham. Avraham considered the Canaanite as captive to deceitful practices as we know from Hoseah 12,8: כנען בידו מאזני מרמה לעשוק אהב, “A Canaanite uses false weights, loves to overreach.” He made the servant swear to reinforce Eliezer’s obligation in the matter.
    Tanchuma Chayey Sarah 2 claims that  there are four possible causes why premature old age suddenly settles on a person. 1) because he lives in fear of something; 2) because he is angry at his children; 3) because he is married to an evil person; 4) because of being involved in waging wars. The respective verses from Scripture quoted by that Midrash to support its claim are 1) Chronicles 1 21,30 “and David was unable to go to it to worship the Lord because he was terrified by the sword of the angel of the Lord.” We also have a verse in Kings I, 1,1 “and King David was old, advanced in years.” As to the anger caused to a person by his children aging him, we read in Samuel I 2,22: now Eli was very old. When he heard all that his sons were doing to all Israel, etc.” We have proof that being engaged in constant warfare ages a person from Joshua 13,1: “Joshua was old, advanced in years.” Concerning a husband’s aging prematurely due to being married to bad women, we find a verse in Kings I 11,4 “it was when Solomon grew old because his wives had turned his heart, etc.” On the other hand, we know that Avraham’s wife had always honoured him and not caused him any grief, for even when she referred to him as old (Genesis 18,12), she still called him אדוני, “my lord.”
  וה' ברך את אברהם בכל, “and G’d had blessed Avraham with everything.” The plain meaning of the word בכל is Avraham was blessed in every undertaking; he had all types of properties, enjoyed honour both locally and amongst distant countries. He enjoyed old age. He had not been denied any of the things the average person hopes for. The only thing he had not yet achieved was to be blessed with grandchildren. Seeing that he was anxious to become a grandfather, Avraham made his servant take an oath that he would secure a suitable wife for Yitzchak.
  A Midrashic approach (Baba Batra 16): Concerning the words וה' ברך את אברהם בכל, Rabbi Meir said that seeing Avraham did not have a daughter, this was a blessing. Rabbi Yehudah said that Avraham did have a daughter. A third (anonymous) view quoted in the Talmud is that  the name of that daughter was בכל, hence this was part of the blessings the Torah speaks about Avraham enjoying.  Rabbi Meir meant that if Avraham had had a daughter he would have faced the difficulty of finding a husband for her. He most certainly would not have chosen a son-in-law from amongst the local Canaanites, and even if such a daughter would have married someone in Charan, the people there were also idolaters and a woman who is subservient to her husband would have had an untenable position if she had been loyal to her father Avraham’s teachings in the home of her pagan husband. Rabbi Yehudah simply felt that one cannot describe someone as enjoying “all of G’d’s blessings,” unless such a person had also been blessed with having a daughter. The unnamed scholars who claim that Avraham’s daughter was called בכל, revealed a profound mystical dimension to us. When they said that Avraham’s daughter was called בכל, they did not refer to a biological daughter. They referred to a spiritual dimension called בת, “daughter.” Their statement is of a kabbalistic nature [elaborated on by Nachmanides in his commentary on this verse]. They meant that Avraham achieved a virtue known as כל. Anyone who attains this virtue will find himself blessed both on earth and in heaven. This is why these sages said that Avraham was blessed בכל, i.e. “with“ the virtue known as kol. The reason why these sages called this virtue “bat,” is that the greatest (hollow) measure known in the Bible (Kings I 7,26)  was the so-called ים של שלמה, the copper basin in front of the Temple from which the priests washed their hands and feet. This basin had a capacity of 2000 bat [equal to 225 times the minimum size of a ritual bath. Ed]. The reason these sages used this measure as their terms of reference when alluding to Avraham’s achievement in the spiritual spheres is that the bat is a sub-category of the virtue (מדה) known as כל. Being a sub-category the name בת, “daughter” is appropriate (just as a subsidiary commercial company is called חברת בת in Hebrew; i.e. “daughter-company.”) In kabbalistic parlance this “virtue,” or “emanation,” is known as the “celestial tribunal of G’d.” This is the reason our verse did not commence with the customary ויברך ה' את אברהם, first describing the actvity, i.e. ויברך, but it first described who carried out the activity, i.e. השם. It is important to appreciate this rule, as it is one of the mystical dimensions of understanding a Torah text. 
  
  24,2. שים נא ידך תחת ירכי, “please place your hand under my thigh, etc.” The plain meaning of the text is hat Avraham demanded two separate matters from Eliezer. 1) that he should make a covenant with him to serve him as a servant serves a master; i.e. to pay homage to Avraham. 2) an oath sworn by Almighty G’d, the G’d of both heaven and earth .
  Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra also explains the request of Avraham for Eliezer to place his hand under his thigh in a similar fashion. He writes that it was customary in those days to place one’s hand beneath the thigh of one’s master while the master was seated, so that in effect the master “sat” on the hand of his servant at the time he made him take an oath. According to Ibn Ezra this custom continued in his time in India.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bereshit Rabbah 59,8 cited by Rashi: The words: “place your hand under my thigh so that I can make you swear an oath,” are all a single request [not as we said previously that there were two requests here.] Avraham made Eliezer swear by placing his hand on the place where he had been circumcised, i.e. where he wore the sign of his covenant with the G’d of heaven and earth. This had been a commandment which Avraham had revealed to the world. The reason the Torah mentions that G’d is the G’d of the heaven is to remind us that the entire Torah is an elongated name of G’d. As a result of this truth, any single commandment in the Torah may be viewed as a “portion” of the name of G’d. When G’d endows us with one of His commandments it is as if He endows us with a part of His elongated name.
   ואלוקי הארץ, “and the Lord of the earth.” Do not be surprised if Avraham spoke about “the G’d of the earth,” seeing that he made Eliezer swear in the land of Canaan, a place where G’d most certainly had not yet been recognised as such. It is customary throughout the Bible to relate the term G’d to a certain country as most nations had “national gods,” deities which supposedly had the interests of the inhabitants of that country at heart. This is why we have such expressions as “the God of Israel,” (Exodus 5,1 and many others), “the G’d of Jerusalem,”  (Chronicles II 32,19). The name of our G’d is never associated with other nations or their countries. The reason is that the Holy Land is G’d’s special “inheritance;” when Avraham referred to אלוקי הארץ, he referred to G’d as the especial Patron of the Holy Land, the very land in which he resided. If Avraham had found himself in Egypt at that moment, he would not have referred to G’d at that time as אלוקי הארץ, “the G’d of the land. This is why he added a little while later (verse six) “the G’d of heaven who has taken me out from my father’s house, etc.” Whereas Avraham lists a number of places G’d has taken him away from, he never once refers to G’d as being the G’d of any of these places. The reason was that he did not want the G’d in heaven to be associated in Eliezer’s mind with any country other than the Holy Land.
    This may help explain the famous statement in Ketuvot 110 that anyone who resides outside the Holy Land is as if he did not have any god at all. They quote as proof Samuel I 26,19 “For they have driven me out today (David speaking), so that I cannot have a share in the Lord’s possession, but am told: ‘go and worship other gods!’” The meaning of the word “as if” in the statement we quoted from Ketuvot is: “such a person is as if he did not belong to the special people who enjoy the protection of the only true G’d, the G’d who is the Lord of the whole universe.” Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra explains the word הארץ to mean that all marriages on earth are the result of divine input. This is what is meant by the Talmud in Sotah 2 that 40 days before the gestation of the fetus a heavenly voice decrees: “the daughter of so-and-so will be married to so-and-so.” These predictions apply even if the parties involved live on opposite sides of the ocean.
    
    24,3. אשר לא תקח אשה לבני מבנות הכנעני, “that you will not take a wife for my son from amongst the daughters of the Canaanite, etc.” He warned Eliezer not to take a wife from a nation which was cursed. When a woman is predestined for
destruction, she is apt to drag her husband in the same general direction. This is precisely what the mother of all human beings did (compare Genesis 3, 20). You are aware that this is what happened to Solomon who married a number of alien women (Kings I 11,1). The prophet testifies there that it was these women who turned his heart from being completely loyal to G’d. This is the reason that it has become the custom of the Jewish people to read this portion (in the presence of the assembled guests)  to a bridegroom on the day when he gets married to remind all the people to be very circumspect in their choice of life-partners. (There is a section on this custom in Zunz: “Ritus” page 15). The Avudraham at the end of ברכת נשואין brings the custom as “on the Sabbath of the seven days of the Chuppah one reads this section before the bridegroom, etc.” (apparently in the Synagogue during the regular morning service). The groom is reminded no to marry a woman because of her physical beauty, as Solomon has said in Proverbs 31,30 ,שקר החן והבל היופי, “grace is deceptive, and beauty is vain.“ He should also not marry a woman because she is wealthy, as money is apt to develop wings and to fly off just like an eagle (compare Proverbs 23,5). The groom should also not marry a woman because she is a member of a powerful, and influential family and he hopes to  become powerful and influential himself due to his wife’s connections. If these are a groom’s considerations in the choice of his wife he will be punished and will likely fail on all three counts. The guiding considerations when choosing a wife have to be reverence for G’d, choosing a family which enjoys a good reputation. Seeing that in the majority of cases the daughter‘s character is similar to that of her brothers, one may form some idea about a girl by observing the way her older brothers conduct themselves. (compare Baba Batra 110). 
	Our portion also teaches that it is appropriate to select a bride from amongst one’s family, as did Avraham (compare verse 4) for his son Yitzchak, and as did Amram who married Yocheved (an aunt, Exodus 2,1 something that the Torah forbade later on). Whenever people marry someone to whom they already have a natural affinity, such as members of their own family (excluding incest, of course), the likelihood of harmonious relations not only between husband and wife but between the mutual members of the respective families is enhanced.
	If someone marries a wife from a lower social strata, there is a chance that he will feel superior to her and this will lead to bad blood and resentment on his wife’s part. The result will be an ongoing friction. Our sages in Pessachim 49, have described families  who are cleaving to one another because they are all part of the same social strata as ענבי הגפן בענבי הגפן דבר נאה ומתקבל, “grapevines joining grapevines are something beautiful and acceptable.” The author continues in this vein, concluding with the quotation from Psalms 125,4 הטיבה ה’ לטובים ולישרים בלבותם, “Do good, O Lord to the good, to the upright in their heart.” The psalmist  implores G’d to grant His blessing to people whose motivations in their choice of wife are guided by the principles we have just outlined. The psalm goes on by predicting that those who are guided by base motivations will join the path of the evildoers. When such clear lines of distinction are drawn between  people who are sincere in their motivations and those who are not, Israel will be at peace (as one will not confuse one group with another).

	24,6. פן תשיב את בני שמה, “lest you bring my son back there.” The meaning is “do not lead him back to there.” Avraham did not want Yitzchak to leave the boundaries of the Holy Land. This was because he had once been designated as a sacred offering, and something sacred must not be desecrated by reverting to a secular status.

	24,10. וכל טוב אדניו בידו, “and with all the bounty of his master in his hand.” Actually, for the sake of accuracy, the Torah should have written  ומטוב אדניו, “and with (samples of) all the bounty of his master,” just as it goes on to say מגמלי אדניו from amongst the camels of his master,” (where the Torah also did not write that Eliezer took all the camels.).
	According to the plain meaning of the text the verse describes the greatness and superior loyalty of Avraham’s servant. The Torah reveals that Avraham had entrusted all his wealth to be administered by Eliezer, everything was “left in his hand.” Eliezer was in full control. We may understand this verse as similar to Numbers 21,26 ויקח את כל ארצו מידו, “he took his entire land from his hand.” (The reference is to Sichon having taken all of Moav’s land) Clearly, the meaning of the verse is a figure of speech. Here too the Torah employs a figure of speech to describe the status Eliezer enjoyed in Avraham’s household.
	A Midrashic (Bereshit Rabbah 59,11) approach: the words וכל טוב אדוניו בידו, “all the bounty of his master in his hand,” refer to a document which Eliezer carried in his hand in which Avraham had appointed Yitzchak as his sole heir. Avraham had done this in order to encourage the parents of any bride Eliezer would choose to allow their daughter to marry out of the country. The Torah  writes: “in his hand,” to inform us of this. The word וילך, “he went,” is also meant to draw attention to this, as obviously, Eliezer did not “walk” all that way but rode on one of the camels. The combined words וילך וכל טוב אדוניו בידו, are a clear hint that Eliezer walked while holding something in his hand. What did he hold in his hand? “The gift-certificate donating all of Avraham’s wealth to his son Yitzchak,” in the event that he would not be alive when the servant returned. The word וילך appears a second time in the same verse  to show that Eliezer set out armed with such a document which was going to be helpful to his mission.
	According to this interpretation, the words ויתן אברהם את כל  אשר לו ליצחק, “Avraham (now) gave all that was his to Yitzchak,” a verse we find only in 25,5 have been repeated there only in order to forestall any claims by any other children of Avraham to part of his estate. The fact is he had already given his accumulated wealth to Yitzchak before the sons of Keturah had been born. They only shared in possessions Avraham acquired after he had remarried.

	24,12. ועשה חסד, “and perform a kindness!” The servant implored G’d’s attribute at the beginning of his prayer as well as at its conclusion when he said ובה אדע כי עשית חסד עם אדוני, “and through her I will know that You have indeed performed a kindness for my master.” Seeing that Eliezer was aware that the outstanding characteristic of his master Avraham was the quality of חסד, this was the attribute of G’d he addressed when he prayed to the Ineffable Name, י-ה-ו-ה.

	24,13. הנה אנכי נצב על עין המים, ”here I am standing at a fountain of water, etc.”  We have to be alert to the fact that this whole paragraph appears to be merely a repetition of what the Torah already told us. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 60,8 have explained beautifully that this teaches that the small talk of the servants of the patriarchs was dearer to G’d than some of the profound Torah insights of the children of the patriarchs. We can prove this from the fact that the Torah was very expansive in reporting everything the servant did, whereas it was most concise in relating some very basic legislation which applies to the Jewish people throughout the ages. Sometimes, such legislation is merely hinted at in the text so that if it had not been revealed to Moses orally we would never have found it in the written text. The whole matter is further proof that the patriarchs were carriers of G’d’s “chariot,” i.e. that their stature exceeded that of the angels who had preceded them as the carriers. 
	There can be no doubt that the Torah did not repeat this whole report of Eliezer’s prayer and his dialogue with Rivkah without an ulterior motive. I will explain this as we proceed with the text of this entire paragraph. I advise you the reader to keep your eyes open as all these matters were directly related to the success of Eliezer’s mission.
	For instance: the Torah speaks of the עין המים, the well (fountain) of water three times, each time varying the syntax somewhat. In our verse here the well is simply described as עין המים, “a fountain of water.” In 24,42 the servant is reported as saying: ואבא היום אל העין, “I arrived this day at the well.” in 24,16 the Torah says of Rivkah: ותרד העינה, “she descended to the well.” In other words, the Torah speaks of the same well in three slightly different versions, עין, העין, העינה. We need to understand the precise reason for each of these nuances. 
	[The author leaves it there, but Rabbi Chavell quotes that according to תורת חיים the combination of the word עין (numerical value 70) plus two more times the same word equals an allusion to the name of G’d consisting of 72 letters. The additional letters ה, either at the beginning of the word or at the end, allude to the last letter ה in the Ineffable Name, a reference to G’d’s attribute of חסד. Eliezer invoked this attribute in order to secure for Yitzchak the mate who was appropriate for him.]

	24,14. והיה הנערה אשר אומר אליה הטי נא כדך, “let it be that the maiden to whom I shall say:  ‘please lower your jug so that I may drink,’ etc.” We have learned in Taanit 4 that there were three people who did not phrase a request to G’d in an appropriate manner. The three were: Eliezer, the servant of Avraham, Saul, son of Kish; and Yiftach from Gilead. Concerning Eliezer the Torah writes: (quoting our verses) “the criteria Eliezer listed to enable him to choose a bride for Yitzchak could have been met by a blind or lame girl.” [Eliezer surely did not mean for a girl with either one of such a handicap to become the bride of Yitzchak. Ed.]. Nonetheless, G’d arranged for the girl whom Eliezer met to be Rivkah, i.e. an eminently suitable choice. Saul, son of Kish requested victory over Goliath the Philistine blasphemer, promising the man who would kill Goliath his daughter as well as material wealth (Samuel I 17,28). If a slave or a bastard had taken up the challenge and succeeded, Saul would have been bound by a promise so carelessly formulated. G’d was kind enough to send him David who took up the challenge. In the case of Yiftach, we are told (Judges 11,31) that he foolishly vowed to offer as a sacrifice to G’d the first living creature which would come to meet him when he returned victoriously from battle. As it happened, his only daughter came out to welcome him. He had laid himself open to having to sacrifice any animal that was not even permitted to be offered as a sacrifice. G’d arranged that his daughter should meet him instead of what he had had in mind. This was the mystical dimension of Jeremiah 8,22 הצרי אין בגלעד אם רופא אין שם? “is there no balm in Gilead, no physician either?” The prophet points out that Yiftach could have had his vow annulled by the High Priest Pinchas or even by someone else had he not been too proud to do so. This thought [that there is not the slightest reason to honour a vow when it involves human sacrifice. Ed.] is underlined by the same prophet in Jeremiah 19,5 אשר לא ציויתי ולא דברתי, ולא עלתה על לבי, “which I have not commanded, nor spoken about, nor even thought about.” In other words, it was not G’d’s fault, or the fault of G’d’s legislation about honouring one’s vows which led to the death of Yiftach’s daughter.
אותה הוכחת לעבדך ליצחק     , “her you have designated for your servant, for Yitzchak.” She is fit for him as she performs deeds of loving kindness and she therefore is suitable to enter the household of an Avraham.
ובה אדע       , “and by means of her (actions) I will know, etc.” this was an appeal to G’d to let him know that G’d had performed an act of kindness for Avraham (compare Rashi).

    	24,15. ויהי הוא טרם כלה לדבר, “and it was before he had finished speaking, etc.” We need to understand the need for the apparently extraneous word הוא in this verse. All the Torah had to write to tell us that Rivkah appeared before Eliezer had completed his prayer was ויהי ככלותו לדברו, “as soon as he had finished speaking, etc.” Actually, the word הוא in this verse is not a personal pronoun, i.e. “he,” but a name of G’d. (compare Genesis 19,33 where we encountered this word in that context) We have numerous examples of the word הוא being a reference to a name of G’d, such as Psalms 100, 3 הוא עשנו ולו אנחנו, “He has made us and we belong to Him;” Numbers 18,23  ועבד הלוי הוא, ”and the Levite will serve G’d, etc.;” the word הוא in that verse means that Eliezer enjoyed G’d’s special assistance in his mission by means of the angel concerning whom Avraham had prayed to G’d that He should make Eliezer’s mission successful (verse 7).The angel, was at hand already before Eliezer had completed praying and he arranged for Rivkah to be the maiden whom Eliezer would address first with his request for water. This is why the Torah wrote: והנה רבקה יוצאת, “and here Rivkah was already in the process of coming out, etc.” The word והנה means that what follows was the result of a special arrangement, invitation. If the servant immediately ran towards her (verse 17) it was because he had noticed the water of the well rising to meet Rivkah on her descent. This is what our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 60,5 have derived from the wording in our verses here.
    
	At that moment Eliezer already understood what Avraham had meant when he had said to him that G’d would send His angel ahead. This is also what he related once he was in Bethuel’s house when he told the family that Avraham had assured him already before he set out on his journey that G’d would send His angel ahead and that he would succeed (verse 40). In view of this it is easy to understand that from the moment that Eliezer had become aware that the angel was supporting him the Torah refers to him no longer as עבד, servant, but as איש, a man of stature. Up until then we read about וישם העבד, “the servant placed;” ויקח העבד, “the servant took;” וירץ העבד, “the servant ran.” From this point on the Torah keeps referring to Eliezer as האיש until he leaves the house of Bethuel with Rivkah. The expressionהאיש  is applied to the angel Gavriel in Daniel 9,21. It is also applied to the angel who told Joseph that his brothers had moved away from Shechem, (Genesis 37,17) and that they had been overheard as planning to move to Dothan. In other words, as of the time the angel joined Eliezer in his quest, he himself assumed the role of the angel in an executive manner. 
	The words והאיש משתאה לה (verse 21) which appear to be somewhat problematical if we assume Eliezer and the angel to have become as one, must be understood as “he was waiting for her;” he did so as he had become aware that his mission was about to be crowned with success. Having done so, the Torah from now on refers to him constantly as האיש, such as when we read (verse 22) ויקח האש, or (verse 26) ויקוד האיש, or (verse 30) כה דבר אלי האיש, etc. When, a little while later, Lavan and Bethuel gave their consent for Eliezer to take Rivkah (verse 51) and they said הנה רבקה לפניך קח ולך, “here Rivkah is in your presence, take her and go,” at which point Eliezer’s mission had been completed, the Torah reverts to describe Eliezer as עבד instead of as האיש. In verse 53 when Eliezer is reported as sharing out gifts, as well as in every subsequent move of his, the Torah speaks of העבד, “the servant,” seeing that the angel’s assistance was no longer required for that part of his activity. Avraham’s prayer which invoked the assistance of an angel had been answered in full.
	If you were to ask that when Lavan and his mother asked Rivkah if she were willing to go עם האיש הזה, “with this man,” and this occurred only in verse 58, after verse 51 which we described as the point at which Eliezer’s mission had basically been completed, the answer is simple. The words reported in verse 58 were not spoken by the Torah but by Lavan and his mother. They certainly were not bound by the considerations we described before. How could they be expected to refer to someone as “this slave,” when the person in question was distributing lavish gifts to every member of their household, not to mention to Rivkah herself? Would it not have been a gross insult to their sister to ask her is she were willing to leave her parental home in order to travel to a distant land “with this slave?”
	Concerning verse 61 in which both Rivkah and her maids are reported as traveling אחרי האיש, which appears to contradict the explanation I have offered that Eliezer had reverted to being an עבד the moment consent had been obtained for her to become Yitzchak’s bride, this wording was chosen by the Torah in honour of Rivkah. It would not have looked respectful if she had been described as riding “behind the slave.”
	Another approach to the words והאיש משתאה לה. It is an allusion to the angel who had tarried and waited at the well until the arrival there of Rivkah. From that moment on Eliezer took over the task of the angel; hence he is referred to as האיש from that moment on. Support for this theory is found in the text near the end of the episode  where the Torah said (verse 61) “they walked behind האיש, “and the עבד took Rivkah and he went.” This verse makes it crystal clear that the subjects איש and עבד respectively could not have been one and the same.

	24,16. ותרד העינה ותמלא כדה ותעל. “She descended to the well, filled her jug, and she came up.” The crucial word “she drew water,” is missing in this verse. On the second occasion when Rivkah again descended (verse 20) to provide water for Eliezer’s camels the Torah does insert the words ותרץ עוד אל הבאר לשאב, ותשאב וגו’, “she ran to the well once more in order to draw water; she drew water, etc.” These fine differences in the text prompted our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 60,6 to say: “all the women go down to the well to fill (their jugs). This one—as soon as the waters saw her they rose up to meet her.”—G’d said to her: “just as the waters have seen fit to rise in your honour so other waters will rise in honour of your children.” [the reference is to Numbers 21,17 אז ישיר ישראל את השירה הזאת “עלי באר”, “then the Israelites broke out in song: “rise up, O well,- sing to it, etc.”]
	This also explains the unusual verse 17 “the servant ran towards her, etc.” As soon as Eliezer had noticed the strange phenomenon that the waters rose to meet this girl, (verse 16) he hastened to meet her.
	You ought to realise that here we encounter for the first time that the 72-lettered version of the 4-lettered Ineffable Name is alluded to. The first letters in the words כדה ותעל spell 26 in numerical value. The numerical value of the 4-lettered Ineffable name י-ה-ו-ה when spelled in letters only equals 26. When these four letters are spelled out as words i.e. יוד הי ויו הי, the result is 72. Such permutations of the holy name of G’d exert their influence on water and the waters which responded to the arrival of Rivkah did so as a result of being sensitive to such considerations. At a later time, when the Israelites were on the edge of the sea of reeds the water was able to rise in the form of walls to let the Israelites pass through in response to Moses’ staff which had this name of G’d (72 letters) inscribed on it. A similar consideration enabled Moses to strike the rock and to bring forth water from it (Exodus 17,6). [Rabbi Chavell cites Targum Yonathan on Exodus 14,21 as the source of our author.]
	24,19. ותאמר גם לגמליך אשאב, she said: “I will also draw water for your camels.” The physical strength required for Rivkah to draw water for all of Eliezer’s camels could only be explained if she enjoyed divine assistance. This is all the more so if we accept the opinion of the sages in the Seder Olam that at that time Rivkah was only three years old. The whole matter can be viewed only as part of the success of which Avraham had assured Eliezer at the outset when he told him: “He will send His angel ahead of you and make your mission successful.” (24,7) This is the reason you find an allusion to G’d’s great name in our verse  the name we have discussed in the previous paragraph. The fact that the letter ג in the word גמליך has a dagesh is additional evidence of an allusion to the attribute of גבורה being involved in what transpired at this well. 

	24,22. ויקח האיש נזם זהב בקע משקלו ושני צמידים, “the man took a golden nose-ring weighing a beka and two bracelets, etc.” Why did the Torah need to tell us the weight of these pieces of jewelry? We are dealing with an allusion to the fact that eventually Rivkah’s descendants, i.e. the generation who would contribute to the building of the Tabernacle in terms of shekalim. In Exodus 35,26 the Torah speaks of the weight of these shekalim also in terms of בקע לגולגולת, one “beka per person.” When the Jewish people received the two tablets with the Ten Commandments you will find that these comprised 172 words. This corresponds to the numerical value of the letters in the word בקע. This corresponds to what we read here ושני צמידים על ידיה עשרה זהב משקלם. The words עשרה זהב are an allusion to the Ten Commandments. We may also perceive the word שקל as an acronym describing אש קול, i.e. the ingredients most prominent during the revelation of G’d at Mount Sinai. We were told that on that occasion מן השמים השמיעך את קולו ליסרך ועל הארץ הראך את אשו הגדולה, “from the Heavens he let you hear His powerful voice, and on earth He showed you His great fire“ (Deut. 4,36). This also leads us to examine the amount of shekels offered by Haman in order to secure permission from King Achashverosh to do to the Jewish people as he saw fit. He offered 10,000 talents of silver,.or 600,000 shekels. (compare Esther 3,9) It was his plan to neutralise the 600,000 shekels the Jews had contributed at the time for the sockets of the Holy Tabernacle and to deprive them of any merit they might have accumulated due to that donation. In short, Haman wanted to neutralise the accumulated merit of the people who had embraced the Torah at Mount Sinai. He wanted to annul what had been acquired with fire and sound. This is what has been hinted at here in Eliezer’s prayer (verse 27) when he said: אנכי בדרך נחני ה’, “I was on the way when G’d guided me, etc.” He meant that the merit of the “אנכי” which the Jewish people would accept in the future was active on his behalf at the time he stood by the well. All the details of what was happening with Rivkah at this time foreshadowed events of the future involving her offspring. Similarly, all that happened to the servant of Avraham on this mission foreshadowed events in Jewish history of the future when that people was in the desert.
	Just as an angel had been at his side through the efficacy of Avraham’s prayer who had said that “G’d will send His angel ahead,” so it happened to Avraham’s descendants in the desert. Seeing that the angel in question was not a regular natural phenomenon but one of the disembodied spiritual creatures, so the angel who accompanied the Jewish people was such a disembodied spiritual force who had been emanated by the merit of Avraham. This was whom the Torah had in mind when it quoted G’d as telling Moses in Exodus 23,20 הנה אנכי שולח מלאך לפניך. “Here I am about to send an angel ahead of you.” Just as Avraham in our chapter referred to this divine force as מלאכו, “His angel,” so G’d referred to the same divine force as מלאכי, “My angel,” (not just any מלאך, angel, in Exodus 23,23). Just as the waters had risen towards Rivkah, so the waters rose towards her “children” in the desert as we explained. The servant also alluded to such future developments when presenting her with the jewelry mentioned in our chapter. This mission was carried out by a trusted servant, i.e. Eliezer. The Jewish people in the desert were led by G’d’s trusted servant Moses. When the Torah wrote in this chapter that Eliezer had been equipped with all the “good” of his master Avraham, the Torah, in a parallel reference, tells us that G’d equipped Moses for his task by equipping him with all ‘His goodness.” This is what is meant by Exodus 33,19 “אני אעביר כל טובי על פניך, “I will let all My goodness pass before you.” Just as Eliezer gave gifts to Rivkah not only at the well but also in her father’s house (verse 53), so the Jewish people who received the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai again received the gift of a covenant shortly before they entered the Holy Land (Deut. 28,69). At that time many commandments which were applicable in Eretz Yisrael were revealed for the first time in detail. This reflects the statement of our sages in Gittin 60 that “the Torah was given to the Jewish people in individual scrolls.” The sages meant that although Moses had received all 613 commandments while he was on Mount Sinai in the first year of their wanderings, he did not teach all of these commandments to the people at once. Just as the story of Rivkah and Eliezer at the well has been repeated in the Torah and the servant relates all that happened to him at the well, so Moses repeated many parts of the events the Jewish people experienced during their trek through the desert once more in the Book of Deuteronomy. Also, the Jewish people received both the first and the second set of Tablets.
 
	24,23. ויאמר בת מי את, “he said: ’whose daughter are you?‘“ The true meaning of this verse is that the servant had asked this question already before he gave Rivkah the jewelry. It is quite inconceivable that Eliezer should have been handing out such expensive jewelry to a stranger he knew nothing about. This is not the only time that you find in this story that the Torah did not report it in the exact sequence in which the events occurred. You find proof that when Eliezer recounted in Bethuel’s house what had occurred, (24,47) he related that he gave her the jewelry after having ascertained who she was. In Leviticus 9,22 the Torah writes that Aaron raised his hands and they (Moses and Aaron) blessed the people, after which he (Aaron) descended from having performed the sin-offering.” The meaning there is clearly that Moses and Aaron blessed the people after Aaron had descended from the altar. Nonetheless, the Torah saw fit to describe this in a manner which could lead us to receive the wrong impression. 
ללין    , ”for an overnight stay.” The word is a noun, as opposed to ללון which would be the verb from the same root. The meaning is that there is accommodation for a single night’s lodging. This is the way our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 60,6 interpret this word. Rivkah had changed the word and had said ללון, implying that Eliezer would be welcome for a more extended stay although he had inquired only if he could stay for a single night. She used the word in its infinitive which does not carry any connotation of a limited time.
	The correct interpretation is that the word ללין is a transitive form of the verb, i.e. Eliezer asked whether lodging overnight could be provided in her father’s house. Whereas Eliezer had asked whether he and his entourage could be assigned a place in her father’s house to spend the night, Rivkah replied that he did not need to be assigned such a place but that he could choose where in her father’s house he wished to spend the night. By saying ללון, i.e. using the intransitive form of the word, Rivkah indicated that Eliezer would have the choice of a number of accommodations in her father’s house.

	24,27. אנכי בדרך נחני ה’ בית אחי אדוני, “I was on the way when G’d  guided me to the house of my master’s brothers.” It is possible to read into this wording that Eliezer had experienced that the earth miraculously telescoped beneath him while he was travelling, thus shortening his trip considerably, as our sages have explained in Sanhedrin 73. We would then have to understand the word בדרך, as if he had said: “I was on this long and tedious journey, and here G’d brought me to this well in one fell swoop when I had only just set out.” This would also be the reason he emphasised his arrival היום in verse 42, as if to say: “I started out today and I arrived today.”

	24,32. ויפתח הגמלים, “he unmuzzled the camels.” Rashi  comments that he unmuzzled the camels which he had muzzled before  so that they would not graze in land owned by others. This is taken from Bereshit Rabbah 60,8. Rabbi Yirmiyah there asked whether the camels of Avraham were not as pious as the donkey of Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair who would not eat grass in another’s field even without being muzzled. [in fact these donkeys were reported once to have remained without fodder for three days due to their piety.] The matter is raised in the Midrash as it was difficult for people at that time to imagine that the piety in the house of Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair should have exceeded that in the household of Avraham. Keeping this in mind, Rabbi Yirmiyah interpreted the word ויפתח to mean that Eliezer loosened the yokes that these camels normally wore around their necks, and  from which the bags they carried were suspended. A parallel of this expression is found in Isaiah 52,2 התפתחי מוסרי צוארך, “loosen the bonds from your necks!” The word ויפתח actually refers to Lavan who performed this task and provided the camels with straw to lie on, fodder to feed, and water to wash the feet of the men travelling with Eliezer.

	24,33. ויושם לפניו לאכול, “food was placed before him.” There is a difference between the spelling and the reading of the word ויישם, which is read as if it had been spelled ויושם. According to ancient sources, including Yonathan ben Uziel, some poison had been placed in Eliezer’s food so that he would die and Bethuel and Lavan would appropriate to themselves all the riches he had brought with him. The attempt ended in failure, as a mistake was made and the plate with the poisoned food was placed in front of Bethuel. This is why the word was spelled with two letters י, the equivalent of the name of G’d. [when you combine the two letters י which are part of the written text, and you add the letter ו, which is read, you obtain the number 26, the same as the numerical value of the four-lettered ineffable name י-ה-ו-ה. Ed.] According to Psalms 124,2 [ the psalmist reputedly had this incident in mind when he composed that hymn, Ed.] this was a hint that had it not been for the merit of Avraham Eliezer would have eaten the poisoned food. While he waited with eating until he had spelled out why he had come there, this afforded the angel the opportunity to switch plates. When the Torah says at the end of that paragraph ויאכלו וישתו הוא והאנשים אשר עמו, “they ate and they drank, he and the men who were with him,” this is to draw our attention to the fact that the members of Bethuel’s household did not eat as they were mourning the sudden death of Bethuel caused by his eating the poison he had prepared for Eliezer. This also accounts for the fact that in verse 55 only Rivkah’s brother and mother are mentioned as requesting a delay in her departure. Her father had died and thus could not offer an opinion.

	24,46. ותאמר שתה, “she said: ‘drink!’” This is the version of Eliezer when he recounted what had happened at the well. Actually, for the sake of accuracy, he should have repeated Rivkah’s exact words which had been “drink my lord!” The reason he did not repeat that version in the house of Bethuel was one of etiquette. [I believe Eliezer, who was a slave, did not want to repeat  that he had been addressed as “my lord.” Ed.]

	24,50. ויען לבן ובתואל, “and Lavan and Bethuel responded, etc.” The fact that Lavan spoke before his father already indicated that he was wicked (based on Rashi). Another indication that Lavan was evil is discernible from the fact that in his remarks he first alluded to the negative when he said (regretfully) “we cannot speak to you negatively or positively.” A righteous individual would have reversed the order saying: “positively or negatively.”
מה’ יצא הדבר     , “the matter originated with G’d.” Lavan meant that it was evident from the order in which matters had occurred that a higher power was involved here. They acknowledged that matchmaking was a preserve of celestial forces. Sotah 2. states that forty days prior to the development of the fetus a heavenly voice proclaims that the “daughter of X will be married to Y, even if the two people involved live on opposite sides of the ocean.” Solomon referred to this in Proverbs 19,14 בית והון נחלת אבות, ומה’ אשה משכלת, “whereas wealth may be determined by what one inherits from one’s father, an intelligent woman is a gift from heaven.” Clearly, parents are only able to bequeath you material riches whereas only G’d can provide you with the soul-mate you crave. Parents are unable to bequeath you the proper wife. 
	In a manner of speaking, such sentiments are also reflected in Solomon’s famous poem about the woman of valour (second half of Proverbs chapter 31). In Midrash Tehillim the author writes: “come and note how difficult it is to match the proper people to each other in marriage, seeing G’d refers to this problem both in the Torah, the Books of the Prophets, and the Hagiographa. In the Torah we have our reference here when even a pagan such as Lavan acknowledged that bringing about optimal marriages was a task only G’d knows how to solve. In the Books of the Prophets, concerning the unfortunate choice of wives or female companions made by Samson, we read in Judges 14,4 ואביו ואמו לא ידעו כי מה’ היא, “and neither his father nor his mother were aware that this matter originated with a plan by G’d. We have just quoted the verse in Proverbs 19,14 to show that also in the Hagiographa the problem is referred to. We have another verse concerning this problem in Proverbs 18,22, where Solomon writes: מצא אשה מצא טוב ויפק רצון מה’, “he who found a wife has found a good thing; he will obtain favour from the Lord.” Some scholars interpret Isaiah 46,3 העמוסים מני בטן הנשואים מני רחם, to mean that even if the respective partners grow up on opposite sides of the universe, G’d arranges for them to meet in order that they can get married. [The verse refers to the passive role man plays in the matter of זווג, matchmaking, though he may fancy himself as totally active and the result as due to is own initiative. Ed.] This is what the Talmud meant when saying that long before the birth of an individual plans had been made in heaven who would become her partner in marriage.
    A kabbalistic approach to the statement בת פלוני לפלוני, “the daughter of X will be married to Y.” The word בת in the statement בת פלוני לפלוני, is an allusion to the י (the tenth emanation), whereas the male, i.e. פלוני is a reference] to the ו, and the word לפלוני is an allusion to the א, (G’d) who is beyond the ocean of the emanation חכמה, wisdom. The reason the Talmud did not phrase this statement simply as פלוני ישא את פלונית, “X will marry Y,” was to show us hat the statement is not to be taken literally but that it applies to the relationships between different spiritual concepts. Such concepts too have to exist in a form of “marriage” to one another. This is also why the sages in the Talmud mentioned the female before the male in that statement [The “tenth”, i.e “lowest” emanation, is “lower,” hence female, when compared to the fifth emanation represented by the word פלוני. This emanation in turn is inferior to the emanation א  which is deemed as “beyond” even the highest of the ten emanations. Ed.] The sages in that statement in Sotah paraphrased the meaning of Genesis 2,8 גן בעדן מקדם, that G’d had “planted” something in advance of creating a physical universe.
    
    24,62. ויצחק בא מבוא, “and Yitzchak was in the process of coming from Be-er lachay Ro-i.” The plain meaning of the text is precisely what the sages wrote in Bereshit Rabbah 60,14 in answer to the rhetorical question where Yitzchak was coming from, that he came to bring Hagar who dwelled near the well mentioned in order for her to become the wife of his father. Hagar had named this well to acknowledge that G’d had seen her disgrace and had helped her regain her dignity.
    This verse and the words בא מבוא may be a reference to the spiritual equivalent of the Jewish people, i.e Mount Moriah. Yitzchak had only now returned from a three-year stay at that holy site. He had been shown by G’d that this was the spiritual well of the Jewish people, the source from which they receive the water  (i.e. Torah) which  keeps them alive. During all this time when Yitzchak had lived in solitude his whole thinking had concentrated on the concept and eventual realisation of what the Jewish people are supposed to stand for in G’d’s scheme of things. We may view the words עם באר לחי רואי as support for our interpretation as otherwise the Torah should have written ב-באר לחי רואי, “at the well of  Lachay Ro-i.”
    
    24,63. לשוח בשדה, “to meditate in the field.” According to both Ibn Ezra and David Kimchi these words mean: “to stroll amongst the shrubs.” Yitzchak had gone for a stroll to enjoy nature.
    A Midrashic interpretation based on Bereshit Rabbah 60,14. The word לשוח means “to pray,” as it does in all instances where it occurs. Well known examples are Psalms 102,1 תפלה לעני כי-יעטוף ולפני ה’ ישפוך שיחו, “A prayer of the lowly man when he is faint and pours forth his plea before the Lord.” Our sages in Berachot 26 have derived their view that Yitzchak inaugurated the daily Minchah prayer from this verse.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words  לשוח בשדהteach that when someone prays to the One and only G’d he employs a כנוי, “a pronoun” of G’d’s name. In other words, one is not to enunciate the four-lettered name of G’d י-ה-ו-ה. Having used a substitute name for G’d (out of reverence for the “real” name), one will “find” G’d. This is the mystical dimension of the words לשוח בשדה. We find something similar with Yaakov in Genesis 28,11 where the Torah describes such a prayer as occurring in the evening, ויפגע במקום, the word במקום being the substitution for the real name of G’d. We employ this substitute in the Haggadah of Pesach when we recite ברוך המקום, meaning “blessed be the Lord.” Whenever the verb פגע appears it occurs with the preposition ב such as in Jeremiah 7,16 ואל תפגע בי, or in Job 21,15 ומה נועיל כי נפגע בו. All the activities of G’d are ascribed to such substitute names, כנויים, when they are still in the theoretical stage, whereas they are ascribed to the “real” name of G’d when they have reached the operative stage. We find confirmation of this in Jeremiah 8,14 כי ה’ אלוקינו הדמנו וישקנו מי ראש כי חטאנו לה', “for the Lord our G’d has doomed us, He has made us drink a bitter draft, for we have sinned against G’d.” Significantly, the verse does not end with “for we have sinned against Him,” as we would have expected but the prophet says “against G’d.” This means that up until the moment G’d actually executed His judgment on us, a “substitute” attribute rather than His Essence was involved. It is worth reflecting on this.
    
    24,64. ותפול מעל הגמל, “she fell off the camel.” Rivkah did not “fall”” off the camel she was riding on when she saw Yitzchak; rather, she inclined her head as one does prior to falling off an animal.” This interpretation is supported by the choice of the word מעל in our verse. Had she really fallen off, the Torah would have written: ותפול מהגמל. This is also why Onkelos translates these words as ואתרכנית, the same expression he used when he translated what Eliezer was going to say to Rivkah at the well, where the Torah wrote הטי נא כדך, “please incline your jug” (24,14). We have a similar example in Kings II 5,21 where Jeremiah wrote of Naaman ויראה נעמן רץ אחריו ויפול מעל המרכבה לקראתו, “when Naaman saw him (Gechazi) run after him, “he fell” from the chariot toward him, etc.” There too the meaning clearly is not that the general Naaman literally fell out of his chariot because he saw Gechazi running. The meaning is that he bent down, inquiring why Gechazi had run after him, etc.
    Ibn Ezra interprets  ותפול literally, adding that she fell down deliberately, i.e. on her face and prostrated herself. It is similar to Numbers 16,4 where it says of Moses ויפול על פניו, “he ‘fell’ on his face.”  Moses did not fall against his will but he prostrated himself deliberately. When the Torah here continues with: ותאמר אל העבד, “she said to the servant,” we must understand this as what she said prior to prostrating herself.
    
    24,66.את כל הדברים אשר עשה , “all the things he had done.” This included the recourse to the “sign” he had asked from G’d to determine which was the right girl for him to approach at the well, when he had pleaded with G’d: הקרה נא לפני, “please let it happen before me this day, etc.” in verse 12. He told Yitzchak about the jewelry he had given to Rivkah on the way, and the gifts he had shared out when at her father’s house; he also told Yitzchak that he had experienced a miraculous telescoping of the earth under him so that he had arrived in Charan on the day he departed  from Be-er Sheva.
    
	24,67. ויביאה יצחק האהלה שרה אמו , “Yitzchak brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah.” Here the Torah first refers to Rivkah merely with the pronoun “her, whereas when the same verse continues to report that Yitzchak married Rivkah she is mentioned by name.” The normal procedure should have been to mention Rivkah by name at the beginning of the verse and to refer to her by pronoun when she becomes the subject again in the same verse. Why did the Torah depart from the norm? Perhaps the underlying consideration was to mention Sarah first as she had been her predecessor in that tent and Rivkah had only been born after Sarah had already died and Bethuel had fathered Rivkah (22,23). At that juncture the Torah had seen fit to report Sarah’s death (23,2) which meant that at the time Yitzchak was bound Sarah had already died. Bereshit Rabbah 55,4 said that Yitzchak was 37 years old at that time and that when Sarah heard what was going to happen to him her soul departed and she died. The Torah itself testifies that Yitzchak was 40 years old when he married Rivkah (25,20), which makes Rivkah 3 years old when she was married. Keeping all this in mind explains  why the Torah first spoke only about Yitzchak bringing Rivkah into the tent of his mother Sarah as at that tender age she was not yet  a real soul-mate for him. Yitzchak’s love for Rivkah was kindled when he observed how perfectly she filled the role his mother Sarah had fulfilled in her tent. At that point, Yitzchak felt ready to complete the proceedings of marriage, i.e. ויקח יצחק את רבקה ותהי לו לאשה, Yitzchak married Rivkah and she became a real wife for him.” , 
	 וינחם יצחק אחרי אמו,,“he comforted himself over the loss of his mother.” Yitzchak did not accept the condolences of his peers for the loss of his mother until he was able to console himself with Rivkah. The words: “Yitzchak brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah,” teach that if someone’s wife dies and he had (grown up) children from her he should not remarry until he married off his children first. Having done so, he should remarry. The Midrash derives all this from the sequence of what the Torah tells us here about the conduct of Avraham who waited with remarrying until after Yitzchak had a home of his own.
    
    25,6. ולבני הפילגשים אשר לאברהם, “and to the sons of the concubines who were Abraham’s, etc.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 61,4, the word פלגשם is spelled without the letter י which indicates a plural ending, suggesting that Avraham had only one concubine ever, Hagar, and that he had remarried her after Yitzchak was married. Keturah was none other than Hagar whom we know from both Lech Lecha and Vayera. The reason she is here called פלגש, “concubine,” is only because she was descended from slaves. In 16,3 she was called אשה, “wife,” because Avraham had given her a כתובה, a financial settlement, something not given to concubines. Sanhedrin 21 explains the verse in a similar fashion. [Our versions of the Torah have פילגשים with an extra letter י, not without any letter י. Ed.]
    The reason why the Torah did not tell us whose daughter Keturah was may have been that she was a Canaanite and therefore the Torah did not want to bother with her genealogy, (Nachmanides). Had she been Egyptian, or from any nation other than the Canaanites, the Torah would have given us more details about her background. We have proof of this when the Torah detailed the genealogy of the women whom Esau and Ishmael married (compare 28,9). Seeing that Keturah was a member of an accursed nation, the Torah preferred not to go into details (for the sake of Avraham?) Do not question me how it was possible for Avraham to marry a local Canaanite woman after he had made such a point of making even his trusted servant Eliezer swear that he would not take a woman of Canaanite descent for his son Yitzchak. The prohibition never applied to anyone with the exception of Yitzchak who was predestined to carry on the line of Avraham and to be a further link in the formation of the Jewish people. Only concerning Yitzchak had G’d said: “for through Yitzchak your seed shall be known” (Genesis 21,12). Once Yitzchak was married and the stage had been set for fulfilment of the prophecy that Yitzchak would become the founding father of the Jewish people, Avraham had no reason not to marry any woman who was qualfied as suitable for him on the strength of her personal virtues.
   Bereshit Rabbah 61,4 which held that Keturah was none other than Hagar, the mother of Ishmael, Avraham’s other son, claims that the name Keturah reflects the concept of קטורת, incense, because her personal deeds were as pleasing to G’d as incense is to Him as a sacrificial offering. The approach reflected by this Midrash would account for the fact that this paragraph has been introduced with the words ויסף אברהם ויקח, “Avraham continued and married (remarried), etc.” After all, she had already been his servant before he had expelled her at the command of G’d and Sarah. The expression ויוסף has been used also in that sense in Genesis 35,26 when the Torah reports that Yehudah did not again sleep with Tamar after he had become aware of her true identity.
   
   25,8. זקן ושבע ימים,  “old and content.” Seeing that the Torah had told us previously that Avraham had been blessed by G’d in all that mattered, and that he had been the recipient of material wealth and honour of every conceivable kind, the Torah tells us that because of this he died without any regrets, did not feel that there were things he had not been able to achieve. This was in pronounced contrast to the fate of the average person of whom we are told in Kohelet Rabbah 1,34 that “when a person dies, half his aspirations in life for acquisitions went unfulfilled.” If he had once made the acquisition of say 1 million his objective, he had raised this objective as soon as he had realised it, so that when he died he  had felt cheated by life. The author of Kohelet called this syndrome אהב כסף לא ישבע כסף, “he who loves silver will never get enough of it (Kohelet 5,9).” 
  ויאסף אל עמיו, “and he was gathered to his people.” Seeing that essentially, death is a separation of phenomena namely the different raw materials which combine to make up the body, which were previously integrated, the Torah informed us that the soul was gathered into his people, i.e. did not disintegrate. The soul returned to the distinguished environment around G’d’s throne of glory. The soul itself is also known as כבוד, “honour” or “distinction.” We find this term applied to the soul in Psalms 30,13 למען יזמרך כבוד ולא ידום, ”in order that [my] soul sing hymns to You endlessly;” as well as in Isaiah 58,8 כבוד ה' יאספך, “the place where the כבוד of G’d is gathered in.” The choice of the term עמיו, “his people,” is analogous to expressions used in the Bible for the soul such as Exodus 31,14 where the Torah decrees a form of death of the soul with the words ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מקרב עמיה, “and such a soul shall be cut off from amongst its people,” (its fellow-souls, obviously( Innocent souls are gathered together forming a family, a nation. The same thing applied here.
   The expression ויגוע to describe the death of the body here may be in order to illustrate that what happened to the body of Avraham was no different than what happened to all the bodies of the animals and the people who died during the deluge where the Torah described their death (Genesis 7,21) as ויגוע כל בשר הרומש על הארץ, “all flesh which moved on the earth died, etc.” Compare also Genesis 6,17 when the deluge had been predicted, and  the Torah wrote כל אשר בארץ יגוע, “everything on earth will die.” The author refers to a statement by our sages that the term גויעה for death is used only in connection with the righteous and the obvious problem of the verses quoted from the Torah’s report of the deluge where the sinners died. He says that what was meant by that statement is to be understood as a combination of גויעה plus אסיפה.
   
   25,9.ויקברו אותו יצחק וישמעאל בניו , “and his sons Yitzchak and Ishmael buried him.” Seeing that Ishmael was the senior of the brothers, the Torah should have mentioned his name first. The fact that the Torah did not do so shows that our sages were correct when they said (Baba Batra 16) that Ishmael had become a penitent while Avraham was still alive and that he had acknowledged Yitzchak’s status as Avraham’s major descendant. When Yitzchak died, the Torah writes: “Esau and Yaakov his sons buried him” (Genesis 35,29). Clearly, the contrast between what is written here and what is written there must tell us something, seeing Esau was a non-penitent firstborn born of the same mother as had given birth to Yaakov. Though he had “sold” his birthright, the Torah still lists Esau there as the elder brother.
   Death is described in six different forms throughout the Bible, three of which are applicable to the wicked and three to the righteous. The three terms applied to a wicked person dying are: מחייה, אבדן, כרת. Death described as מחייה is the worst of the three deaths. It is applied to the deaths of the kind of wicked people who have neither Torah knowledge nor ordinary wisdom to their credit and remained unaware of the Creator and His wonderful deeds. Such people’s death is no different than the death of animals. Their souls perish as absolutely as do their bodies. Proverbs 13,9 ונר רשעים ידעך, “and the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished,” compares the soul of the wicked person to a lamp, explaining that this soul is dependent on the body it inhabits much as the light of a lamp is dependent on its oil supply. When that supply fails the light is extinguished. This group of wicked people has neither reward nor punishment to look forward to ever. [I suppose the reference is to the time of resurrection. Ed.] Examples of such people were the people of the generation who perished during the deluge of whom the sages have said that just as they have been wiped out on earth their life expectancy in the hereafter has also been wiped out (compare Sanhedrin 108). The sages there concentrated on the words וימח את כל היקום, “He erased all creatures” (Genesis 7,23). This line refers to their destruction in this life, whereas the subsequent words וימחו מן הארץ in verse 24 in the same chapter refer to their becoming extinct in any form of life in the future.
   The expression אבדן when applied to the death of the wicked refers to such Israelite sinners as died without benefit of having repented their sins prior to their deaths. They are being judged after their physical death in Gehinom; this is the meaning of Leviticus 23,30 והאבדתי את הנפש ההיא. Such a death is worse than the death described by the Torah as כרת. The people guilty of the penalty called כרת are judged and after they have completed whatever length of punishment has been decreed for them, their souls are admitted to the hereafter.
   The three types of deaths mentioned in connection with the righteous are: גויעה, אסיפה, ביאה. All three of these types of death are mentioned in connection with Avraham. This means that these three are all of the same category [as Avraham certainly died only once. Ed.] We read in 25,8 ויגוע ויאסף,; we also have the Torah telling Avraham about his death in the future where G’d said to him in Genesis 15,15  ואתה תבא אל אבותיך בשלום, “as far as you are concerned you will come to join your fathers in peace.”  Expressions of death involving either of the three words mentioned in connection with Avraham apply to the kind of righteous people who transfer to Gan Eden immediately upon the death of their bodies, not having to face any punishment at all. Such a death was the lot of Ishmael, of whom the Torah writes ויגוע וימת ויאסף אל עמיו. Clearly, he had become a penitent.
   The second type of death involving the righteous is described in the Torah by the word לקיחה, “being taken away.” Such an expression is applied to people who enter Gan Eden while physically alive such as Chanoch (Genesis 5, 24) of whom the Torah wrote: “he was no longer, as G’d had taken him.” The prophet Elijah experienced a similar “death,” as he had told his disciple Elisha (Kings II 2,10) אם תראה אותי לוקח מאתך, “if you will see me taken from you, etc.”
   	The third type of death applicable to the righteous is described  as “rest.” This is an expression promising the righteous participation in the resurrection, a time which our sages have described with the words מנוחה or שבת. This promise was applied to Daniel who had been told (Daniel 12,13) ואתה לך לקץ ותנוח ותעמוד לגורלך לקץ הימין, “But you, go on to the end; you shall rest and arise to your destiny at the end of the days.”
   
  ואלה תולדות יצחק
   
  עטרת זקנים בני בנים ותפארת בנים אבותם, “Grandchildren are the crown of their elders, the glory of children are their parents” (Proverbs 17,6). According to the plain meaning of this verse, Solomon informed us that the true crown of parents are their children and grandchildren. We find that Terach, Avraham’s father was crowned  with his son Avraham. [Had he not had such a son, his soul would have perished. As it is, Avraham’s outstanding life resulted in Terach’s soul deriving some reflected glory so that he did not forfeit his share in the hereafter; this is one way in which the verse (25,6) describing Avraham as “joining his people may be understood.” Ed.]
   The parents are truly the glory of their children only when they themselves are upright, G’d-fearing, and are setting the personal example upon which their children can model themselves. When such children point with pride at their parents, the parents can experience real glory. This is why Solomon used a different word to describe the parents’ feelings, not עטרת, “crown.” Viewed superficially, a crown is something of higher rank than תפארת, glory, worn on the inside. However, when children do not follow the path set for them by their parents, it would be foolish to describe such parents as wearing their children as a crown, as something they boast about for all to see. On the contrary, in such instances the children actually shame their parents by their conduct (compare Isaiah 30,5).
   A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Toldot 4) to these verses. The words עטרת זקנים refer to grandchildren. The righteous are crowned by their grandchildren. This is a reference to Avraham who was crowned by the merit of his grandson Yaakov. When Nimrod threw Avraham into the furnace, G’d saved him because of the eventual merits of his grandson Yaakov. This is the meaning of the words in Isaiah 29,22 לכן כה אמר ה' אל בית יעקב אשר פדה את אברהם, “indeed, this is what G’d said to the house of Yaakov who had redeemed Avraham.” How did Yaakov “redeem” Avraham? He redeemed him from Nimrod’s furnace. This is an example of grandparents being crowned by their grandchildren.
   How do children “crown” themselves with their fathers? When Yaakov had departed from Lavan and Lavan was in hot pursuit, G’d appeared to him in a dream and warned him not to say anything threatening or complimentary to Yaakov. When, eventually, Lavan caught up with Yaakov he said to him: “had it not been for the fact hat the G’d of your father had addressed me last night, etc.” (Genesis 31,29). Clearly, on that occasion it was Avraham and Yitzchak’s merit which saved Yaakov. Yaakov personally acknowledged this when he said to Lavan during their argument: “if it had not been for the G’d of Avraham and the G’d whom Yitzchak fears who was with me, you would have now sent me away empty-handed” (Genesis 31,42). Lavan was unable to carry out his evil designs due to the interference of the merit of Yaakov’s father and grandfather. Similarly, the evil design of Pharaoh to drown all Jewish boy-babies (Exodus 1,22) boomeranged when G’d drowned Pharaoh and his chariots in the sea (Exodus 15,4). Many hundreds of years later when G’d thwarted the decree of Haman to wipe out all the Jews, it was again the merit of the patriarchs which helped reverse his plan (Esther 9,1). When Bileam wanted to curse the Jewish people and G’d turned his intended curses into blessings (Deut. 23,7), this too was due to the merit of the patriarchs. This is the meaning of Isaiah 54,17 כל כלי יוצר עליך לא יצלח, “No weapon formed against you shall succeed.”
   Our sages in the Tanchuma there quoted the Roman Emperor Hadrian as having said to Rabbi Joshua ben Levi that the power of the sheep which stands (has managed to survive) amongst 70 wolves (the Gentile nations) is very great indeed. To this observation Rabbi Joshua replied that it is the power of the shepherd who wards off the attacks against this sheep and breaks the power of the attackers which is great. He quoted the verse from Isaiah 54,17 to support his words. The prophet there referred to the Gentiles who will perish from this world. This is also implied in Jeremiah 2,3 קדש ישראל לה' ראשית תבואתה כל אוכליו יאשמו רעה תבוא עליהם נאום ה'. “Israel was holy to the Lord, the first fruit of His harvest. All who ate of it were held guilty, disaster will befall them- declares the Lord.” Our history is full of proof that those who tried to eliminate us were eliminated instead. A few examples are: Pharaoh, Amalek, Siserah, Sancheriv, Nebuchadnezzar, Titus, Hadrian, and many others like them. This is why the prophet compared Israel to something sacred, like an offering. When a non-priest consumes a portion of that which is sacred, the penalty for such people is death. This is why all the Gentile nations who at one time or another have “eaten” part of the Jewish people will pay for that with their very existence. 
    The reason the Torah had to repeat here that Avraham had fathered Yitzchak was that there were a number of scoffers who attributed Sarah’s pregnancy to her stay at the palace of Avimelech. G’d arranged for Yitzchak to look extraordinarily like his father Avraham in order to discredit the rumours circulated by these scoffers.
    
    25,19.ואלה תולדות יצחק בן אברהם, אברהם הוליד את יצחק , “and these are the descendants of Yitzchak the son of Avraham; Avraham fathered Yitzchak.” Tanchuma Toldot 6 explains that we find an interesting parallel between Avraham and Yitzchak on one side and David and his son Kilav. When David’s messengers had gone to see Naval and asked for some material assistance, (Samuel I 25,11) the latter replied: “Who is David  Who is the son of Yishai? There are many slaves today who run away from their masters....Should I take my water, my bread, and my meat, which I slaughtered for the benefit of my shearers and give it to people whom I do not know whence they have come?” When David heard this he made ready with his men to assault Naval and to take what they wanted. At that point, Avigayil, Naval’s wife, hastened to take 200 loaves of bread, two jars of wine, five dressed sheep, etc., and she told her servants to carry these ahead of her as a gift offering for David and his men. (Avigayil succeeded in persuading David not to act violently against her husband.) The Book of Samuel continues  (verse 38) to describe that ten days after this event Naval took sick with a stroke and died. Upon hearing this, David proposed marriage to Avigayil his widow. After Avigayil accepted his proposal, David did not sleep with her for three months in order to avoid the suspicion that any child born to them would be suspected as having been fathered by Avigayil’s first husband. After the three months had passed, David had marital relations with Avigayil and she conceived and  gave birth to a son named כלאב, meaning כולו אב “he looked entirely like his father (David),” to preclude anyone thinking that he had been  fathered by Naval.
    25,21. ויעתר יצחק לנכח אשתו כי עקרה היא, “Yitzchak prayed in the presence of his wife seeing she was barren.” Actually, the Torah should have commenced this verse with the statement  ותהי רבקה עקרה וגו', “seeing that Rivkah was barren, Yitzchak prayed, etc.” The reason the Torah first mentioned the prayer was to tell us that this was Yitzchak’s main concern. If the prayer had been evoked only by Rivkah’s being barren, this would make the barrenness the major element in this verse. The Torah wanted to be certain that we appreciate that the major element of what the verse tells us is that Yitzchak prayed and that the prayer was effective. In other words, the only reason G’d had allowed Rivkah to be barren until that time was to get Yitzchak (and Rivkah) to pray. Her barrenness was merely a detail in bringing about Yitzchak’s prayer. A major reason why Rivkah had been barren in the first place is explained by our sages in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2,32: “Why were the matriarchs barren? Because G’d longs for the prayers of the righteous.” This teaches the powerful effect prayer has. It is so powerful that it can bring about changes in the laws of nature. This is also the reason the Torah uses the unusual word עתר to describe Yitzchak’s prayer. We would have expected either ויתפלל, or ויצעק, or other expressions associated with the offering of a prayer. Why did the Torah write ויעתר?. Our sages explain this in the first chapter of tractate Sukkah. The question is asked why the prayer of the righteous is compared to an Attar, “a shovel, a pitchfork?” The answer given is that just as a pitchfork turns the floor of a threshing ground upside down (after its use), so the prayers of the righteous succeed in changing the mind of G’d from an intention to employ the attribute of Justice (which implies sorrow for the person at whom it is directed) to the decision to use instead the attribute of Mercy.
    Technically speaking, the (use of) the pitchfork brings the grain which is on the floor to the top of the heap while placing the grain which was on the top to the bottom. In a similar manner the prayer of the righteous raises certain matters which had been at the bottom of G’d’s priorities to the fore, while submerging other considerations of G’d which had been in the forefront of His thinking until the righteous offered a prayer. As a result, G’d’s bounty which had been held back in an inaccessible region is moved to a region from which it is released for man’s benefit forthwith. The word ויעתר is also related to מחתרת, i.e. from the verb חתר, “dig under,” “subvert,” and is similar to עתר. This would be similar to Sanhedrin 103 where Chronicles II 33,13 dealing with G’d’s efforts to accept King Menashe’s repentance is described. We read in that verse ויתפלל אליו ויעתר לו וישמע תחנתו, “He (Menashe) prayed to Him, and He (G’d) allowed Himself to have His priorities changed, He listened to his prayer, etc.” The fact that before the words: “He listened to him,” we find the words ויעתר לו, indicates that some transformation had to occur in G’d’s thinking before He decided to listen to this prayer. 
    You should remember that three out of our four matriarchs  were naturally barren. The Torah wrote concerning Sarai ותהי שרי עקרה, (Genesis 11,30); concerning Rivkah it says here כי עקרה היא, “for she was barren.” The Torah also used the term עקרה, “barren” in connection with Rachel in Genesis 29,31. There is a simple reason for the barrenness of these three women. There were two reasons why Sarah was barren; I) in order that Ishmael should be fathered  by Avraham. After all, she herself is on record as saying “G’d has prevented me from giving birth, etc., please sleep with my maid servant.” (Genesis 16,2). 2) This was in order for G’d to change her name and to demonstrate an important lesson. The name change was essential in order to teach her and all of us that just as G’d used the letter ה to create the physical part of the universe, so He uses this same letter to bring about changes in the laws of nature in that universe. The potency of the horoscopic influences on man’s (or woman’s) life was nullified by the substitution of the letter ה' in Sarai’s name. (compare commentary on Genesis 2,4  בה-בראם).
    As to Rivkah’s barrenness, we know that Yitzchak was forty years old when he married her and that he was sixty when Esau and Yaakov were born. In other words, she lived with him for twenty years during which no mention is made of their praying to have children. G’d arranged her barrenness in order that Avraham should not experience the disappointment of seeing that one of his grandchildren became disloyal to his teachings. After all, G’d had assured Avraham (Genesis 15,15): “you will join your fathers in peace (of mind).” We have already pointed out that Ishmael became a complete penitent during Avraham’s lifetime. According to Baba Batra 16, Esau began his career as a wicked person on the very day Avraham died (and he sold his birthright). The reason Rachel remained barren for a few years was so that Bilhah and Zilpah could give birth to four of the twelve tribes (Dan, Naftali, Gad and Asher) prior to her becoming pregnant with Joseph.
    
    25,22. ויתרוצצו הבנים בקרבה, “the children quarrelled inside her.” This particular pregnancy was totally different from all the pregnacies experiened by women up until that time. It was quite unknown for women who gave birth to twins to experience turbulence within their wombs during their pregnancies. The fact that these fetuses had begun to behave in such a manner already while inside the womb made Rivkah very distraught. She had her worst fears confirmed when G’d told her through His prophet Shem (Bereshit Rabbah 63,7) that she was going to give birth to founders of two nations whose outlook on life would be totally different from one another. He assured Rivkah that she, personally, had no cause to worry about the physical phenomenon of that tumult within her.
    A Midrashic opinion (Avodah Zarah 11) draws attention to the unusual spelling of the words גיים in our verse. The correct spelling should have been גוים. This prompted Rabbi Yehudah to see a hint that there would be two individuals belonging to these two nations, i.e. Emperor Antoninus and Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi, whose wealth would be such that  all manner of vegetables which were not in season would nonetheless be served on their tables all year. At first glance such a statement is difficult to reconcile with the statement made by the same Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi on his deathbed (compare Ketuvot 104), that he had never permitted himself to use his wealth to indulge himself or to otherwise enjoy the pleasures of life on earth, but had made do with absolute necessities only. We need to understand the Midrash in Bereshit Rabbah as describing what Rabbi Yehudah served his guests, not what he himself partook of. Antoninus was a descendant of Esau, of course. He had studied Torah secretly with Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi so that his servants and other members of his Empire would not become aware of this. According to tradition (also quoted in Avodah Zarah 10), Antoninus, (while governor of Palestine) had a subterranean room which was linked by a passage to the home of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi. He would take two slaves with him every day. He would kill the first one at the entrance to the house of Rabbi Yehudah, and the second one at the entrance to his own palace so that there would not be any surviving witnesses to his visits at the home of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi. He requested of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi that at the pre-arranged times when he would visit, Rabbi Yehudah should not have anyone else present at the house. It happened that on one occasion Rabbi Chanina bar Chama happened to be at the house of Rabbi Yehudah when Antoninus arrived. He became very agitated and complained: “did I not tell you not to have anyone present when I come?” Rabbi Yehudah replied that the apparition in the guise of Rabbi Chanina was not a human being. Thereupon Antoninus said to Rabbi Yehudah: “tell this man to get me the slave who stands on guard at the entrance.” Rabbi Chanina, aware that this slave was going to be killed, deliberated what to do. When he came to the place from where he was supposed to get the slave he found that the slave was already dead. He meditated on what to do, saying to himself that if he told Antoninus that the slave was already dead, he would accuse him of having murdered him. At the same time there is a rule that one need not return to the sender in order to bring bad news. On the other hand, he reasoned, if he were simply to leave the dead man and not go back to the house of Rabbi Yehudah at all, this would be a disgrace, and an insult to the Roman Empire. So he decided to pray. As a result of his prayer the dead guard came to life again and he sent him to his master. Thereupon Antoninus said to Rabbi Yehudah: “I am aware that even relatively insignificant Jews possess the power to bring the dead back to life. Nonetheless, I wish that when I come here no other living soul shall be present.” Antoninus used to provide Rabbi Yehudah with a variety of personal services as well as feed him if necessary on a daily basis. He even expressed a wish to be able to serve Rabbi Yehudah in the hereafter as his mattress. One day he asked Rabbi Yehudah if he could expect to be granted life in the hereafter. Rabbi Yehudah answered in the affirmative. Antoninus questioned this, quoting Ovadiah 18 “there will not be anyone remaining of the house of Esau.” Rabbi Yehudah replied that this verse speaks only of people who live in accordance with the principles of Esau. Thereupon Antoninus quoted another verse, this time from Ezekiel  32,29: “There are Edom, her kings and her princes” [The entire passage deals with the descent to Gehinom of all these Gentile people. Ed.] Rabbi Yehudah replied that the verse referred to “her kings,” but not to “all her kings.” He added that Ezekiel had specifically excluded Antoninus as well as a certain Ketiah bar Shalom from his prediction.
    
    25,24.והנה תומם בבטנה , “and here there were twins in her womb.” The word תומם, “twins,” is spelled defectively, with the letters י and א missing. The reason for the defective spelling is that one of Rivkah’s children was going to be a wicked person. The next time the birth of twins is mentioned in the Torah, i.e. the sons of Tamar and Yehudah, Peretz and Zerach, the word is 
spelled properly, i.e. תאומים, seeing that both of the sons Peretz and Zerach were going to be righteous.
    
    25,25. ויצא הראשון אדמוני, “the first one emerged all reddish looking.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 63,8 the performance of the commandment to take the Lulav and Etrog on the first day of Sukkot ( Leviticus 23,40) and to give thanks to G’d for His bounty is the reason that G’d appeared to the Jewish people first, demands payment (for their sins) “from the first one,” “builds for them first,” “brings them (to the Holy Land) first”. The fact that G’d appeared to the Jewish people first is derived from Isaiah 44,6 אני ראשון ואני אחרון; the fact that G’d enacts payment from the first one, i.e. Esau first, is derived from our verse i.e. ויצא  .הראשון אדמוני“He builds for them first,” is a reference to the Holy Temple as we know from Jeremiah 17,12 כסא כבוד מרום מראשון, “O Throne of Glory exalted from the first.” The fact that G’d brings the redeemer to the Jewish people first, is attested to by Isaiah 41,27 ,ראשון לציון הנה הנם ולירושלים מבשר אתן, “the things predicted to Zion originally, behold they are here! And again I send a herald to Jerusalem.” [I am not sure why our author brings this Midrash unless it is to demonstrate that the word ראשון, “first,” does not necessarily imply an advantage, such as when G’d demands an accounting for his sins from Esau first because he emerged first from Rivkah’s womb. Ed.]
   כלו כאדרת שער, “all of him looking like a fur coat.” The meaning is as if the Torah had written כלו שער, כאדרת, “his entire body covered with hair, just like a mantle.” Seeing he was born with this much hair, people called him איש שעיר, “a hairy man” (27,11). The word שעיר is an all encompassing expression which includes the demonic qualities which are attributed to the deities called שעירים, which the Torah enjoins us from offering sacrifices to (Leviticus 17,7.) The author quotes an unidentifiable Midrash according to which the strength of that demonic power is concentrated in the hair which covers its heart. At the time of the redemption, (arrival of the Messiah), G’d will make the demonic power collapse when He blows the Shofar heralding the redemption, as we know from וה' אלוקים בשופר יתקע והלך בסערת תימן, “and My Lord G’d will sound the ram’s horn, and advance in a stormy tempest.” (Zechariah 9,14) [the author appears to substitute the letter ש for the letter ס in the word סערת. something quite common, Ed.]
    25,27. ויגדלו הנערים, “the lads grew up.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 63,10 after Esau attained the age of 13 he frequented houses of idolatry while Yaakov frequented Torah academies. Our sages  in the same Midrash also said that Rivkah had experienced similar experiences during her pregnancy. Whenever she passed either one of the aforementioned institutions one of the fetuses within her seemed anxious to emerge. There is a verse in Jeremiah 1,5 בטרם אצרך בבטן ידעתיך, “even before I formed you in the womb I already appointed you (as a prophet).” From this verse we see that distinct pre-natal tendencies are not mere figments of our sages’ imagination. Psalms 58,4 זרו רשעים מרחם, “the wicked are defiant even while in the womb,” confirms this piece of psychological insight. 
   ויהי עשו יודע ציד איש שדה, ויעקב איש תם יושב אהלים, “Esau became a hunter, a man of the field, whereas Yaakov was a simple man a dweller in tents.” This verse conveys the fact that though the brothers were twins they had totally different interests in life. Esau pursued the material pleasures available in life whereas Yaakov was of a philosophical bent. This is why the Torah characterises the difference in the two phrases that Esau was a man of the field, i.e. a man dedicated to the earth, the physical. This is why later on he is called אדום, a word closely reminiscent of -אדמה, earth. It is a well known fact that if man dedicates himself to the pursuit of the pleasures which life has to offer, this estranges him to G’d and makes it difficult for him to serve the Lord at the same time as he is busy pursuing his major concerns. Making earthiness a priority must result in making godliness a secondary concern. We see this best reflected when Esau sold the birthright and the Torah (25,34) describes this in a few words: ויאכל וישת  ויקם וילך, ויבז עשו את הבכורה, “he ate, he drank, he arose and went of his way; thus Esau demonstrated his disdain for the birthright.” Anyone who is characterised by this negative virtue will eventually find himself deceived. [I believe the author means that sooner or later such people will be disappointed in what they had expected out of life. Ed.] In the case of Esau we find him describing himself as deceived twice when he said to his father (27, 36) “and he (Yaakov) has tricked me twice, he took my birthright and now he has taken my blessing.” Whatever pleasures and satisfactions such people do experience are only temporary and the time will come when they rue their former lifestyle and they cry out bitterly when they realise that “life” has deceived them. This is what Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 5,3-4: “for the lips of an immoral woman drip honey; her mouth is smoother than oil. But in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.” This is precisely the lifestyle of Esau and all those who support him. The philosophy and lifestyle of Yaakov are diametrically opposed to this, for someone characterised as איש תם  and as יושב אהלים is the antithesis of someone described as יודע ציד, איש שדה. Not only this, whatever Esau was willing to give up, i.e. to sell, Yaakov was anxious to buy. When the Torah speaks about the dish of lentils, something round, always returning to its beginning, this merely illustrates the concept of the pursuit of the pleasures of this world. This physical universe and all the phenomena in it are constantly being recycled, as Solomon said already at the beginning of Kohelet: “there is nothing new under the sun.” What is perceived as progress, eventually is seen to be merely a retread of something old. Yaakov who had perceived this was therefore anxious to sell such “merchandise,” in return for something which promised enduring progress. The instrument of securing this spiritual progress is the birthright, as it represents the privilege of performing service for the Lord in sacred precincts.
    Know that seeing the Torah had described both Esau and Yaakov already as איש, i.e. adult, mature in years, it is clear that they must have been at least 13 years of age at the time Yaakov bought the birthright from his twin brother. If, as the Midrash told us, Avraham died five years early in order not to experience how Esau displayed his disdain for spiritual values, this means that the brothers were 15 years old at the time the sale of the birthright took place. Avraham was 160 years old at the time Yaakov and Esau were born. He died at the age of 175, i.e. at a time when  his grandchildren were 15 years of age. There is also an allusion in our verse that people such as Esau are slated for Gehinom whereas people such as Yaakov are destined for Gan Eden.
     We read in Bereshit Rabbah 65,22 that when Yaakov entered Yitzchak’s room in order to receive the blessing, Gan Eden entered with him. On the other hand, when Esau entered the same room a little later, Gehinom entered with him. We have a Midrash Tanchuma Parshat Tzav, 2 which expresses a similar sentiment when the author writes that  the words היא העולה, ”it is the burnt-offering” (Leviticus 6,2), are a reference to a nation which is totally אדומית, wrapped up in earthly concerns, and which elevates itself as is written in Ovadiah 4, “even if you rise as high as the eagle I will bring you down, על מוקדה, on the site of the altar where the fire is burning.” The word is a reference to the fires of Gehinom in the hereafter. The words of Daniel 7,11 apply to such people ויהבת ליקדת אשא, “and consigned to the fire’s burning.”
   ויעקב איש תם, “and Yaakov was a straightforward man.” Actually, the Torah should have written: ויעקב היה איש תם. This would have corresponded to the line ויהי עשו איש יודע ציד, or ויהי הבל רועה צאן (Genesis 4,2). On the other hand, there too Kayin’s vocation is described in the terms וקין היה עובד אדמה, “Kayin had become a tiller of the soil.” Why these changes in describing the development of the respective people and their vocations? The expression היה, “he was,” or “he had become,” is used in connection with Esau as he had been called “Esau” already at birth and he remained Esau until the day he died. Just as Esau’s name did not change so his character did not undergo any change either. Not so Yaakov, who eventually qualified for the name Israel (Genesis 35,10). This is why the word היה, or ויהי would not have been appropriate in connection with describing his vocation. When G’d changed his name, He emphasised the permanence of that change by using the very word יהיה, (a form of הויה) which the Torah had avoided using earlier.
    Furthermore, actually the Torah should have written: ויעקב איש אמת, “and Yaakov was a man of truth.” His principal characteristic was אמת, “truth.” This is what Michah was at pains to point out when he said (Michah 7,20) תתן אמת ליעקב, “Grant truth to Yaakov, kindness to Avraham, etc.” Instead the Torah added the word תם to describing Yaakov as a יושב אהלים, “a dweller in tents,” a student of Torah, in order to already hint at that quality אמת by attributing to him two of the three letters in that word. The letters תם also allude to the quality of being מכריע, reconciling apparent contradictions and deciding on a certain path. The quality is known as תיומת. We encounter the word in connection with the adhesion between two leaves in the Lulav. The quality is one which reconciles opposites and pursues a middle of the way between the two extremes. In this instance Yaakov combined the major characteristics of his grandfather Avraham, i.e. חסד, love, and the major characteristic of his father i.e. פחד or גבורה, and he moulded them into a viable combination. This is why he succeeded in raising 13 children all of whom remained true to his heritage. 
    You are aware that the numerical value of the letters in the name Yaakov (182) when combined with 4 letters of the Ineffable Name (each counted as 1)  amount to 186. At the same time, the numerical value of the letters in that Ineffable Name when squared also amount  to 186. This may be the reason why Rabbi Akivah said that קוף=the name of G’d.
   יושב אהלים, “a dweller in tents.” The plain meaning of the text is that Yaakov spent his time in the tents of Shem and Ever, i.e. in their academies.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: The reason the Torah speaks about the word “tents” in the plural, i.e. אהלים, seeing hat most people dwell in only one tent at a time, is that Yaakov demonstrated that one could live in the tent of the “higher” regions and in the tent of the “lower” regions of the universe simultaneously; We have been taught already (Bereshit Rabbah 68,12 ) that the countenance of Yaakov is engraved on the throne of G’d. In view of this, the expression יושב אהלים (404) is equivalent to the numerical value of the words יושב הכסא, “The One who sits on the Throne.” 
    
    25,28. ויאהב יצחק את עשו כי ציד בפיו, “Yitzchak loved Esau for he had a taste for game.” The Torah conveys to us here that the reason Yitzchak loved (preferred) Esau was not because he was the firstborn, but because he used to enjoy the venison Esau brought home from the field. This teaches us that the wicked Esau hunted on two tracks. He used to hunt the animals in the field and the desert, true to the Torah’s description of him as an איש שדה. At the same time, he also used to “hunt” his father’s mind, i.e. to mislead him as a hunter does his prey, making Yitzchak believe that he was pious. This is the double entendre of the words כי ציד בפיו, for “the art of hunting was with his mouth.” Our sages in Tanchuma ToIdot 8 have said that Esau used to ask his father such questions as “does salt have to be tithed?” This would impress Yitzchak favourably and he would wonder how careful Esau was with the performance of all the commandments. When he used to ask Esau: “my son where have you been today?” Esau would reply that he had been in the house of study. He would proceed to tell his father what he had learned on that day. The Holy Spirit, when hearing such lies, would proclaim: “When he speaks graciously, do not believe him; for there are seven abominations in his heart.“ (Proverbs 24,25) Furthermore, the sages in the same Midrash derived from this wording  that the reason Esau went hunting and was feeding the venison he hunted to his father was only in order to secure the blessing for himself. This is the mystical dimension of the Torah writing in Deut. 16,19 “for the bribe blinds the eyes of the wise.” In connection with Yitzchak, the Torah had written “his eyes had become weak from seeing” (Genesis 27,1). Just as Esau was a man paying bribes, so his descendants were willing to receive bribes. The Torah (25,30) reports Esau as saying to Yaakov הלעיטני נא, “please feed me, etc.” Concerning this David said in Psalms 68,31מתרפס ברצי כסף , “till they come cringing with pieces of silver.” They (Esau’s descendants) derive their power from their celestial counterpart (the scapegoat mentioned in Leviticus 16 offered to Azzazel) who accepts this offering as a bribe by the Jewish people on the Day of Atonement. (compare commentary on Leviticus 16,7). In a similar manner every single nation derives whatever power sustains it from its celestial representative at the court of the angels. It is the same source from which the original serpent had derived its power and ability to seduce Eve. Once it was able to seduce, it was capable of spilling the blood of its victims. Such seducers became the cause of all those who choose to eat blood. Such forces are diametrically opposed to the Israelites who are circumcised (i.e. had given up their blood for G’d instead of consuming it), and who therefore abstain from eating any kind of blood. When an accuser of the Jewish people wants to seduce us, one of the first laws he wants us to break is that of circumcising our male children. Once this law has been broken the consumption of blood is only a small step. [it appears that the author refers to philosophical attempts at converting Jews to Christianity seeing that the Moslems abide by circumcision. Ed.] Adhering to these two laws (circumcision and the prohibition to eat blood), is therefore cardinal in our effort to stave off conversion and this is why the prophet said of the descendants of Esau (Ezekiel 15,6)  אם לא דם שנאת, ודם ירדפך, “surely you have hated blood (the prohibition of it) and blood will pursue you.” The prophet predicted Esau’s (Edom) eventual destruction because as descendants of Avraham they rejected the commandment of circumcision as they hated to lose blood (instead of consuming it) This is also the mystical dimension of Jeremiah 48,10 וארור מונע חרבו מדם,”cursed be he who withholds his sword from blood.” (The prophet speaks of the blood of circumcision).
    
    25,29. ויזד יעקב נזיד, “Yaakov cooked a dish.” We would have expected the Torah to write that Yitzchak cooked such a dish seeing it was on account of mourning for his father Avraham. Seeing that the mourner must not eat what he has cooked himself, this dish had to be prepared by a third party, i.e. Yaakov. It was a dish of lentils as it was the custom to eat such a dish in the house of mourners. The lentil is round and closed like a wheel, and it thereby symbolises the recurring nature of physical life on earth which ends where it began, i.e. “dust thou art and to dust thou shalt return.” As the lentil has no “mouth,” opening, so the mourner is not to open conversations (or speak at all). 
    Avraham had died on this day. He had been fortunate to have been spared seeing one of his grandchildren despise the birthright and to forsake his teachings. According to Baba Batra 16 Esau committed five different sins on that very day. 1) He slept with a girl who was betrothed to another man. 2) He killed a human being. 3) He scoffed at the idea of resurrection. 4) He denied the existence of G’d, and reward and punishment. 5) He despised the birthright. The Talmud finds allusions in Scripture to support all these allegations 1) The Torah describes Esau here as ויבא עשו מן השדה, and in connection with the prohibition of sleeping with a girl who is betrothed to another, the Torah worded this in Deut. 22,27 כי בשדה מצאה “for he found her in the field.” The choice of the words: “in the field” is not arbitrary but an allusion to what happened here. The allusion to Esau committing murder is based on the words here כי עיף אנכי, “for I am exhausted,” and the verse in Jeremiah 4,31 כי עיפה נפשי להורגים, “for my soul is exhausted from killing.” The allusion to Esau denying resurrection of the dead is based on Esau saying here הנה אנכי הולך למות, “here I am going towards death,” and Job 7,9 כלה ענן וילך כן יורד שאול לא יעלה, “as a cloud fades away, so whoever goes down to Sheol does not come up.” As to Esau denying the existence of G’d and the system of reward and punishment, the sages point at the expression in our paragraph where Esau said למה זה לי, “what good is all this for me,” and the words זה אלי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I will glorify him;” this was the affirmation of G’d sung by the Jewish people after they had emerged from the sea and the Egyptians had been drowned in it (Exodus 15,2). The fact that Esau despised the birthright needs no allusion as it is spelled out right here.
    
    25,30. הלעיטני נא, “please let me gulp down, etc.” he spoke foolishly by using such an expression which is normally applied to the manner in which camels eat their food (compare Shabbat 155). This prompted our sages in Tanchuma Pinchas 13 to say that “the righteous eat their food in order to sate their biological needs, i.e. לשובע, whereas the belly of the wicked always feels unfulfilled.” You may contrast the conduct of an Eliezer, Avraham’s servant, with that of Esau. The former said הגמיאיני נא מעט מים, “please let me sip a little water(24,17),” whereas Esau said: “let me gulp down!” When the sages spoke of the righteous they referred to Eliezer, whereas when they spoke about the belly of the wicked, they referred to Esau.
   מן האדום האדום הזה, “from this reddish looking stuff;” the lentils were red, or they were spiced in red looking spice-dishes so that they reflected the colour of the container they were in. Seeing that Esau could not identify the exact nature of the dish he referred to it only by colour, calling it “this red stuff.” Subsequently people who heard about this called him אדום, “the red one,” making fun of his boorishness. They referred to someone who traded a valuable birthright for a mess of some reddish-looking stuff with sarcasm.
    Another way of looking at our verse: the fact that Esau repeated the word אדום, red, had to do with the discipline of astrology. The planet Mars is (looks) red and as such is a symbol of war and bloodshed. According to the scientists the red-coloured fruit also derives some of its power from that planet. The same applies to certain red-coloured gemstones such as rubies. In other words, the planet Mars extends influence over some of all three categories of phenomena in our world, the living creatures, the plants, as well as the inert. This planet (horoscope) was Esau’s especially, and that is why later on Yitzchak blessed him with a power he already possessed, i.e. the power of the sword. When he asked Yaakov to give him from the “red” dish he meant that this dish more than any other was germane to his character. He expected to renew his flagging spirits from a red dish faster than from any dish of another colour. Esau came by his inclination to shed blood naturally as he had been born under that horoscope. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, in Bereshit Rabbah 63,12 expanding on that theme, said that just as Esau himself was red, so his food was red, his country was red, his clothing was red  and when the time comes that he has to give an accounting for his crimes the payment demanded from him will be red, i.e. blood. Mount Seir, which was the land allocated to Esau was also known as ארץ אדום, “the red land” (Genesis 32,4). The Midrash quotes verses documenting Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish’s statement.
    
    25,31. מכרה כיום את בכורתך לי, “sell me your birthright effective today!” At that time, the privileges connected with the birthright did not include a double portion in the father’s inheritance as was legislated in the Torah later on. The principal value of the birthright consisted in filling the father’s position of head of the family once the father passed away. It was more a position of honour than of immediate financial advantage. It also was accompanied by a certain amount of authority within the family, of course. According to Nachmanides, once the father had died,  the firstborn would be in charge of the family’s estate. This is what Esau referred to when he said: “what good is the birthright to me as my pursuits will lead to my death,” i.e. I will never outlive my father to reap the benefits of my potential privileges. This then is the meaning of the sequence: “he ate, he drank, he went (on his way), i.e. Esau despised the birthright.” He demonstrated his lifestyle by the manner in which he negated the value of the birthright for him.
    
    25,34. ויעקב נתן לעשו לחם ונזיד עדשים, “and Yaakov had given to Esau bread and a dish of lentils, etc.” At this point in the story the Torah reveals the nature of the dish Yaakov had cooked when Esau arrived home when we read: “Yaakov was cooking a dish.” It would have been more appropriate to mention the kind of dish Yaakov had been cooking already at the beginning of the paragraph and to continue later that Yaakov had given Esau a dish of lentils. It is possible that the Torah chose this sequence in order to describe the haughtiness of Esau as well as his lack of etiquette and regard for others; this is why the Torah did not mention what precisely Yaakov had been cooking until it had told us Esau’s whole range of reactions to what he found at home on that day. As long as we did not know what kind of ordinary dish Yaakov had cooked, we could have credited Esau with demanding the exotic dish that his brother had been preparing and that this had been the reason that he was so willing to trade his birthright for it. When the Torah, finally tells us at the end of the paragraph the nature of the dish for which Esau traded his birthright, it wanted to show us how Esau had related to it in the first place.
    
    26,1.ויהי רעב בארץ מלבד הרעב הראשון , “There was famine on earth, apart from the first famine, etc.” Nachmanides writes concerning this statement that it is possible that the first famine on earth was the one reported in Genesis 12,10 during the days of Avraham. His comment is surprising in view of what we learned in Bereshit Rabbah 64,2 that there were a total of 10 famines which have been mentioned in the Bible, the first one of which occurred in the days of Adam as a result of G’d cursing the earth for his sake (Genesis 3,17). The second is supposed to have occurred during the time of Lemech, Noach’s father who greeted Noach’s birth as a good omen, saving mankind from the earth which had been cursed (Genesis 5,29).
    The correct interpretation of our verse is that the word “the first famine,” referred to in our verse describes the post-deluvian world, not the “first” ever. This is evident even from the continuation of Nachmanides’ commentary in which he writes: “for they were remembering the first famine and telling each other about it.” On account of that famine Avraham had felt impelled to leave the land of Canaan and to descend to Egypt. Yitzchak, true to the example set by his father, wanted to do the same, until G’d restrained him by telling him not to go to Egypt.
    Nachmanides, in commenting on this whole paragraph, involving Yitzchak and Avimelech, writes: “this entire paragraph is full of allusions and foreshadows what would happen to the Jewish people when they would go into exile to the land of the Babylonians. Whereas the exile of Avraham into Egypt had been due to a famine, foreshadowing that his descendants would also descend there on account of a famine, this exile of Avraham to Gerar was voluntary (Genesis 20,1) “Avraham journeyed from there to the land of the South and settled between Kadesh and Shur and he sojourned in Gerar.”
    The descent of Yitzchak to Gerar, as opposed to that of his father, was involuntary and occurred at the specific command of G’d. (verse 2) It therefore can serve as a preview of an exile to a land one’s fathers had come from. Just as Avraham had come from Babylonia before migrating to the land of Canaan, so when his or Yitzchak’s descendants would march into exile it was fitting that the place they would be exiled to would be the land they had originally come from. Please remember that Yitzchak’s “exile” was different from his father’s. Avimelech did not rob him of his wife. He only lived in fear that this might happen, fear being one of the hallmarks of living in exile. At the beginning, as soon as Yitzchak arrived, Avimelech had issued instructions that no one should dare harm Yitzchak (verse 11), whereas ultimately he expelled him from his country (verse 16). Eventually, the same people who had expelled him sought an alliance with Yitzchak. This is very similar to the experience of the Jewish people during the Babylonian exile. The exile commenced due to the terrors of hunger (Lamentations 5,10). During the Jews’ stay in Babylon they were not oppressed, and many of them rose to positions of great influence. Finally, [after the Babylonians had themselves become vassals of the Persians, Ed.] King Coresh proclaimed that they were free to return to their homeland and gave them money and a military escort to protect them on the way (Ezra 1,3). He even warned the surrounding kingdoms not to molest the returning Jews (Ezra chapter 4 and Daniel chapter 7).
    Basically, what the Torah tells us in this paragraph is that there was a famine and Yitzchak went to the land of the Philistines, a land governed by the same Avimelech who had already governed it in the days of Yitzchak’s father and who had concluded a sacred covenant with his father. This was the reason Avimelech did not dare touch Yitzchak. [originally, Avimelech had requested the covenant because he was afraid of what might happen to his offspring when the Jews would take over the country. It had not occurred to him that Avraham’s son might use his own country as a safe haven from famine. Ed.]. The inquiry about the status of Rivkah was not made by Avimelech but by the local inhabitants, and this is why the Torah was careful to write (verse 7) “the men of the place inquired about his wife.” In spite of being told that Rivkah was not Yitzchak’s wife they did not molest her remembering the covenant with Avraham, Yitzchak’s father. When Avimelech protested to Yitzchak that “someone from the local population almost slept with Rivkah,” (verse 10) he meant: “I did not touch her and I was extremely careful not to get involved with her. But, at the same time, it was very possible that one of my countrymen could have done so and then you Avraham would have been the immediate cause of making us guilty just as happened in your father’s time.” Thus far Nachmanides
    
    26,3. גור בארץ הזאת, “dwell in this land.” G’d commanded Yitzchak not to leave the boundaries of the Holy Land. The reason was that he had been sanctified when he lay bound on the altar on Mount Moriah in order to become a burnt-offering (Bereshit Rabbah 64,3). [some ancient sources combine this with the fact that Yitzchak was born in Eretz Yisrael. Ed.] Had Yitzchak left the country he would have become ritually impure, just as are all the people outside the land of Israel.
    Why did G’d phrase the command not to leave Eretz Yisrael as גור! “dwell as a stranger,” when He had already told him in the previous verse שכון בארץ, “live permanently in the land!?” He wanted to give Yitzchak a hint of the גור אריה, the vision Yitzchak had seen while lying bound, something which transformed him into the epitome of פחד יצחק, the heading under which our tradition sums up Yitzchak’s relationship with G’d. It was because of this vision that when Yitzchak found out that he had been deceived by both his sons when he gave the blessing to Yaakov, that the Torah reports: ויחרד יצחק חרדה גדולה, ”Yitzchak experienced a very great trembling (27,33).” [being wrong in one’s assessment of such an important matter as almost giving the power to bless and to curse to an unworthy person was a traumatic experience for someone whose life was based on the attribute of Justice. Ed.]
    
    26,5. עקב אשר שמע אברהם בקולי, "“because Avraham was obedient to Me.” This is the source of our sages in Nedarim 32 claiming that Avraham recognised his Maker when only three years old. He had lived for 175 years. When you add up the numerical value of the letters in the word עקב, you get 172. If you deduct this number from 175, the resulting number 3 is the number of years when Avraham was not yet obeying G’d’s commandments because he had not yet recognised Him as such.
   וישמר משמרתי, מצותי, חוקותי ותורותי, “he observed My safeguards, My commandments, My statutes and My moral/ethical instructions.” If we follow the approach of interpreting these nuances as the plain text, we must assume that G’d spoke of the seven Noachide laws which are applicable to all of mankind. The word מצותי then applies to the prohibition of robbery and bloodshed; the word חוקותי applies to the law not to eat tissue or blood from a living creature, as well as not to mate different species of animals with one another or to do the same with trees by crossbreeding. The word תורותי refers to the prohibition of all kinds of idolatry as well as to the positive commandment to establish a judiciary. People observing these laws are considered as doing G’d’s will. Finally, וישמר משמרתי “keeping G’d’s safeguards,” is a reference to “fences” around Biblical commandments to ensure that even if a “fence” had been violated, the Biblical commandment itself would remain inviolate. According to Bereshit Rabbah 64,4 Avraham was familiar even with such concepts as making an עירוב in private property to avoid becoming guilty of transferring property from one domain to another on the Sabbath. There is a view expressed in the same Midrash that the tractate Avodah Zarah dealing with idolatry and its sub-categories studied by Avraham was comprised of 400 chapters. The repetition of the word משמרתי after G’d had already said that Avraham observed, i.e. וישמר, is a reference to secondary incestuous relationships which were not even spelled out in the legislation concerning forbidden (sexual) marital relationships  in the written Torah.
    The opinion of our sages is that the words וישמור משמרתי refers to Avraham observing voluntarily all the laws of the Torah which had not yet been legislated. According to this opinion it would be inappropriate for the Torah to commence the list with subordinate rabbinical ordinances before mention had been made of Biblical commandments. The verse divides these 613 commandments into specific categories each with its own heading. Basically, there are three categories of commandments. The first are called עדות, ”testimonies,” and comprise commandments which the mind can readily understand and which are therefore easy to fulfill. The second category is called חוקים. They are in the nature of Royal decrees which are usually incomprehensible to the human being, the subject of the King, as they are based on a superior intelligence. Finally, there is the category called משפטים,  social laws, which are generally readily understandable. We find that the Torah quotes future generations of Israelites as dividing the Torah into these three categories when the Torah writes: מה העדות והחוקים והמשפטים, “what is the respective significance of these three categories of laws in the Torah?” (Deut. 6,20) The division in our verse is similar except that the social laws are referred to as תורותי, “My moral/ethical imperatives.” Furthermore, the reason for that word (and two others) appearing in the plural is that it refers to both the written as well as the “oral” Torah. The Talmud Yuma 28 states that Avraham even observed the various rabbinical ordinances such asעירובי תבשילין  and עירובי תחומים. The former involves preparing food for the holiday before the holiday if the Sabbath occurred immediately after the holiday, in order that it would not appear that the holiday was used to prepare for the Sabbath. עירובי תחומים, on the other hand, is a device employed to change the radius of one’s habitat prior to the Sabbath by means of depositing food at the centre of the new radius in order to fulfill duties such as welcoming Torah scholars who did not reach that area prior to the beginning of the Sabbath. Ed.] In illustrating the fact that our patriarchs taught their children all these aspects of Torah which had not been legislated as yet, they quote Genesis 45,21 in which the Torah refers to the wagons Joseph sent to transport his father Israel down to Egypt. The choice of the word עגלות for such wagons [which is less appropriate than, say, מרכבה, Ed.] is interpreted as Joseph reminding his father that the last subject in their Torah study they had learned prior to his going on his ill-fated mission, was the one called עגלה ערופה, the heifer which needs to be killed in order to atone for a murder committed near a Jewish community when the murderer has not been found. Joseph hinted to his father that during the 22 years he had not seen him he had maintained his custom to study Torah.
    The meaning of the word משמרתי according to this approach would be “the safeguards erected by the rabbis against violating Biblical injunctions on the Sabbath.” When we reflect on these opinions offered by the Talmud and subsequent scholars that the patriarchs observed even minutiae of later rabbinical ordinances, the question comes to mind how Yaakov could ignore a Biblical injunction and marry two sisters while both were alive, or how he could erect a מצבה, a monument, or how Amram could marry his aunt Yocheved? Not only that, but Moses himself, after the Ten Commandments had been revealed, erected 12 monuments as spelled out in Exodus 24,4. In answering these questions Nachmanides (in his commentary on Leviticus 18,28) points out that the principal function of the laws of the Torah is that they be observed within the boundaries of Eretz Yisrael. When the patriarchs did observe them, they did so in an entirely voluntary fashion. Seeing that the “so-called” infractions we mentioned occurred outside of Eretz Yisrael they were no infractions at all. The patriarchs had decided in each of these instances that the reasons for not observing these laws at that time and in that place were stronger than that they should voluntarily observe them.
    
    26,12. ויזרע יצחק בארץ ההיא,  “Yitzchak planted in that land, etc.” The reason the Torah emphasised “in that land,” is that it was hard ground, did not usually produce much. Considering the fact that the year was one of famine the achievement by Yitzchak in securing a hundredfold return on his seed was all the more remarkable. The place where he had planted the seed was Gerar. This is where these remarkable “hidden” miracles happened for him. The land was so parched that when the local people finally found some water, they exclaimed: “we have found water!” (verse 32)
   מאה שערים, “one hundredfold.” At the end of tractate Ketuvot (folio 112) our sages explain that when the land of Israel enjoys G’d’s blessing, one בית סעה, of earth will yield a crop of 50,000 כור of grain. In the period when Tzoan in Egypt was at the height of its development, the yield of a measure of earth of a בית סעה would be equivalent  to 70 כור. This is documented by Rabbi Meir having personally observed that in the valley of Beit Shean (Jordan valley) one בית סעה produced 70 כור. He added that there is no soil which is reputed to be richer than that of Egypt, i.e. the region around Tzoan, which the Torah described as being “like a garden of G’d” (Genesis 13,10), and where the Egyptian kings were being raised. We know this from Isaiah 30,4 where the prophet mentions that Egypt’s princes and kings were in Tzoan, and that the fertile region extended a far as Chaness. On the other hand, there was no more rocky region in Eretz Yisrael than the region of Hebron and in spite of this the single cluster of grapes which were brought back by the spies from that region had to be carried by eight men. The Torah had reported that Hebron had been cultivated seven years earlier than Tzoan in Egypt (Numbers 13,22). This number is not to be taken at face value, as it would have no bearing on what the Torah was trying to tell us in that verse. The meaning is that even in a rocky place in the land of Israel such as Hebron, the yield is seven times that of the yield of similar produce planted in Tzoan, i.e. 490 כור. In an area which is not covered with rocks such as Hebron the yield may be presumed to be 500 כור. The Talmud concludes its discussion on the relative fertility of the best part of Egypt and the worst part of the land of Israel by saying that the reason why the Torah makes a comparison is to teach that the worst part in the land of Israel is seven times superior to the best part of Egypt even if that part of Eretz Yisrael does not enjoy a special blessing during the year in question. Our verse then points out that when G’d does send His blessing the result is 100 times as great as in normal years (which themselves are phenomenal by world-wide standards.)
    
    26,15. וכל הבארות אשר חפרו עבדי אביו, “and all the wells which the servants of his father had dug, etc.” The Torah simply tells us that the Philistines were so jealous of Yitzchak’s success that they closed down wells which Avraham had dug in order to deny Yitzchak the opportunity of benefiting from his father’s foresight. They wanted to deny Yitzchak the water he needed to sustain his herds and flocks. Eventually, Yitzchak bestirred himself and he redug the same wells making sure he kept the names his father had given to these wells. The Torah reports this seemingly insignificant detail to acquaint us with the meticulous way Yitzchak adhered to the norms his father had taught him. Perhaps, this is even the reason why the Torah never reports that Yitzchak’s own name was changed, as distinct from the names of both his father and his son Yaakov. This would be a further illustration of the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, that G’d responds in kind. [Yitzchak had been named already prior to his birth and never needed to have his name adjusted in order to encourage him to become more perfect. Ed.]
    Some commentators claim that the wells are allusions to converts who had been converted in Avraham’s time to monotheism. The allusion would symbolise that conversion was as easy as accepting a source of water which the earth provides for free. Opening a heart which had been closed to belief in G’d is compared to “digging.” This is why the Torah describes the Philistines as having stopped up the hearts of these converts, i.e. filled them with dust. Allegorically speaking, whereas Avraham had filled the mouths of these converts with “water,” i.e. life-giving Torah knowledge, their pagan compatriots filled them with earth. The expression עפר, “earth, dust” to describe pagan religious concepts is not novel; we find it in Baba Batra 16 as describing someone like Job who used specious arguments to decry G’d’s system of Justice. The Torah reports that after a while Yitzchak made the effort to reconvert these converts his father had made. It is the nature of people who engage in missionary activity to place a great deal of emphasis on the names they give to their converts. Yitzchak did just this and named the people with whom he succeeded with the very same names his father had given them when they converted to monotheism. The source for this is Isaiah 65,15: “He calls His servants by another name.”
    
    26,19.ויחפרו עבדי יצחק בנחל וימצאו שם באר מים חיים , “Yitzchak’s servants dug in the valley and they discovered there a well of living water.” Nachmanides comments on this as follows: “The reason the Torah devotes so much space to the digging of wells  is not because the knowledge of these facts is so useful to us, nor is the reason that the Torah wished to publicly honour Yitzchak for his activities in developing the area agriculturally. Rather, the reason is hat these details are allusions to what would happen to the Jewish people in their history long after Yitzchak had died. The words באר מים חיים, “a well of living water,” is an allusion to the Holy Temple of which it is written in Jeremiah 17,13: מקור מים חיים את ה', ”The Fount of living waters.” The first well which was called עשק is an allusion to the first Temple which became the object of contention (התעשקו) between the Jewish people and its adversaries until, in the end, they managed to destroy it. The second well, named שטנה, hatred, illustrates an even greater hatred than that which surrounded the first Temple and is an allusion to the second Temple, concerning which it has been written: “during the reign of Achashverosh, at the beginning of his reign, they issued letters of hate against all the inhabitants of Yehudah and Yerushalayim” (Ezra 4,6). This hatred continued throughout the existence of that Temple. Eventually, our opponents succeeded in destroying it and the Jewish people were exiled under very adverse conditions. The name of this well reminds you that this is where the source of Satan is to be found. Satan is none other than the spiritual representative of Esau in the celestial regions. Satan’s preoccupation in this world is to always oppose the Jewish people with a display of hatred.
    Yitzchak named the third well רחובות, the Torah mentioning ויעתק משם, that he had previously moved from the sites of the first two wells. The meaning of these words is that Yitzchak freed himself from the mentality surrounding the second Temple and he was able to concentrate and look forward to the idyllic conditions which would exist once the third Temple would be built. Concerning that Temple it has been written in Ezekiel 41,7 ורחבה ונסבה למעלה, למעלה, “and the passage will become wider and wind its way upwards and upwards.” When that time arrives there will be no strife and hatred and G’d will expand the boundaries of our country as is written: (Deut. 12,20) “it will be when G’d will expand your boundaries as He has said to you.” This verse was written concerning a time in the distant future, the time envisaged in greater detail in the prophecies of the latter chapters of the Book of Ezekiel. Thus far Nachmanides.
    The fact that in connection with the digging of that third well the Torah associates G’d’s name with it, i.e. כי הרחיב ה' לנו ופרינו בארץ, “for G’d has granted us ample space and we can be fruitful in the land,” was a prediction applicable to the future. Seeing that the first two Temples were constructed by human hands by the instructions of Solomon and Coresh respectively, they did not endure. The third Temple which will be constructed by G’d Himself (compare Rashi in Rosh Hashanah 30,1 צריכא), will no longer be subject to destruction. This is why G’d’s name is associated here with the digging of the third well.
    I have found a Midrash which supports this. Our sages commented on Samuel II 5,7 where we read וילכוד דוד את מצודת ציון היא עיר דוד, “David captured the citadel of David which became the city of David.” The Midrash asks why the city was called after a mortal, i.e. after King David? The answer provided is that G’d knew perfectly well that the city would initially be built and subsequently destroyed by mortal human beings. This is why during the periods preceding the final Temple, Jerusalem was known as the city of David, i.e. the city of a mortal human being. However, in the future, it will bear the name of G’d Himself seeing that it would then no longer be subject to destruction. This is the meaning of Isaiah 60,14 והלכו אליך שחוח בני מעניך והשתחוו....וקראו לך עיר ה' ציון קדוש ישראל, “they shall come before you, the children of those who have tormented you....and you will be called ‘city of the Lord, Zion, the Holy One of Israel.”
    
    26,26. ואבימלך הלך אליו מגרר, “and Avimelech walked to him from Gerar.” The reason the Torah wrote מגרר, something quite superfluous, is so that we can read the word as מגורר, full of eczema; his skin had developed painful boils, etc. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 64,9).
    
    26,27. מדוע באתם אלי? ואתם שנאתם אותי ותשלחוני מאתכם!, “why do you come to me? You hate me and have driven me away from your midst!” Yitzchak reminded Avimelech and his chief of staff of three matters. 1) “why do you come to me?” He referred to the distance between Gerar and Beer Sheva where he now lived. 2)  “You hate me” on account of my being successful and the vast numbers of cattle and sheep which I own. 3) You drove me away.” He referred to the district of Gerar where he had settled previously and Avimelech had told him “go away from us for you are too powerful for us.” (26,16) Avimelech responded to all three questions. Concerning the question why he had come, he acknowledged: “we have seen very clearly that G’d is with you (verse 28). They repeated this, thus implying that Yitzchak’s success in planting and bringing in a bumper crop, plus the fact that he always found water was ample proof that G’d was on his side. As a result of this belated realisation they had come to make a covenant with him. Onkelos translates the word אלה, oath, as מומתא, “oath,” and the word תהי was meant to reconfirm an existing obligation entered into by Avraham. [They were afraid that by expelling Yitzchak they had given him cause not to feel bound by his father’s covenant with the same king. Ed.]
    A totally different explanation is quoted by our author in the name of Rabbi Ishmael the author of Sifri. [our editions of the Sifri do not have this, Rabbi Chavell]. Rabbi Ishmael views the offer of a covenant as not related to the covenant concluded with Avraham but as a new “non-aggression pact” between Yitzchak and Avimelech not to cause each other damage in any way. They wanted this to be a secret agreement that the world was not to know about. It was embarrassing for Avimelech if the world at large would hear that he had come all the way to Yitzchak to make the latter swear not to harm him in any way, and that he was so scared of Yitzchak’s power.
    Concerning Yitzchak’s second point about their hating him, Avimelech said that this was absolutely not the case and he had no cause to be hostile to them. In fact he would be ungrateful if he did them any harm seeing they had not only allowed him to depart in peace but had not prevented him from taking all his wealth with him. [In the opinion of the Gentiles, letting a Jew depart with his locally made fortune is proof that they do not hate him. Ed.] As to the third point Yitzchak had made, i.e. that they had expelled him, he had not suffered by this as G’d had made him equally successful elsewhere so that the fortune he had made could not be attributed to the location Gerar which they had recently denied him.
    
    26,34.  ויהי עשו בן ארבעים שנה ויקח אשה את יהודית בת בארי החתי ואת בשמת, “when Esau had reached the age of forty he took as a wife Yehudit daughter of Be-eri the Hittite and Bosmas.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 65,1 interpreted the wording to mean that during the first forty years of his life Esau chased married women. When he attained the age at which his father had married his mother, he decided to emulate his father’s example and to take a wife also. He reasoned: “just as my father married at the age of forty, I shall do the same.” Concerning this strange attack of sudden piety on the part of Esau, Rabbi Pinchas quoted Rabbi Seymon that it is strange that the pig has been mentioned only on two occasions by the prophets. Once by Moses who emphasised that it is unfit to be eaten by Jews (Leviticus 11,7), and the second time by Assaph in Psalms 80,14  “the wild boar gnaws at it and creatures of the field feed on it.” The psalmist uses the pig as an example of a creature which when “lying down” extends its hooves to display that it is a pure animal,  while at all other times it unabashedly disregards civilised conduct. Esau,  when getting ready to settle down, pretended to be following in the footsteps of his father by choosing the age at which his father had gotten married to emulate him. The nation descended from Esau also excels in pretending to apply civilised standards as something demanded of others while they themselves rob, plunder and murder. They have a record of perpetrating evil under the cloak of being servants of the Lord.
    Both Esau’s wives were Hittites, Canaanites, members of the seven tribes whom the Jewish people have been instructed to exterminate if they do not vacate the land of Canaan first (Deut. 20,17). The Torah informs us that wicked Esau married wives belonging to a wicked people. The verse applied to the marriages of the wicked is found in Psalms 125,5: “but those who in their crookedness act corruptly, let the Lord make them go the way of the evildoers; peace on Israel.” The psalmist means that when the wicked join other evildoers the ultimate result will be peace for Israel as the wicked will self-destruct. Hail to Israel who do not act in this fashion. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 65,3 have stated  “when a starling is seen joining a raven, this is not by accident. It proves they have something in common.” [In current parlance this is the meaning of the expression “birds of a feather.” Ed.] If Esau, though biologically descended from a father who epitomised holiness nevertheless married such women, it proved that spiritually he was totally corrupt.
    
    26,35. ותהיינה מורת רוח ליצחק ולרבקה, “they were a source of aggravation for both Yitzchak and Rivkah.” Satisfaction with something as well as knowledge of something are called רוח in our tongue as we know from Sifri Pinchas on (Numbers 27,16) that the leader must be able to confront every individual’s spirit and make it amenable to his own. We are told in our verse that each of the wives of Esau refused to fall in with the wishes of either Yitzchak or Rivkah. They angered both Yitzchak and Rivkah in all they did, as they did so provocatively.
    According to a Midrash Tanchuma Toldot 8 the words  מורת רוח mean מרימת רוח, “they caused the holy spirit which had previously rested on Yitzchak as well as on Rivkah to lift itself off Yitzchak and Rivkah and  to depart from them.” Departure of holy spirit from a person may be due to two reasons. 1) Because a person becomes angry and loses his “cool.” We have a tradition that holy spirit rests on a person only when he is in a joyous frame of mind (Berachot 31). 2) Another reason why the holy spirit departs from a person is when he keeps company with wicked persons. We have observed a classic example of this when the Torah did not report G’d as communicating with Avraham until the latter had separated himself from Lot (compare Genesis 13,14). Bereshit Rabbah 65,4 states that one of Esau’s wives was a daughter of a priest. Seeing that Rivkah herself was a daughter of an idolatrous priest, she did not mind so much when she saw garbage of idolatry. [my version of this Midrash. All of this would only explain why Yitzchak reacted earlier to this phenomenon than Rivkah. Ed.].
    
    27,1. ותכהין עיניו מראות, ”his eyes weakened due to seeing.” According to the plain meaning of the text, a decline in the quality of vision is a normal phenomenon in people who reach a certain age, We find such a phenomenon as occurring to the prophet Achiyah Hashiloni (Kings I 14,4). When the Torah testified that Moses at 120 had not lost any part of his vision or any other bodily functions, (Deut. 34,7) this is reported precisely because it was a miracle.
    A Midrashic approach. Bereshit Rabbah 65,7 attributes Yitzchak’s failing eyesight to his being bribed with venison by his son Esau. The Torah had taught in Exodus 23,8 that one must not accept bribes and that accepting bribes “blinds the eyes of the seeing.” At that point, the Torah addresses judges and warns them not to accept bribes. Continuing with that subject, Rabbi Yitzchak said: “if someone who accept bribes from someone (such as his son who is obligated to feed him in his old age) is punished for accepting such favours, how much more is this true of someone who accepts such favours from a person who does not owe him anything!” Another approach of an homiletical nature is this: Yitzchak’s eyesight was impaired in order to enable Yaakov to obtain the blessing (Tanchuma Toldot 8). Still another approach: Yitzchak’s failing eyesight was due to the smoke from the incense his daughters-in-law offered to idols. [this leaves open why Rivkah’s eyes were not similarly affected. Maybe because she was so much younger. Ed.] Yet another reason offered in the Midrash: It was to prevent Yitzchak from leaving his house so that when people saw him they should not point to him as the father of the wicked Esau (compare Bereshit Rabbah 65,10). G’d hit on a stratagem to keep him indoors by blinding him. This would be reflected in the verse (Proverbs 28,28) “when the wicked rise up, other men go into hiding;” this prompted our sages to say that if someone raises a son who turns out to be wicked his eyes will become dimmed. They quote what happened to Yitzchak as proof for their contention. The reason that Achiyah Hashiloni lost his eyesight was that Jerobam ben Nevat, the King who placed golden calves on the road to Jerusalem to prevent his subjects from travelling to the Temple, was his star pupil.
    A totally different approach (Bereshit Rabbah 65,10) ascribes Yitzchak’s failing eyesight not to his age but to the fact that while he was bound on the altar he had beheld a forbidden vision of G’d, something which G’d did not want to punish him for at that stage. However, G’d decreed at that very hour that He would deprive Yitzchak of his eyesight at some time in the future. If G’d had punished Yitzchak immediately, He would have subjected not only Avraham to a test but also Yitzchak; this was not His intention at the time. This is based on the Torah writing מראות, “as a result of seeing something.” Had the Torah simply wanted to inform us that Yitzchak’s failing eyesight was a normal phenomenon it would have written מלראות, i.e. “his eyes became too weak to see.” Bereshit Rabbah 65,10  illustrates this with a parable. A King went for a private stroll behind the gate of his palace. When he raised his eyes he noticed that the son of a dearly beloved friend espied him from his window. Thereupon the King reasoned as follows: “if I kill that son, I will cause anguish to my friend. I will instead decree that the windows all  be closed so that the son in question can no longer use it to spy on me.” A similar thing happened during the binding of Yitzchak. If G’d had punished Yitzchak for not closing his eyes and watching something he was not supposed to watch, He would be causing anguish to Avraham at the very moment when He was testing him. This is the meaning of Isaiah 5,23 מצדיקי רשע עקב שוחד וצדקת צדיקים יסירו ממנו,  “who vindicate him who is in the wrong in return for a bribe, and withhold vindication from him who is in the right.” The prophet alludes to Yitzchak who, because of the venison he used to provide for his father, enjoyed his father’s favour. The second half of the verse refers to Moses and the fact that his eyesight was not withheld from him even at the age of 120 as he had never accepted any bribe.
   ויקרא את עשו בנו הגדול, “he called in Esau his elder son.” Both his father and his mother referred to Esau as גדול, “senior.” Rivkah is on record as doing so in verse 15 when the Torah tells us where Esau kept his valuable clothes. G’d, on the other hand, referred to Esau as קטן, “junior.” We know this from Ovadiah 2 הנה קטן נתתיך בגוים, “here I have made you junior amongst the nations.” The meaning of the word גדול is justified according to the popular proverb לקבל תורא טבחא, “one hands over the fully grown ox for slaughter.” Compare Isaiah 34,6: “For the Lord holds a sacrifice in Bozrah, a great slaughter in the land of Edom.” The prophet speaks of retribution being meted out to the descendants of Esau. Ed.] On the other hand, the reason the description “junior” when applied to Yaakov may be appropriate on occasions is that in verse 30 where he is so described  by his mother, G’d retaliated in due cause by referring to Israel as ומי גוי גדול בארץ, “who is a great nation on earth such as Israel” (Deut. 4,5).
    
    27,3. ועתה שא נא כליך, “and now, please make ready your gear, etc.” Yitzchak referred to Esau’s sword and to his bow. It is customary for the hunter to gird both his sword and to take his quiver and bow with which to hunt fowl. This, at any rate, is the plain meaning of these words. Yitzchak also hinted that the weapons Esau’s offspring would depend on were precisely these lethal instruments.
    According To Bereshit Rabbah 65,13 the words שא נא כליך are a reference to the Kingdom of Babylon as we read in Daniel 1,2 ואת הכלים הביא בבלה, “and the vessels (Temple utensils) he (Nebuchadnezzar) brought to Babylon.” The word תליך, “your quiver,” refers to the Medes as we read in Esther 7,10 ויתלו את המן, “they hung Haman.” The word וקשתך, “and your bow,” is a reference to the Greek Empire as we read in Zechariah 9,13: כי דרכתי לי יהודה קשת, “for I have drawn Yehudah taut as a bow, etc.;” finally, the words וצא השדה are a reference to the Roman Empire as we read in Genesis 32,2: ארצה שעיר שדה אדום, “to the land of Seir, which will become the field of Edom, Rome.”
    
    27,4. ועשה לי מטעמים ...בעבור תברכך נפשי, “and prepare them for me as a tasty dish,...in order that my soul may bless you.” When Yitzchak appeared to emphasise the taste of the food he asked Esau to prepare for him he did not allude to the physical enjoyment he would derive from this as an objective in itself. He meant that the pleasant frame of mind he would be in after eating such a meal would result in his enjoying a degree of holy spirit so that his blessing of his son would become effective. Our sages in Shabbat 30 are on record that the שכינה, the benevolent presence of G’d, does not rest on a person when he is inert, lazy, nor when he is sad, but only when he is in a joyous frame of mind. They base this on Kings II 3,15 (where Elisha could not muster the spirit of prophecy and he instructed that music be played) “as the musician played, the hand of the Lord came upon him, etc.” This is the reason Yitzchak was careful to speak of his נפש, “his soul” enjoying the food; he did not want Esau to think that he wanted his body to enjoy this food. You will notice this repeated emphasis on נפשי, נפשך during this entire episode. The Torah wanted us to know the real reason Yitzchak ordered מטעמים, “delicious food,” to be prepared for him. If you were to ask why he did not simply order music to be played as did the prophets, or for that matter as did King Saul when he wanted to rid himself of a melancholy state of mind, the reason is that the blessing he was about to bestow was not of a spiritual kind but of a mundane nature, commanding earthly, bodily blessings to be granted to Esau by G’d. We see that in verse 19 Yitzchak called down “dew from the sky,” assured Esau (whom he thought he was addressing) the fat parts of the earth, corn and wine to be plentiful, etc.” It is quite understandable then that the frame of mind he was trying to achieve in order to pronounce these blessings with full concentration had to be based on his having enjoyed these very benefits himself recently.
    Here is an interesting excerpt of how our sages viewed the detail provided by the Torah in this whole paragraph. The Talmud Rosh Hashanah 16 asks: “why did the Torah command the libations of water which had to accompany the Mussaph offerings on the festival of Tabernacles?” Answer: “In order for G’d to bestow on us the blessings of an adequate water supply, Tabernacles being the season when we pray for this, i.e. for the rains to be rains of blessing.” Why did the Torah command the Jewish people to offer the “Omer” offering, (a measure of the first ripe barley of the season)?” Answer: “In order for G’d to extend His blessing for the grain harvest which begins around this time of year.” Why did G’d command the Jewish people to offer two loaves of the new wheat harvest in the Temple on the festival of Shavuot?” Answer: “In order for G’d to bless the fruit of the trees which begin to ripen at that time of year.” These blessings, if and when they materialise, would constitute a reward for the public offerings which the Torah  commanded to be brought on those festivals. The Talmud is at pains to demonstrate the מדה כנגד מדה principle, i.e. that G’d always responds to us in the manner in which we have related to Him. We must not think that a good harvest constitutes the true reward for Torah observance, G’d forbid!  After all, our sages have told us explicitly in Kidushin 39 that the real reward for Torah observance is not dispensed in this life at all. Whatever blessings we experience in this life are only in the nature of a “dividend” compared to the capital reward which we will receive in the hereafter. Our sages illustrated this with the following example: when someone is especially meticulous about observing the commandment involving ציצית, fringes, he will find that in due course he will have prestigious looking garments. When someone is especially meticulous in the manner he observes the commandment involving מזוזות, (attaching a parchment containing the words of this commandment on his door posts), he will find that in due course he will become the owner of an imposing residence., etc. etc. The idea the sages conveyed is that the “dividend” will correspond in a recognisable manner to the type of commandment observed meticulously; however, the sages only spoke about the “dividend,” not about the real reward which has not been revealed as it is reserved for the hereafter.
    
    27,9. שני גדיי עזים טובים, “two choice kids.” Rivkah specifically commanded Yaakov to bring her two choice kids. The question that is almost forced upon one is: “did Yitzchak consume two whole young kids every day?” According to Bereshit Rabbah 65,14 the marriage contract between Rivkah and Yitzchak made her a daily allowance of two young kids (so that she was not encroaching on her husband’s property when slaughtering these animals and selecting the most tasty parts thereof to prepare for him). Rabbi Chelbo, in the same Midrash, concentrates on the word טובים which appears superfluous seeing that Yaakov had no reason to select mediocre or undernourished kids. He says that the word is an allusion to what was going to prove “good,” i.e. beneficial for Yaakov and his descendants. Seeing that these kids would be the instrument of securing the blessings for Yaakov they would prove to be “good” for him. In addition, they would prove to be good for Yaakov’s children as they would be the principal sin-offerings offered on the Day of Atonement (Leviticus 16,5) securing forgiveness for the Jewish people, Yaakov’s descendants. “They are good for you,” i.e. Yaakov’s ascendancy over Esau who is described as an איש שעיר, “a demonic individual,” was due to the scapegoats one of which was offered to the azzazel, the spiritual equivalent of Satan-Esau by the Jewish people as something like a bribe. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 14 that the words ונשא השעיר עליו את כל-עונותם, “he (the scapegoat) will carry (figuratively speaking) upon himself all their sins,” refer to the sins committed when no warning had been received by the perpetrators. The sinners were תם, not rebellious. Seeing that Yaakov has been described as איש תם, it was appropriate that such an animal should serve as the instrument of atonement for his descendants).
    The delicacies which Rivkah instructed her son Yaakov to enable her to prepare for Yitzchak were not of the type of free-roaming beasts to be found in the field, but they were domesticated animals. This is why she emphasised: “please go to the flocks.” Yaakov, after all, was not a hunter; he was a homebody, a dweller of tents who despised the sword as an instrument to gain one’s livelihood. The Israelites never offered sacrifices from categories of animals which are free-roaming, not domesticated. The prophet Jeremiah characterised the distinction between the Jewish people and the Gentiles when he said (Jeremiah 10,16) “not like these is the portion of Yaakov.” The word חלק means either “portion,” or it can mean “smooth” (with different vowels). The prophet referred to Yaakov as being a smooth-skinned man (according to 27,11). As a result of these considerations, Yaakov’s descendants were never told to offer sacrifices from the free-roaming beasts but only from the domesticated beasts as the Torah said (Leviticus 1,2) אדם כי יקריב מכם קרבן לה' מן הבהמה, “anyone of you who wishes to offer a sacrifice to G’d, from the domesticated beasts, etc.”
    
    27,19. אנכי עשו בכורך,  “it is I Esau, your firstborn.” When Yitzchak asked again: אתה זה בני עשו, “are you this son of mine Esau?” and Yaakov answers אני, “that is me,” we also have to understand the words in the same manner as here. There is no question that Yaakov spoke the truth on every occasion. This is what the prophet (Michah 7,20) emphasised when he said תתן אמת ליעקב, “You gave truth to Yaakov.” A further example of Yaakov speaking the truth when it does not appear this way at first glance, is when he said: “of all that You will give me, I will give a tenth to You as a tithe” (Genesis 28,22). He had twelve sons. When you add Ephrayim and Menashe who were Joseph’s sons of whom Yaakov said: “they shall be for me just like Reuven and Shimon,” (Genesis 48,5) this makes a total of fourteen. When you exclude from these the four firstborns (1 from each of his wives) that left ten sons who were Yaakov’s as opposed to being G’d’s. We have a rule that קדש, something already holy from birth or inception, is not subject to tithing. As a result of all this one of the ten sons had to become G’d’s, i.e. reserved for sacred rather than mundane tasks. This tribe was Levi. You observe that Yaakov’s words turned out to be true (though not recognised as true at the time they were uttered). Something similar is evident in our verse. When Yaakov said אנכי עשו, בכורך, he referred to the fact that he had acquired the birthright from Esau; he meant: “I am the one who replaces your firstborn Esau.” He knew that the only reason his father wanted to bestow the blessing on Esau was that Esau was the firstborn. He therefore hinted to his father Yitzchak that Esau had long ago ceased to be the firstborn (48 years ago) when he had sold his birthright to him. Yaakov was therefore entitled to receive the blessing his father wanted to bestow at this time. He considered himself Esau’s representative in the matter, and we know that legally speaking anyone who is the representative of the principal may act on behalf of that principal.
    If we needed proof of this, the best proof is that angels who are acting on behalf of G’d are accorded G’d’s name even, such as the angel in Exodus 3,1 who referred to himself as אני ה', “I am the Lord.” There are numerous such examples. One of the most pronounced such examples is found in Genesis 31,13 where the angel says to Yaakov: “I am the G’d of Beit El for whom you have anointed a monument (as an altar) where you have vowed to me, etc.” Clearly, the angel was speaking in the name of his Sender. [Surely, he did not mean to imply that Yaakov had built an altar in honour of an angel. Ed.]
    When Yaakov said אנכי עשו, בכורך, this was equivalent to his saying: “I am Esau,-to the extent that I am your firstborn.” Had he merely said: “I am Esau,” without adding the words “your firstborn,” this would have been a lie. The reason he added the words “your firstborn” was to draw attention to the fact that the blessing about to be dispensed was meant for the firstborn. When in response to Yitzchak’s question: אתה זה בני עשו, “are you indeed my son Esau, meaning “the one I am supposed to bless,” Yaakov answered: אני, this means: “I am the one.” Had he added the word Esau, he would have lied. By saying אני he merely meant that he was the one entitled to the blessing.
    As to Yaakov saying immediately afterwards עשיתי כאשר דברת אלי, “I have done as you instructed me,” how could this be truthful seeing that Yitzchak had not instructed him to do anything? We need to understand the word אלי as not meaning “to me,” but  as “for my benefit.” Had Yitzchak not instructed Esau to bring him venison, Rivkah would not have overheard this and would not have ordered Yaakov to obtain the blessing (albeit by subterfuge). As to Yaakov’s asking his father: (verse 19) ואכלה מצידי, “in order to eat from my venison,” seeing he had not been hunting at all, how do we explain this without making a liar out of Yaakov? The word מצידי, means “from my food, i.e. from the food I have prepared for you.” We have a parallel example in Scripture of the word ציד meaning simply “food,” in Joshua 9,14 (where the Gibeonites tricking the Israelites are described) Samuel reports ויקחו האנשים מצידם, “the men (the leaders of the Israelites) took from their (the Gibeonites’) food supply,” (in order to check if indeed these people had come from afar) etc.
   קום נא שבה, “rise up please and sit.” Esau by contrast ordered his father to rise by saying: “may my father rise” (verse 32). He did not ask him to be seated. Bereshit Rabbah 65,18, addressing this difference between how the two sons spoke to their father, writes as follows: “seeing that Yaakov had addressed his father with sensitivity and respect G’d returned the compliment in a similar manner when Moses, Yaakov’s descendant used similar language when addressing G’d in Numbers 10,35 and 10,36 with the words קומה ה’ ויפוצו אויביך..... שובה ה’ רבבות אלפי ישראל, “Arise Hashem and let Your foes be scattered;....Reside tranquilly, Hashem, among the myriad thousands of Israel.” Esau, on the other hand, who had spoken in a gross and haughty manner to his father will be paid back (to his descendants) as we know from Psalms 68,2 יקום אלוקים יפוצו אויביו, “when Elokim arises, His enemies scatter.” 
    [The meaning of this strange sounding comparison seems to be that whereas when G’d deals with the descendants of Esau He employs the attribute of Justice, when He does so at the behest of the Jewish people there will not be a negative fallout for those who implored Him to take vengeance on His enemies, seeing not only the expression קומה is used by Moses, but he referred only to the attribute of Mercy, Hashem, being involved. Ed.]
    27,22. הקול קול יעקב, “the voice is the voice of Yaakov.” We are taught in Bereshit Rabbah 65,21 that “Yaakov (the Jewish people) controls (employs as his weapon) only his voice (his weapon is prayer).” The Midrash bases this on our verse here. The Midrash continues that by the same token Esau’s control extends only over his hands (he relies only on the sword), as Yitzchak had added: “and the hands are the hands of Esau.” Similarly, we have a verse in Psalms 20,8 אלה ברכב ואלה בסוסים ואנחנו בשם אלוקינו נזכיר, “They (call) on chariots, they (call) on horses, but we call on the name of the Lord our G’d.” Moses referred to this in Numbers 20,16 when he reminded the king of Edom of the experiences of the Jewish people in Egypt. He said: “We cried out to the Lord  and He heard our voice.”
    
    Rabbi Abba bar Kahane said that the most prominent Gentile philosophers such as Bileam son of Be-or and Avnimus the Ardi were asked how one could overcome the power of the Jewish people. They were told to go to the synagogues and check on whether the young children were busily engaged studying Torah and praising the Lord. If so, they were told, there was no chance in the world to overcome these people, as their principal weapon was their voice appealing to G’d to come to their support. 
    27,33. גם ברוך יהיה “he shall also remain blessed.” Yitzchak meant that Yaakov should remain blessed by all the emanations. He said these words to teach us that if someone received a blessing from the patriarchs [who had been specifically endowed by G’d with the power to bestow blessings, Ed.] he is as if he had been blessed by G’d directly. The expression chosen by our author is מפי אלוקי אמן. [This is an expression borrowed from Isaiah 65,16 meaning that the blessing -even though its fulfillment may have been delayed -stems from the G’d who can be trusted to fulfil His promises Ed.]
    Tanchuma Toldot 13 concentrates on the word ויחרד יצחק חרדה גדולה, “Yitzchak experienced a great trembling,” explaining that the Torah repeats the word חרד to show that this was already the second time Yitzchak had trembled. The first time was on the altar on Mount Moriah. The reason why the Torah added the words עד מאד in this instance was to tell us that this trembling was of a more far reaching nature than the one he experienced when he thought he was going to be a sacrifice.
    Bereshit Rabbah 67,2 asks why a man whose one son left the room to make room for his other son should be seized by such violent tremors. The answer given is that when Esau entered Gehinom entered with him. Rabbi Nathan, quoting Rabbi Acha said  that the walls of his house started shaking. This is alluded to by the words מי אפוא in our verse and meant: “who in the future was going to ‘be baked?’” [Yitzchak had a vision of someone being burned by the fires of Gehinom and considered that it might be himself for having misjudged the character of his children so tragically. Ed.] G’d answered him that neither he nor Yaakov was going to be burned by those fires but the one הצד ציד, who had constantly been “hunting,” i.e. misleading him, Esau.
    
    	27,39.ולכה אפוא מה אעשה בני, “and as to you, where, what can I do my son? This verse teaches that Yaakov had been blessed with the blessing ויתן לך אלוקים, an all encompassing blessing, a blessing which extended both to his body and to his soul. Although, from a strictly textural point of view, such things as “corn, wine, dew, and fatness of the earth appear to be something totally physical, material, these words also contained allusions to the soul.
    The words ולכה אפוא מה אעשה, cannot mean that Yitzchak did not bless Esau that he should enjoy the dew of the heaven, etc. Surely he had no reason to deny him such a blessing. By assigning the dew of heaven to one person surely that does not exclude another person from enjoying a similar blessing! We must look for some exclusive factor in the blessing Yitzchak had bestowed on Yaakov while he thought that Esau stood before him! The answer therefore must be that Yitzchak bestowed a double blessing aimed at both body and soul. This being so, it left no room for Esau to receive a blessing also. The letter ה at the end of the word ולכה, which really should have been ולך, was an allusion to the five sons Esau would father, i.e. Eliphaz, Reu-el, Ye-ush, Ya-alem and Korach. Yitzchak referred to these when he said: “what can I do for you?” He meant that they had already been made servants to Yaakov. This part of the blessing did not allow him to second-guess himself.
    
    27,39.  הנה משמני הארץ, “here from the fat part of the earth, etc.” You do not find mention of the name of G’d in the blessing Esau received, whereas the name of G’d has been mentioned in the blessings given to Yaakov when Yitzchak had said: “and may the Lord give you from the dew of the heaven, etc.” This teaches that Yitzchak did not invoke a direct bounty from G’d when he promised Esau that he would enjoy the bounty of nature, i.e.משמני הארץ יהיה מושבך , “you will reside in a part of the earth which is of the best, the most fertile.” Yitzchak left Esau’s fortunes to the vagaries of the stars, to astrological influences only. This is what he meant by מטל השמים מעל, “from the dew originating in the sky above.” The words ומשמני הארץ יהיה מושבך, are a thinly veiled hint that Yitzchak was concerned only with Esau’s life on earth; he did not foresee an afterlife for him. We have a parallel expression in Numbers 24,21 when Bileam prophesied about the future of the various nations surrounding the people of Moav and Israel and said of the Kenite איתן מושבך, “your dwelling is strong.” There too the implication is that all this will come to an end with the physical death of the person who receives the blessing. The mention of the word הנה is equivalent to an invitation, i.e. Yitzchak inviting these blessings of nature to be available to his son Esau. We find G’d Himself using the same expression when He answered Avraham’s prayer concerning the well-being of his son Ishmael in Genesis 17,2 when he said הנה ברכתי אותו, “I have prepared a blessing for a him.” Blessings introduced with the word הנה are applicable only in this terrestrial world, and in the case of Esau only at times when the Jewish people fail to carry out G’d’s will. These blessings were all subject to certain conditions. When a blessing commenced with the letter ו, i.e. ו-יתן לך האלוקים, “and the Lord may give you, etc.,” this implied “if you have met the prerequisites for this blessing to become effective.” It is clear from verse 40 in our chapter that when the prerequisites of Yitzchak’s blessing have not been met the blessing was not to materialise. This is the meaning of the words  והיה כאשר תריד ופרקת עולו מעל צוארך, “and whenever you are aggrieved you will cast off his yoke from your neck.” In other words, the blessings for Esau even in this world are applicable only when Israel is not deserving of its own blessings.
    
    27,40. ועל חרבך תחיה, “and you will live (survive) by means of your sword.” This blessing was an acceptance by Yitzchak of Esau’s vocation as a hunter, a person who spends most of his time in wildernesses, uncivilised countries where danger always lurks. It was appropriate then that Yitzchak assured his son of protection against these dangers, blessing his sword as an instrument of his survival, so to speak. Esau’s patron was the planet Mars, the planet associated with warfare, bloodshed, with the sword. This is why the descendants of Esau also excelled in military conquest. Basically, Esau’s patron in the celestial spheres indulges in killing and represents the power of the sword in this world. In order to contrast Yaakov’s (Jewish) philosophy with that of Esau, the Torah legislated that the altar or Sanctuary of the Jewish people must be built without any metal instruments being used as these instruments symbolise war and bloodshed. In connection with the construction of the Tabernacle, the Torah writes in Exodus 25,3 where the materials to be donated for that structure are listed, that gold, silver and copper are to be contributed. Iron was not solicited as a contribution at all. In Kings I 6,7 we are told ומקבות והגרזן כל כלי ברזל לא נשמע בבית בהבנותו, “and hammers and axes and any other iron instruments were not heard in connection with the Temple’s being built.” The reason was that iron symbolised war and the sword which brings destruction to the world. The function of the Temple, on the other hand, is to ensure hat the world endures.
   ואת אחיך תעבוד, “and you will serve your brother.” Provided Yaakov deserves his blessing.
   והיה כאשר תריד, “and when you are aggrieved, etc.,” when Yaakov is not in a state when he deserves his blessing.
   ופרקת עולו מעל צוארך, “you will cast off his yoke from your neck.” This is in line with the opinion of Onkelos who translates this verse as: “when they violate the commandments of the Torah.”
    
    27,41. ויאמר עשו בלבו, “Esau said to himself, etc.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 67,8 used this phrase to remind us that the wicked are always “prisoners” of the dictates of their hearts, whereas the righteous are in full control of their hearts. We have a number of verses speaking of wicked people in which the Bible uses the same expression. Examples are: Psalms 14,1: “Naval said in his heart,” (to himself), Jerobam said to himself (Kings I 12,26) et al. The word בלבו must be contrasted with the expression אל לבו, “to his heart,” as distinct from “in his heart.” When you speak “to your heart,” you are the boss. When a voice speaks “in your heart,” the heart is the boss. This why we find in Samuel I 1,13 where Chanah is praying that the wording used to describe this is וחנה היא מדברת אל לבה, “and Chanah, she was speaking to her heart.” When G’d is reported as speaking to Himself in Genesis 5,21 the wording used is also ויאמר ה’ אל לבו.
   יקרבו ימי אבל אבי, “may the days of mourning for my father approach, etc.” He did not want to kill Yaakov while Yitzchak was alive as he was afraid of being cursed by his father and that the blessing he had received would turn into a curse. Seeing that Yaakov had gone into hiding and left town, Rivkah had to send a message to him [ותשלח in verse 42] to warn him of Esau’s plan.
    
    27,44. עד אשר תשוב חמת אחיך, “until the anger of your brother abates.” This was the anger at having sold the birthright.
    
    27,45. עד שוב אף אחיך, “until your brother’s wrath subsides.” This was a reference to the blessing Yaakov had stolen from him. This is the reason the Torah speaks of two different types of anger Esau was filled with.
    27,4.  קצתי בחיי מפני בנות חת, “I am fed up with my life on account of the Hittite women” (Esau’s wives). You notice that the letter ק  at the beginning of the word קצתי is written is smaller script. The reason was that Rivkah foresaw with her holy spirit that the Holy Temple which measured 100 (ק) cubits in length would one day be destroyed due to he sin of intermarriage between the Israelites with local Gentile women. We find a similar occurrence of the letter ק being written in larger than usual script in Psalms 84, 4  (גם צפור מצאה בית ודרור קן לה, “even a sparrow has found a home, and the swallow a nest for herself”). The Psalmist in this instance refers to the silver and gold David had amassed in preparation for the building of the Holy Temple which his son Solomon would complete. In other words, when you look forward to establishing a Temple 100 cubits long, the letter ק is written larger, whereas when one envisages the destruction of this Temple the same latter ק is written in smaller script. David had complete details of the precise measurements of the Temple which would be built by Solomon as we know from Chronicles I 28,19 “All this that the Lord made me understand by His hand on me, I give you in writing—the plan of all the works.”
    
    28,5.  וישלח יצחק את יעקב, “Yitzchak sent Yaakov, etc. Here the question arises that seeing Yaakov left his father’s home at the command of his parents, why do the sages claim that the separation of 22 years which Yaakov experienced from his son Joseph was due to his failure to observe the commandment of honouring father and mother during that period? (compare Megillah 17) Perhaps we must assume that his parents had meant for him to marry Leah and to return home forthwith when his father would send for him. Yaakov, however, had set his mind on marrying Rachel on account of her beauty; he was therefore not fulfilling a parental command by doing so and his delay in returning home was accounted against him. In fact, he had volunteered to serve seven years for Rachel (Genesis 29,18).
   וילך פדנה ארם אל לבן בן בתואל הארמי, “he went towards Padan Aram, to Lavan son of Bethuel the Aramite.” While he was on his way he intended to marry one of the daughters of Lavan. This is why the Torah describes him as going “to Lavan.” After all, this had been what his father had commanded him to do when he said to him (verse 2): “arise and go to Padan Aram to the house of Bethuel and take for yourself from there a wife from amongst the daughters of Lavan your mother’s brother.”
    There is also the question of why the Torah had to write: “the brother of Rivkah, the mother of Yaakov and Esau.” Did we not know that Lavan was Rivkah’s brother, etc.? According to the plain meaning of the text we must interpret this line as a complimentary comment on Yaakov who was prepared to follow a parental command and marry a girl who was the daughter of two generations of wicked people, i.e. Bethuel and Lavan. The Torah wanted to justify Yaakov by pointing out that though Lavan was a wicked person, his sister Rivkah was a fine woman, righteous in her own right. He could therefore assume that Lavan’s daughters, much like Bethuel’s daughter Rivkah, might be  just like their aunt. The Torah continues complimenting Rivkah who became the mother of both “Yaakov and Esau.” The Torah wanted to emphasise that Rivkah, as opposed to her husband, had always loved Yaakov best (25,28), although she could have preferred her elder son as is customary.
    I have heard from my teacher that the words “mother of Yaakov and Esau” are to show us that Rivkah deliberately sent Yaakov to a place where the biological relationship to Yaakov and Esau were of the same degree so that Lavan would not have a reason to favour Esau over Yaakov and allow Esau to harm Yaakov who had come to seek shelter under the roof of his uncle.
    An investigative/rational approach to our verse: The Torah reminds us that when twins are born there are two afterbirths seeing each twin grows within its own setting. In the case of Esau and Yaakov, however, something unnatural occurred. Although they grew up within a single afterbirth, nonetheless their characters were  so totally at variance. This was foreshadowed when Rivkah experienced that the fetuses were fighting with one another inside her (25,22). The Torah had to remind us that Rivkah had already endured much before these sons had been born.
    
    28,6.  ,בברכו  אותו ויצו עליו לאמור לא תקח אשה מבנות כנען when he had blessed him and commanded him saying: ‘do not take a wife from amongst the daughters of Canaan’.” The experience of the fathers was being repeated with the sons. This is why Yitzchak commanded his son not to take a wife from the people of Canaan but to go to his own family and members of his father’s family, just as his father had commanded concerning his own choice of a potential marriage partner at the time.
    Why did Yitzchak bless Yaakov again (28,1) and why did the Torah repeat this fact in our verse? Why was this matter referred to a third time with the words בברכו אותו? The Torah wanted to make it clear beyond any doubt that the fact that on the first occasion Yitzchak had not been aware whom he had really blessed had become totally irrelevant and that Yaakov‘s blessing was confirmed beyond dispute and that even Esau was fully aware of it. Bereshit Rabbah 67,17 writes that the second blessing was necessary as there had been a weakness concerning the validity of the original blessing. This “weakness” was now eliminated and it was clear to everyone that Yaakov’s blessing was legal beyond any doubt or dispute. The blessings received by Yaakov here were in the nature of a confirmation, a stamp, if you will, on the original blessing. It was similar to the practice of confirming a bill of divorce with such a stamp. In Jewish law, a bill of divorce is valid only if it bears such stamp. Without such confirmation there would still be people accusing Yaakov of having “snatched” the blessing away from Esau for whom it was intended. It also showed that if Yaakov had not agreed to become part of the short-lived charade to show his father how easily he could be tricked he would have obtained the blessing due him anyway.
    We observe in history that the blessing has a way of being transferred from generation to generation. We find the first basic blessing of mankind being given to Adam and Chavah in Genesis 1,27. When, due to the curse which rested on the world at the time of the deluge this blessing had to be renewed, we read in Genesis 9,1 that G’d bestowed this blessing again on Noach and his sons. When the generation of the Tower had become guilty of a collective sin, the blessing which had been in a state of suspended animation was given to Avraham in Genesis 12,2 and he was given the power to direct it as he saw fit. Avraham was entitled to pass on this blessing to Ishmael, his oldest son as was the custom in those days. However, Avraham refrained from doing so as G’d had told him that his principal heir was Yitzchak. At the same time, since he did not want to cause rivalry and feuding between his sons Ishmael and Yitzchak, he decided not to allocate this power to bless to either one of this sons and to leave it to G’d to decide when and to whom to grant this power. G’d intervened and gave this blessing to Yitzchak (25,11). Yitzchak was entitled to give the blessing to Esau, seeing he was the firstborn. This is why Yaakov agreed to trick his father as he had become the legal firstborn. As a result of Esau selling his birthright he had lost both it and the power to receive or bestow the blessing. When Yaakov founded a family of twelve sons each of whom became the head of one of the twelve tribes making up the Jewish nation, he would have been entitled to transfer this blessing and the powers associated with it to his own firstborn Reuven. He did not do so, however, seeing Reuven had been guilty of a serious trespass as a result of which his father transferred the birthright to Joseph (Chronicles I 5,1). When these  blessings were fulfilled for Yaakov the third of the patriarchs, this serves as an assurance to us in this our third exile that they will also be fulfilled at the time of the redemption from this exile. Seeing that the Torah tells us that even the spiritual representative of Esau at the celestial court agreed that Yaakov had deserved to be the recipient of these blessings and he himself conferred a blessing on Yaakov (Genesis 32,30), this was a forerunner of what the prophet Isaiah said concerning the redemption in the future: והיו מלכים אומניך ושרותיהם מיניקותיך אפים ארצה ישתחוו לך ועפר רגליך ילחכו וידעת כי אני ה’ אשר לא יבושו קווי, “Kings shall tend your children, their queens shall serve you as nurses; they shall bow before you, face to the ground and they lick the dust of your feet, and you shall know that I am the Lord; those who trust Me shall not be shamed.” (Isaiah 49,23).
    
    
    
    
    
   ויצא יעקב
    
    
    
   בברכת ישרים תרום קרת ובפי רשעים תהרם, “by the blessings of the righteous the city is elevated; but it is torn down by the mouth of the wicked.” (Proverbs 11,11) In the course of his Book, Solomon makes mention of all positive and negative virtues. In the course of his words he stipulates that the צדיק, the righteous person, personifies precisely the opposite virtues of the רשע, the wicked person. Similarly, the ישר, the upright person, is the reverse of the devious person, the traitor. Throughout the Book of Proverbs Solomon contrasts opposite virtues. In chapter 21,18 this is spelled out very clearly when we read כופר לצדיק רשע ותחת ישרים בוגד. “The wicked will be a ransom for the righteous; the traitor in place of the upright.” Solomon clearly contrasts the righteous with the wicked and the upright with the traitor, the deceiver. These two types of people are absolute opposites. Solomon makes another statement along these same lines when he writes in 11,6 צדקת ישרים  תצילם ובהות בוגדים ילכדו. “The righteousness of the upright saves them; the treacherous will be trapped by their malice.” The ישר is the person who knows straightforward honesty, he treasures it, and he deliberately chooses to pactice it. He is prepared to endure all the various unpleasant effects of sticking to his mode of life. All of this he does because he is captive to the motto of being truthful. The בוגד, the treacherous person, on the other hand, is the reverse. First of all, in many instances he does not even recognise the truth when he sees it. Secondly, even when he does recognise the truth he does not admit it but endeavours with all the means at his disposal to pervert the truth.
    In spite of all this we find that in some verses in this Book Solomon contrasted the virtue of uprightness with wickedness (instead of with treachery) and in the verse we quoted at the beginning of this paragraph he tells us that the upright man who dwells in a town causes the entire town to be morally and ethically uplifted on his account; in other words, Solomon defines the upright man as someone conferring benefits on his fellow citizens so that the whole town benefits from his conduct. Not only do the words of his mouth benefit his townspeople but he benefits them by means of the blessing which rests upon him. In other words, whatever G’d has endowed him with is transferred also to the community within which such an upright person resides. The very reverse is true of the wicked person, and this is why our verse continues with ובפי רשעים תהרס , “by the mouth of the wicked the town is destroyed.” The wicked person not only does not make a contribution to society, i.e. to the people with whom he associates, but he causes such a society to disintegrate due to his very presence. He does so merely by the words which come out of his mouth and by his haughty and overbearing manner. The righteous, on the other hand is not only a source of honour to the town he lives in but even his property is also a blessing for that town. This is the meaning of the words בברכת ישרים תרום קרת. The general principle which Solomon teaches is that the good deeds of the righteous as well as his words bear fruit. This  is the meaning of Kohelet 11,3: ואם יפול עץ בדרום ואם בצפון מקום שיפול העץ, שם יהוא “If a tree falls down in the south or the north, wherever it falls there it remains.” Solomon speaks of a righteous person. The “tree” in the parable is a symbol for the righteous. Wherever he makes his residence there he will produce fruit. When our portion commences with the words ויצא יעקב וגו’ “Yaakov departed, etc,” this implied that a worthwile person left the Holy Land and the whole land experienced his absence. When a righteous person resides within a city this makes an impression on that town’s fortunes. This is why the Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 68,6) used this wording to teach this lesson. The Midrash felt that surely Yaakov had not been the only person who had ever left Beer Sheva. Why then did the Torah make special mention of his departure? [remember that we already read about his leaving in 28,8 when he is reported as וילך פדנה ארם, “he went in the direction of Padan Aram.” Ed.] We can understand then that his departure is mentioned as it may have been the first time that a righteous person left Beer Sheva permanently.
    Since it would have sufficed to tell us where Yaakov was headed, i.e. “he went towards Charan,” the words ויצא יעק מבאר שבע tell us that with his departure the glory of that town departed also.
    
    28,10. ויצא יעקב מבאר שבע, “Yaakov left Beer Sheva, etc.”  Beer Sheva is part of the land of Israel as we have been told in 26,23 that Yitzchak moved from the land of the Philistines to Beer Sheva. Seeing that  that we know that Yitzchak never left the land of Israel, it is clear that Beer Sheva was part of this land. We had also read that Yitzchak had named the town (26,33). Whereas the Torah had never mentioned that Yaakov moved to Beer Sheva, it is clear that when the Torah mentioned that he departed from there he must have first obtained permission from G’d to do so. He did so as otherwise he could not comply with the commandment of his father to go to his uncle Lavan and to marry one of his daughters. The words “he went to Charan” then may mean that he obtained permission for this specific journey and its purpose. [According to the Midrash we must assume that at the time Yaakov and Yitzchak lived in Kiryat Arba, and the reason Yaakov went there was to consult G’d who had previously communicated with his father there and given him assurances].
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 68, Yaakov reasoned that just as G’d had appeared to his father at this spot so He might appear to him in response to his prayer. If He were to permit him to leave the land of Israel he would go, if not he would not leave this country. If this were not the correct interpretation the Torah really should have written ויצא יעקב מחברון, “Yaakov departed from Chevron,” as this is where both he and his father lived at that time and that is where he received the blessings. You may now understand the proper sequence of what occurred. 1) Yaakov left, he encountered G’d; he spent the night there (verse 16) where he had that encounter. The word במקום with the vowel patach under the letter ב, alludes to a place he knew, i.e. Mount Moriah where he had previously had a vision of G’d. Permission to travel northwards was granted as G’d said to him He would be with him on the way he would travel, etc. (verses 13-15). After Yaakov had spent the night at Mount Moriah and G’d had given him permission to leave, i.e. had promised him to bring him back to this land, the reference of “to this land” was to Beer Sheva which is part of the land of Israel. Having had this assurance, Yaakov set out in an easterly direction. [according to this interpretation by our author Yaakov took a very round about route, first traveling north from Kiryat Arba (Chevron) to Mount Moriah (Jerusalem); from there he traveled south to Beer Sheva (passing his hometown Kiryat Arba on the way) and from Beer Sheva in a north-easterly direction heading for Charan. Another difficulty is that the Torah never reported Yaakov as returning to Beer Sheva. It only mentions his return to Kiryat Arba (35,27) Ed.] He set out directly for Charan only after having stopped over in Beer Sheva. Our entire portion then discusses only what he experienced at Mount Moriah and after he had spent at least one night at Beer Sheva. We need to understand the words וילך חרנה as a general statement, whereas the words וישא יעקב רגליו וילך ארצה בני קדם, “Yaakov lifted his feet and proceeded in the direction of the land of the easterners,” is the detailed description of his journey.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 68,8 Yaakov covered the distances reported here in a single day all the way from Beer Sheva to Charan. The basis for this is the similarity of the wording here with the description of Eliezer’s journey in 24,10-11. [I suppose the mention of the time of day when Eliezer arrived i.e. in the evening is the part of the narrative the Midrash focuses on. Ed.] According to the Talmud Sanhedrin 95 the people of whom Scripture wrote the words ויקם וילך in that order, all experienced that the earth telescoped beneath them and they completed a lengthy journey in a single day. They were: Eliezer, Yaakov, and Avishai. Eliezer had made mention of the fact that he arrived at the well the same day (24,42) when he said ואבא היום אל העין, “I arrived at the fountain this day,’”i.e. the day he had left Avraham.
    Another Midrash (Chulin 91) focusing on the words ויפגע במקום, “he encountered the place,” states that when Yaakov was already close to Charan it suddenly occurred to him that he might have passed by a place where his father and grandfather had offered a prayer to G’d and he had failed to do so. As he made ready to retrace his steps, the earth “folded” beneath his feet so that he encountered the spot in question without having to go back all that way. The place in question was Mount Moriah. The true message of that Midrash is that Yaakov expressed a longing for Mount Moriah and the chance to offer a prayer there. G’d obliged him by saving him the journey and he experienced a sensation equivalent to Mount Moriah being where he found himself. In order to reconcile the two Midrashim we must say that Yaakov experienced two such miraculous telescoping of the earth beneath him. The first time was when he went from Beer Sheva to Charan in a single day, a journey which he had undertaken willingly. The second time he experienced this phenomenon was in order to save him the trouble to retrace his steps.
    There is also a Midrash in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 35, according to which Yaakov took 12 of the stones of the altar Avraham had built on Mount Moriah and on which his father had been bound. This was a hint that in the future twelve tribes would emerge from him and that they would all merge to become a single nation. The words: “He took the stone which he had put under his head” are an allusion to the unification of the Jewish people of whom David had said in Samuel II 7,23 (verse 18) ומי כעמך ישראל גוי אחד בארץ, “and who is like Your nation Israel, a unique and unified nation on earth.”
    
    28,11. וישכב במקום ההוא, ”he lay down in that place.” All the Torah had to write was: “he lay down,” just as the Torah wrote וילן שם, “he spent the night there.” Why did the Torah add the words: “in that place?” The words במקום ההוא are restrictive. The Torah means that all he did in that place was to lie down. But in another place, i.e. at the academy of Ever he spent 14 years studying Torah before journeying on to Charan and to Lavan.
    
    28,12. ויחלום , “he had a dream.” This dream was not of the same order as are ordinary dreams people dream. However, at the same time it was not a true prophetic vision either. This is why the Torah wrote at the end: וייקץ יעקב משנתו והנה חלום, “and Yaakov awake from his sleep, and here it had been a dream.” A true prophetic vision would be described by the Torah not as שנה, sleep, but either as במראה אליו אתודע, or as בחלום אדבר בו, as we know from Numbers 12,7. Seeing that neither of these two expressions is in evidence here, this downgrades the visionary element.
   והנה סולם מוצב ארצה, “and here a ladder was standing on the ground, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text Yaakov observed that the feet of the ladder stood in Beer Sheva, where he was lying; this is the meaning of the words מוצב ארצה, whereas the meaning of the words: “its head reached heavenwards” refers to the Temple. This is the gateway from which the angels ascend to heaven or descend to earth. When G’d appeared to be standing on top of the ladder, Yaakov realised that the site he was lying on was the gateway to heaven, and that it was an appropriate place for prayer. The Holy Temple is the House of G’d. Yaakov realised that the Holy Temple was of crucial importance in channeling communication from man to G’d and vice versa. [When the author speaks of the plain meaning of the text, I believe he refers to Yaakov subsequently describing what he had seen and what it meant (verse 16-17) Ed.]
    Rashi too quotes Bereshit Rabbah 68, where Rabbi Eleazar in the name of Rabbi Yossi ben Zimra describes the bottom of the ladder as standing at Beer Sheva, the angle being such that the top was vertically above Mount Moriah. When the Midrash spoke about the שיפוע, the angle of the elevation, it meant that at its zenith the ladder was above Mount Moriah. In other words, the point at which it appeared to reach heaven was directly above where the Holy Temple would stand in the future.
    A Midrashic approach sees the dream as hyperbole of the revelation at Mount Sinai in the future. The word סלם, ladder, is equated with סיני, Mount Sinai. The numerical value of the letters in both words are the same, i.e. 130. The words מוצב ארצה, are a reference to the Jewish people who would stand at the bottom of the Mountain at the time of the revelation. ויתיצבו בתחתית ההר (Exodus 19,16). The words וראשו מגיע השמימה are akin to Deut. 4,11 וההר בוער באש עד לב השמים, “and the mountain was all aflame burning up unto the heart of the heaven.” The words ומלאכי אל-הים are a reference to Moses and Aaron who acted as G’d’s messengers, Moses ascending the mountain. Seeing that Moses was also reported as descending (Exodus 19,14), he symbolised both of the motions ascribed to the angels in the dream. When G’d addressed Yaakov, saying אני ה’ אלוקי אברהם אביך, this was equivalent to G’d saying to the Jewish people at Sinai אנכי ה’ אלוקיך, “I am the Lord your G’d, etc.”
    According to Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 35 G’d showed Yaakov in his dream the four empires who would host Israel in its various exiles, showing them to him in their ascendancy as well as in their eventual decline. He showed him how the celestial representative of the Kingdom of Babylon would ascend seventy rungs on the ladder only to descend all of them again. He showed him the Medes ascending 52 of the rungs of this ladder and then descending again. Then He showed him that the spiritual representative of the Greek Empire ascended 180 rungs of this ladder only in order to have to descend all of them again. Finally, he showed Yaakov how the spiritual representative of the Roman Empire climbed the whole ladder without descending. While doing so that representative boasted that he would conquer heaven whereas Yaakov quoted  Isaiah 14,14 where the descent of the Roman Empire is predicted also by the words אך אל שאול תורד “but You will bring him down to She-ol.” G’d had told him “even if you rise like the eagle I will bring you down from there” (Ovadiah 4). According to this Midrash Yaakov’s dream contained a prophetic message that at the end of all the various exiles the Jewish people would resume their leading role in the world, seeing that all the patriarchs had similar visions starting with the covenant between the pieces when Avraham was first told about the exile his descendants would experience before they would inherit the land of Israel as their homeland. We have already quoted these various Midrashim in connection with our commentary on Genesis 15,12. Other Midrashim variously describe the angels Yaakov saw ascending and descending as the angels of Sodom which had been demoted as their charges had been destroyed, or that they were the angels who accompanied Yaakov while he was in Eretz Yisrael now taking their leave in order to be replaced by other angels who would guard him while he was in Charan, etc. Other Midrashim describe the angels Yaakov saw ascending and descending as inquisitive angels who wanted to get a close up look at the choicest of the patriarchs, Yaakov, whose likeness was engraved on G’d’s throne. None of these Midrashim are mutually exclusive as the ladder was not narrow and many angels were able to climb or descend at the same time, each one at his own speed.
    A rational approach to the dream. The ladder represents the various levels of this universe. The universe may be regarded like a pyramid with the terrestrial part, the part inhabited by man at the bottom of the pyramid. Above our world is that of the planetary system; still “higher” is the world inhabited by disembodied creatures. In other words: the ladder has three basic rungs. David also characterised the world in a similar manner when he said (Psalms 103,20): ברכו ה’ מלאכיו, “bless the Lord, His angels.” He followed this by saying: (verse 21) ברכו ה’ כל צבאיו, משרתיו, עשי רצונו, “bless the Lord, all His hosts, His servants, who do His will; “ Finally, he said (verse 22) ברכו ה’ כל מעשיו וגו’, “bless the Lord all His creatures, etc.” Solomon also portrayed the world in a similar way in Song of Songs in three consecutive verses in Song of Songs 5,13-14-15).
    The verses are: לחיו כערוגות הבושם, מגדלות מרקחים. שפתותיו שושנים נוטפות מור עובר. ידיו גלילי זהב, ממולאים בתרשיש, מעיו עשת שן מעולפת ספירים. שוקיו עמודי שש, מיוסדים על אדני פז. מראהו כלבנון בחור כארזים. The conventional translation of these verses is as follows: ”His cheeks are like beds of spices, producing banks of perfume; His lips are like lilies, they drip flowing myrrh. His hands are rods of gold, studded with beryl; his legs are like marble pillars set in sockets of fine gold. He is majestic as Lebanon, stately as cedars” The author views Solomon as paraphrasing different parts of the universe and its functions.
    He uses the cheeks, hand and thighs, to describe these three levels of the universe. In those verses the spiritual concept of the Jewish people, known in Talmudic parlance as כנסת ישראל,  praises the Lord and His creation. The לחיו, “cheeks,” represent the world of the angels who tell the prophets what they should prophesy; the hands represent the world of the planetary systems  The word שפתותיו, “his lips,” are a reference to the prophets who relate what they have been told by the angels, the source of their information. The word נוטפות, is the actual prophetic message. The word is derived from והטף אל דרום, (Ezekiel 21,2) “let your words flow southwards.” Solomon also compares prophecy to מור, “myrrh”, as the soul derives similar pleasure from prophecy as it does from the spice by that name. “His hand,” is a reference to the planetary system, the word גלילים being essentially the same as גלגלים, “orbiting planets”. They are compared to “hands,” as all of man’s activities are influenced by these orbiting stars and planets. In fact everything that goes on in our terrestrial world depends on these planets. The words “filled with beryl,” is a reference to the stars which form the satellites of many of these planets. The word תרשיש represents something more precious than gold. Whereas the planets themselves are in outer space, the “stars” are perceived of filling some of the void between earth and the planets. The words מעיו עשת שן  are a reference to the 12 horoscopes; this is why Solomon mentioned מעולפת ספירים, adorned with sapphires, i.e. with 12 sapphires. The words שוקיו are a reference to our terrestrial world, the bottom rung of this material existence. Just as the legs of a human being are the “lower” part of his whole body, so the part of the universe we live in is the low end of the entire universe. The word שוקיו applies to the two elements fire and wind, whereas the word אדני פז are a reference to the other two elements water and earth. The entire universe is portrayed as if it were a ladder.
    G’d informed Yaakov in this dream/vision that He stands above this pyramid and oversees all that goes on within it. He mentioned the lower part of the universe first as it was the part which Yaakov was standing on and which was therefore closest to his thinking. The words וראשו מגיע השמימה, “and its head reached to heaven,” are a reference to the world of the planetary system, who appear to touch the outer fringes of the universe. When David describes them as proclaiming the honour of the Lord (Psalms 19,2), they are described as part of the celestial regions. Finally, when the dreams described the angels ascending and descending on that ladder, the reference is to that celestial region inhabited by disembodied intelligences. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 68,12) used this division of the world into three parts (rungs) to state that the angels, (their habitat) represent one third of the universe. They base it on a verse in Daniel 10. We are not to understand this to mean that the “upper third” of the universe is reserved for the angels, but that angels “share” in all three parts of the world.” This is the way Nachmanides explains this in connection with his commentary on the cherubs on top of the Holy Ark. [Rabbi Chavell could not find this except in the writings of Maimonides in his “Moreh” section 2 near the end of chapter 10. Ed.] According to this view the words עולים ויורדים בו, “ascending or descending on it,” refer to the temporary nature of angels who have been created for specific tasks and who are destroyed when they have completed that task. The existence and usefulness of an angel is described as עליה, ascent, whereas the redundancy and subsequent destruction of the angel is described as ירידה, descent. Our sages in Eychah Rabbati 3,21 phrased it thus: “On every single day G’d creates a class of angels who proceed to praise him in song and are then going on their way.” These are the types of angels that came into existence on the fifth day of creation. A different group of angels whom G’d created on the second day of creation enjoy permanent life. 
    The word בו in our verse refers to the ladder which had served as the illustration for the composition of the universe as a three-tiered pyramid. G’d is described as towering above the ladder (universe) exerting His influence even on the angels. The angels in turn exert their influence on the tier of the planetary system, which in their turn exert their influence on the creatures in the terrestrial part of the universe. In other words, all the creatures in the terrestrial universe are subject to the direct influence of the planetary system. This was confirmation to Yaakov of the validity of astrology as a discipline worth studying. These planets, etc. however, were not independent powers but were presided over by the agents of G’d called “angels,” who in turn were under the direct supervision of G’d Himself. Solomon described this system when he wrote (Kohelet 5,7) אם עשק רש וגזל משפט וצדק תראה במדינה אל תתמה  על החפץ כי גבה מעל גבה שומר וגבהים עליהם. “If you see oppression of the poor, and the suppression of justice and right in the State, do not be astonished at the fact, for there is One higher than the high who watches and there are high ones above them.” The first part of the verse speaks of the injustice perpetrated in the terrestrial part of the universe. Solomon warns us not to jump to the conclusion that the world consists only of this part and that therefore the whole universe must be corrupt. Justice does exist, and there are forces at work which are superior to those which are active in our terrestrial part of the universe, and the considerations which guide these forces are of the kind that we human beings often cannot understand, because His reasoning is so much superior to our reasoning (Isaiah 55,8). This ultimate Supervisor of what is allowed to go on in the universe is none other than the Creator Himself. Solomon refers to G’d in the plural as גבהים, matching the plural ending in the word אל-הים. This is not the only occasion when G’d [who is primarily known as One, Unique, Ed.] is referred to in Scripture in the plural. Another example is Joshua 24,19  כי אל-הים קדושים הוא, “for G’d is holy (pl).” You will note that Joshua adds the word הוא, “He,” after the word קדושים (pl), to make certain that we do not misunderstand that the word אל-הים implies power-sharing by G’d. The reason that the word אל-הים is in the plural is because in the final analysis G’d combines within Himself all the various forces that are active within His universe.
    Maimonides’ approach to the dream involving the ladder (Moreh Nevuchim 1,15) is that the Torah included the planets in the part of the universe called here “ladder.” The words מוצב ארצה refers to this planetary system being based on earth its lower extremity, whereas the words וראשו מגיע השמימה refer to the upper extremity of that  part of the universe. The heaven is also known as ערבות, as we know from Deut. 33,26 רוכב שמים בערבות, “riding through a part of the heavens called ערבות.” It is a collective name for the entire system known as מרכבה, ”G’d’s entourage.” On this ladder anyone who wants to is free to ascend or to descend. The מלאכי אל-הים which the Torah speaks of are the prophets as per Numbers 20,16 וישלח מלאך ה’, the meaning obviously being “a prophet.” The same term is found in Chagai 1,13 where the word מלאך also refers to the prophet, a mortal human being. When the Torah describes such prophets as ascending the ladder it tells us that there is a limit to how high a prophet can ascend. Once he has reached his destination he receives the prophetic instruction G’d wants to grant him. When the prophets are also described as “descending the ladder,” this means that they are returning and preparing to deliver their respective messages. On the other hand, in the tenth chapter of section two of this same work, Maimonides writes in a different vein concerning the same subject. 
    He first introduces the subject by saying that the planetary system is composed of the four basic raw materials which also make up earth and all that is part of the terrestrial universe and that as a result they are exerting their influence on what goes on earth. For instance, the moon exerts a gravitational pull on the waters on earth causing tides. The sun on the other and, exerts a powerful pull on the terrestrial element fire. The five other fixed stars combined exert their influence on the terrestrial element earth, whereas the moving stars exert their combined influence on the fourth terrestrial element, the  wind. Accordingly, we may assume that the various planets are made up of the same basic raw material, elements, as is the כדור הארץ, our globe. According to Maimonides we have to conclude that the ladder had four rungs, seeing that the planets each exerted influence on 4 separate elements on earth. [According to Rabbi Chavell Maimonides bases himself on a version of a Midrash Tanchuma saying the ladder had four rungs. This version is not extant today. Ed.] According to what Maimonides writes in chapter 10 section 2 of the Moreh, Yaakov first achieved an understanding of the elements which exist and which extend as far heavenwards as the parts of the heaven known as ערבות. This is the meaning of מוצב ארצה וראשו מגיע השמימה, “standing on earth its top extending up until heaven.” The “heaven” meant by the verse is that called ערבות. G’d presides, i.e. “was standing” above that part of heaven. The words מלאכי אל-הים appear to refer to the four basic elements two of which were observed by Yaakov as ascending the ladder whereas the other two were perceived by him as descending. The “light” elements he perceived as ascending, whereas the two “heavy” elements, water and earth, he perceived as descending by comparison. If the dream appears to describe the planets as first descending and then ascending, i.e. when G’d is described as immediately above the heaven, this may be parallel to a vision described by Ezekiel in Ezekiel 1,16. The prophet’s vision also included four phenomena. [I confess that I do not understand the meaning of that prophecy. Maimonides apparently seizes on the word אופנים as being equivalent to גלגלים, the planets. The author supports what he perceives as Maimonides’ understanding of this prophecy. Since I do not understand it myself, I will omit this passage. Ed.] 
    28,13. והנה ה’ נצב עליו “and here the Lord was standing above it, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word עליו refers to the ladder.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word עליו refers to Yaakov, i.e. G’d appeared to Yaakov as if He were standing above him.” What the Kabbalists are trying to tell us is that Yaakov viewed himself in this dream as the carrier of the שכינה, the Divine Presence, and its entourage. The Torah would thereby have compared Yaakov to one of the cherubs of whom it has been said וירכב על כרוב ויעוף, (Samuel II 22,11) “He mounted a cherub and flew.” The patriarchs are the true מרכבה, the “chariots” supporting the שכינה, the benevolent Presence of G’d. They performed a task on earth which the angels perform in the celestial spheres. Kabbalists (True scholars, i.e. the sages of the Talmud) have expressed this thus when speaking about the כרובים, cherubs: The face of a human being is considered the major “face,” whereas the face of the cherub is considered as the “minor” face. (compare Rashi, Sukkah 5B where the cherubs on the lid of the Holy Ark are discussed). According to Kabbalists it was this idea David referred to in Psalms 104,25 where he referred to חיות קטנות עם גדולות, “small and large חיות.” Let me enlighten you on this subject. We already mentioned that Yaakov’s facial features are engraved on G’d’s throne (Bereshit Rabbah 68,12 and that the angels descended to compare Yaakov’s sleeping countenance with that engraved on G’d’s throne). This was the reason the Torah describes him as יושב אהלים, “dweller in tents,” (25,27) i.e. he was “at home” both in a celestial residence as well as in a terrestrial one. This idea is expressed even more forcefully in connection with the revelation at Mount Sinai where the “nobles” of Israel (Exodus 24,10) are described as having a vision of אל-הי ישראל ותחת רגליו, “of G’d, and Israel who is at His feet.” This is also what Yaakov had in mind when he said to Rachel who had demanded that he make children for her (30,2) התחת אל-הים אנכי. This statement was not a rhetorical question but he explained to Rachel that he was not G’d-like, but his image was inscribed below, i.e. beneath the throne of G’d who has the power to bestow children.
   אני ה’ אלוקי אברהם אביך ואלוקי יצחק, I am the Lord G’d of Avraham and the G’d of Yitzchak.” According to the plain meaning of these words G’d here assures Yaakov that He will give the land to Yaakov and his descendant, that he will be with him and will protect him in all his undertakings, similar to Psalms 91,11 כי מלאכיו יצוה לך לשמרך בכל דרכיך, “for He will command His angels to protect you on all your paths.” The reason that the pronoun אני is used is to show that the angel who appeared to Yaakov wanted him to understand that he was acting as G’d’s messenger, i.e. was part of the Divine establishment. It is as if G’d had said: אני חלקך ונחלתך, (Numbers 18 20) “I am your share and your heritage.” The Priests were informed that they are an integral part of the Divine. Similarly, we have a statement (Deut. 32,9) describing the whole Jewish nation in similar terms, i.e. כי חלק ה’ עמו יעקב חבל נחלתו, “For His people are part of G’d, Yaakov is a portion of His heritage,” and not merely a portion of the angels which had been mentioned.
    This paragraph contains both an assurance to Yaakov personally at this time that G’d will be with him on the journey he had undertaken and that He would bring him safely back to his father’s house, but G’d also gave him an assurance regarding his offspring.  G’d would be with them also wherever they would be even if at times they would be in exile just as Yaakov at this time. Our sages in Megillah 29 expressed it thus: Wherever the Jewish people will be exiled the שכינה  will be exiled with them. The שכינה would look after the Jewish people and protect them from many troubles they would otherwise experience while in captivity.
    A kabbalistic approach to our verse and passage: When G’d said “I am the G’d of your father Avraham and the G’d of Yitzchak,” He mentioned two attributes. The attribute of גדולה and the attribute of גבורה. Remember that the site upon which Yaakov was dreaming was Bet El, a site of which Yaakov was to say when he woke up “this must be a House of G’d, and hence the gateway to heaven.” The place was also known as Luz. it is not the same Bet El as the one which is located near the town of Ai which Joshua had trouble capturing and near which Jerobam placed one of his golden calves to prevent his subjects from making the pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem (Kings I 12,29).
    Yaakov named the site Bet El (verse 19) because this is where he had a vision of G’d. This verse does not mean to conceal something but to explain something. It explains such statements as אל-הים קדושים (Joshua 24,19), and אל-הים שופטים (Psalms 58,12), where it appears at first glance as if the plural ending applied to G’d as “Holy” or “Judge,” indicates that there is more than one G’d. This is also the reason that Onkelos translates the words מה נורא as מה דחילו (pl) and not as מה דחיל (sing.) as we could have expected. Concerning this revelation to Yaakov that G’d appeared to him as two attributes Isaiah said (Isaiah 6,2) שרפים עומדים ממעל לו, “seraphim are standing above him.” It was a reference to two attributes of G’d. These two attributes of G’d are particularly manifest at Bet El. This was also the reason that the heretic King Jerobam was careful to erect not one golden calf but two golden calves. The Jewish people in the desert had made one golden calf for themselves when Moses did not return when they expected him. They had thought that he was dead and they felt they needed a new symbol to replace Moses and to serve as their visible inspiration. They were fully content with a single leader. 
    Jerobam had a different motivation. He wanted to counteract the Divine attribute of גדולה and hoped that the presence of that golden calf, something G’d hated, would drag away spiritually positive influences and forces from Jerusalem, i.e. from the Temple. The second golden calf which Jerobam made was intended to counteract the Divine attribute of גבורה, as he wanted to be the stronger of the two kings ruling over Israel. This attribute is the specific attribute with which a king ought to be endowed. He hoped that by weakening the presence of this attribute in Jerusalem he would thereby strengthen his own hold on that attribute. The reason that he placed both golden calves outside of Jerusalem was that he wanted to undermine Jerusalem as the עיר דוד, “the city of David.” Jerusalem was also known as the עיר הצדק, “the city of righteousness (Isaiah 1,26)”. The power of the Kingdom of David was concentrated in that city as the attribute of righteousness is manifest in that city. צדק, righteousness was the outstanding attribute, the virtue of David. We know this from Isaiah 32,1 הן לצדק ימלך מלך, “a king shall reign in righteousness” (the king being the Messiah, a descendant of King David). Jerobam was intent on nullifying this monarchy. It had been made even stronger both symbolically and spiritually, seeing that the Temple in Jerusalem was “opposite” the celestial Temple. All these considerations prompted Jerobam to distance himself from the site of the Holy Temple and the holy city Jerusalem. The Talmud Sanhedrin 102 phrases it thus: וירבעם יצא מירושלים מפתקה של ירושלים, the words: “Jerobam left Jerusalem” mean much more than that he set foot outside the walls of Jerusalem. These words mean that he wanted to put all that Jerusalem stood for behind him, never to return to that city.” Actually, Jerusalem comprised  the  five lower emanations. He wanted to escape the restrictions inherent in one’s being on the level of the lower emanations only. His plan was fatally flawed as he meant to attain access to higher emanations only in order to dethrone David and what his dynasty stood for. This is why the sages applied to him the verse from Proverbs 28,24 “that if someone robs his own father or mother saying he did not commit any sin he thereby becomes a companion to the destroyer, i.e. איש משחית.” What he did was to rob the higher regions of G’d’s universe in order to make profane use of his plunder. Seeing that the regions he robbed were the emanations known as כבוד and תפארת, that Jerusalem comprised the lower 5 emanations beneath that of  תפארת, harmony, this is the mystical dimension of the verses in Kings I12, 26-27: “Jerobam said in his heart now: ‘there is a danger that the kingdom will return to the dynasty of David. If the people were to go up to Jerusalem to offer meat-offerings in the House of G’d in Jerusalem and the heart of the people will become friendly towards Rechavam their master the King of Yehudah, they will kill me and return to Rechavam the King of Yehudah’”. The King took counsel and constructed two golden calves saying to the people: “enough of your pilgrimages to Jerusalem; here are your symbols of the G’d of Israel, the ones who have led you out of Egypt.” The plural used when he said הנה אלוהיך ישראל, referred to the two emanations or attributes of G’d which we have mentioned.
    When the Book of Kings proceeds to describe where these two golden calves were placed, i.e. one at Bet El and one in Dan, he had clearly violated the commandment לא תעשון אתי אלוהי כסף, “do not make beside Me silver or golden deities (Exodus 20,23).” However, the worst part of his sin was that he portrayed what he had done as a shortcut to heaven, wanting to make his people believe that now that they had symbols of higher emanations than were to be found in Jerusalem there was no longer any point in making the trip to the Temple in Jerusalem. The Book of Kings testified to Jerobam’s real concern namely that when the people would make the pilgrimage to Jerusalem it would not take them long to find out that they had been fooled by their King, and they would then kill him.
    
    You are aware that the prophet (Amos 7,8) already predicted doom and retribution concerning Bet El and said that he saw  the attribute of Justice demanding the destruction of both Bet El and Dan. The wording there is: והנה  א-דני נצב על חומת אנך ובידו אנך....ויאמר א-דני הנני שם אנך בקרב עמי ישראל לא אוסיף עוד עבור לו וקמתי על בית ירבעם בחרב. “Lo, my Lord G’d was standing on a wall and He was holding a plumb line. And the Lord G’d declared: ‘I am going to apply a plumb line to My people Israel, I will pardon them no more. And I will turn upon the house of Jerobam with the sword.” The “plumb line” mentioned is a measuring rod used to determine the guilt level of the people. The numerical value of the Hebrew word אנך is 71, an allusion to the 71 elders in the Supreme court needed to pass judgment on a Jewish King. The words לא אוסיף לעבור, mean that G’d will not continue to appear to ignore the iniquities perpetrated by the King as well as his people. The unusual expression ונשמו במות ישחק, “the shrines of Yitzchak shall be laid  waste,” which is also part of the prophet’s prediction should really have been ונשמו במות ירבעם, “the shrines of Jerobam will be laid waste.” The reason for this unusual statement as well as the unusual spelling of the name Yitzchak with the letter ש instead of the customary צ, is due to Jerobam having seized on the attribute of Yitzchak, i.e. גבורה in his nefarious scheme. The letter ש is reminiscent of the element אש, fire, itself an allusion to the attribute גבורה. We find this supported in the Sefer Yetzirah 3,8, the idea being that the shape of the letter ש suggests the upward draft of fire, of flames. In Amos 7,9 the prophet continues to describe what will happen to מקדשי ישראל, “the Sanctuaries of Israel which will be destroyed.” The plural form of this expression is a clear hint that the prophet refers to the two sites Dan and Bet El where the respective golden calves were positioned. Seeing that Amos prophesied this destruction as occurring at Bet El, it is not surprising that immediately afterwards (verse 10) the prophet reports the local High Priest Amatziah sending word to the King that a rebellion was occurring against Jerobam, that the prophet Amos was inciting against him telling the people to uproot any so-called sanctity in Bet El and to return to the true source of sanctity in Jerusalem. He advised Amos to flee to Jerusalem and to pursue his career as a prophet there. He ordered Amos to desist from prophesying in Bet El (verse 13), claiming that the Temple in Bet El and Jerobam were in fact one and the same (philosophically speaking). The words מקדש מלך  and בית ממלכה referred to in Amatziah’s threat against Amos, were references to the respective attributes or emanations גדולה and גבורה which we have spoken of.
    
    28,14. והיה זרעך כעפר הארץ “and your descendants will be as the dust of the earth, etc.” From a purely textural point of view, G’d assures Yaakov in this verse that his descendants will be very numerous, comparable to the dust of the earth. He could have used another simile, namely that the descendants of Yaakov would be like the stars in the heavens, a simile which had been used in 26,4. The reason G’d did not choose that particular simile was that he wanted to allude to a second element here, something not connected to a numerical increase. The reference to dust always evokes feelings of something low, something that one steps on, in other words a reference to periods when the Jewish people would be in exile, treated by their host countries as if they were merely dust to be walked on. There is another aspect to dust, i.e. a positive, encouraging side. As a result of stepping on dust, the dust frequently rises and covers the person who has stepped on it, or at least his feet. Thus, in due course, after completion of their various exiles the Jewish people will experience that they rise above those who had previously trodden upon them. Isaiah 14,2 expressed it thus: והיו שובים לשוביהם ורדו בנוגשיהם, “they shall be captors of their captors and masters of their taskmasters.” This then explains why G’d compared the descendants of Yaakov to dust. We have another statement by Isaiah 26,5 in which the prophet makes a similar point: that initially “He leveled Israel to dust in order to eventually orchestrate its redemption.” (compare Rabbi Yochanan in Rosh Hashanah 31 where he explains Isaiah 52,2). We sing the words of that verse  weekly in the Lecha Dodi  hymn when we usher in the Sabbath [at the time of the author that song had not yet been composed, Ed.] by singing התנערי, מעפר קומי, “rouse yourself and rise from the dust.” In Yaakov’s dream G’d immediately added the words “and you will spread out to the west, to the east, to the north and to the south, to make plain that the mention of “dust” was to be interpreted positively as the dust of the earth endures forever. Similarly, Yaakov’s descendants would endure forever.
    
    28,15. והנה אנכי עמך, “and here I am going to be with you, etc.” Onkelos translated these words as והא מימרי בסעדך, “and this word (promise) will assist you.” When the Torah writes in Exodus 3,12 ואהיה עמך, “and I shall be with you,” (G’d encouraging Moses to accept the role of leader) Onkelos translates this as ארי יהי מימרי עמך, “behold My promise will be with you” The (apparently minute) difference in the way Onkelos renders G’d’s promise to Moses reflects the difference between the spiritual level of these two men at the time G’d communicated with them. Seeing that in verse 13 the Torah wrote והנה י-ה-ו-ה  נצב עליו ויאמר אני י-ה-ו-ה, Onkelos was forced to use the description בסעדך similar to when the Talmud in Shabbat 89 quotes G’d as telling Moses he should have assisted Him when he saw G’d write the crowns on the Torah. Yaakov was on a level where G’d applied to him the attribute of שדי, G’d as Master of nature. Whatever assistance Yaakov would receive would not be by means of נסים גלוים, the kind of miracles which upset the laws of nature. Moses, on the other hand, was already being addressed by the Ineffable Name, by a higher attribute of G’d. Yaakov only dreamed; Moses was wide awake when he saw the burning bush. If you were to challenge my explanation by pointing out that in 46,4 Onkelos translates the words אנכי ארד עמך as אנא איחות עמך, indicating that Yaakov was on a level not inferior to that of Moses, the context of that verse forced Onkelos to translate  it in the way he did. The purpose of G’d’s message at that time was to reassure Yaakov that even in exile G’d’s  Presence would be with the people, i.e. the שכינה would descend to Egypt with the Israelites.
    
    28,17. וזה שער השמים, “and this must be the gate to heaven.” The expression זה occurs three times in this verse. Bereshit Rabbah 69,7 therefore claims that G’d showed Yaakov a Temple built and destroyed; when Yaakov saw the Temple built, he exclaimed: “how awesome is this place!” When he was shown the Temple ruined, he exclaimed אין זה, “this cannot be!” When he was finally shown the Temple rebuilt, he exclaimed “this must be the gateway to heaven.” According to this version of the Midrash G’d showed Yaakov only two Temples.
    It is possible to explain our verse in a manner which shows that it contains allusions to all three Temples. It is a well known fact that the word זה on occasion serves as an allusion to G’d, such as in Exodus 15,2 זה אלי ואנוהו, ”this is my G’d and I want to glorify Him.” When Yaakov said “מה נורה המקום הזה, “how awesome is this place,” he referred to the first Temple which was a home for G’d’s Presence, for the שכינה. When he exclaimed אין זה he referred to the second Temple which did not house G’d’s presence seeing that such symbols of G’d’s Presence as the Holy Ark, the cherubs, the Urim Vatumim in the High Priest’s breastplate, etc,  were all lacking. We have this information on the authority of the prophet Chagai who wrote in Chagai 1,8  וארצה בו ואכבדה, and the word ואכבדה is spelled defective, the last letter being missing. Since the last letter was the letter ה, this was an allusion to five important ingredients which were absent in the second Temple. Both the heavenly fire which consumed the sacrifices and the שכינה were also missing. When Yaakov was shown the third Temple he exclaimed וזה שער השמים, “and this finally is the gateway to heaven.” The reason he chose the word שמים when referring to the third Temple is that we have a tradition that the reason the first two Temples were destroyed is that they were built by mortal man. Seeing that the third Temple will be built by G’d Himself, there is no need to worry about it being destroyed, ever. This is the mystical dimension of the words ישכון לבטח עליו, “He will reside upon it in safety.” When Moses (Deut. 33,12) blessed the tribe of Binyamin in whose territory the Temple will be built, he alluded to all three Temples. The words ישכון לבטח עליו refer to the first Temple seeing that G‘d’s presence which is referred to as ידיד ה' will reside there. The words חופף עליו כל היום, ”He hovers over it all day long,” refer to the second Temple. Finally, the words ובין כתיפיו שכן, “and He will rest between its shoulders,” refer to the third Temple. You will find that in Nazir 32 the words היכל ה' היכל ה', היכל ה' המה (Jeremiah 7,4) are understood as referring to the three Temples. If there had to be three Temples, this is proof that the first two were going to be destroyed. [Jeremiah’s words in that chapter were spoken some time before the destruction of the first Temple. Ed.] You will note from the plural המה in that verse that the people who spoke these words, and whom the prophet quotes sarcastically, must have made a Freudian slip when they said this word, not being aware that they referred to two Temples that were going to be destroyed. 
    The word המה has been used to describe something permanent in Ezekiel 10,20 when the prophet describes ואדע כי ככרובים המה, “and I realised that they were cherubs.” Similarly, we find this expression used to describe something enduring in Psalms 25,6 כי מעולם המה, “for they are as old as time.” Our sages, commenting on Exodus 27,20 כתית למאור, ”pounded for illumination,” say that whereas the first Temple stood for 410 years and the second Temple stood for 420 years the combined  total being 830 years, this total is reflected in the numerical value of the letters in the word כתית. The expression כתית pounded, crushed, expressed the fate in store for the first two Temples.
     Concerning the third Temple, however, the verse in Exodus 27,20 continues with the word להעלות נר תמיד, “to provide eternal light.” There is a Midrash in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer, 35 referring to the words: וזה שער השמים, “and this is the gateway to heaven.” According to this Midrash we learn from this verse that when one prays in Jerusalem one is as if praying opposite the gateway to the celestial Sanctuary, to the throne of G’d’s glory. The meaning of the Midrash is that from Jerusalem, the gateway to heaven, prayers ascend to their ultimate destination.
    
    28,18. וישם אותה מצבה, “he set it up as a pillar.” He did not erect this pillar at the site where he slept, i.e. Beer Sheva, but at Bet El which is Jerusalem, the site where the ladder’s top reached Heaven.
   ויצק שמן על ראשה, “he poured oil on its top.” The act of either pouring oil or wine on a pillar is equivalent to offering a sacrifice on the altar. Rabbi Saadyah Gaon writes that the reason for Yaakov pouring oil on this pillar was in order for him to be able to identify this particular stone pillar so that in the future he could separate it from other adjoining stones. Seeing that oil remains visible for a long time, he would in due course be able to make an altar of it.
    Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 35 adds that when Yaakov returned to gather up the stones which had formed his “pillow,” he found that they had all merged into a single stone. Upon seeing this he poured oil on that stone, the oil being provided by heaven. The Midrash derives this from the words in our verse “he poured oil on its head” [instead of “on their heads”, seeing that the Torah had described Yaakov as taking “from the stones” pl). when he lay down to sleep. When G’d observed Yaakov doing what he did, He dipped the right leg of that stone into the deep recesses of the earth, תהום, linking it to the very core of the earth. He made a wedge of this stone much as a person who places a wedge in an arch. This is why the foundation of the Holy Temple in Jerusalem was known as אבן שתיה, the stone the whole universe is supported by. It is part of the “navel” of the earth. From that place the earth “opened up” and the Sanctuary was erected on that site. This is precisely what Yaakov had in mind when he predicted that “this stone will become the House of the Lord.” Having anointed the stone with “miracle” oil, Yaakov proceeded to Charan and covered the distance instantly.
    
    28,19.  ואולם לוז שם העיר לראשונה, “however, the name of this town used to be Luz.” The place they called Bet El at that time is Jerusalem now. Why did the Torah bother to tell us that at a still earlier point in history the town had been known as Luz? What benefit do we derive from such information? Perhaps the Torah wanted to hint that the name Luz had been the starting point of the earth rejuvenating itself. It was the site at which earth first started to develop into the globe as we know it. The words לוז השדרה, (Vayikra Rabbah 18,1) mean the place in the spine from which the tissue is able to regenerate itself at the time of the resurrection. Just as the coming into existence of the physical universe out of nothing was something miraculous, so the resurrection when it occurs will be a miracle of similar dimensions. King David had already alluded to this phenomenon when he described the creation of soul, body as well as the eventual resurrection as originating in the “centre” called Zion. He phrased it thus in Psalms 3, 1-3: אל אלוקים ה' דבר, ויקרא ארץ  ממזרח שמש עד מבואו. מציון מכלל יופי אלוקים הופיע. “G’d the Lord spoke and summoned the world from east to west.. From Zion, perfect in beauty, G’d appeared.”
    
    28,20. וידר יעקב נדר לאמור, “Yaakov vowed a vow, saying, etc.” Bereshit Rabbah 70,1 concentrating on the apparently extraneous word לאמור, wants to know the need for this word. The answer given is that Yaakov wanted to teach his future offspring that the time to make vows is when one finds oneself in difficulties one does not know how to extricate himself from. Although, as a general rule, the Torah frowns on the making of vows, when a person vows due to finding himself in distress this is perfectly permissible. This why David said (Psalms 119, 106) “I have sworn an oath and I mean to keep it.” 
   ונתן לי לחם לאכול ובגד ללבוש, “and He will give me bread to eat and clothes to wear, etc.” This is what the righteous ask of G’d. They are only allowed to pray for necessities, the definition being things which a human being cannot do without. We are all aware that man has a tendency to ask for things which he could do well without and these are the very things which are liable to cause him problems, confusion, aggravations. This is why it befits a truly G’d-fearing individual to practice the advice of our sages (Avot 4,1) that the truly wealthy person is he who enjoys the portion G’d has allotted to him. Solomon expressed the same sentiment when he said (Proverbs 15,16) “better a little with fear of the Lord, than a great treasure with trouble.” Solomon immediately provides an illustration of what he means when he said in verse 17 of the same chapter: “better a meal of vegetables where there is love, than a fattened ox where there is hate.” [At this point the author sermonizes on this theme quoting various sources which all convey the same lesson. I have decided to omit this. Ed.]
    The author claims that gemstones, etc. which are found only in a few places on earth are proof that one can do well without them. Had they been necesssary, G’d would have provided them in abundance. Similarly, the author distinguishes between one kind of necessity and another. Whereas a person can go for days without eating, he can only survive a relatively short time without water or other drinks. This makes water a more urgent necessity than food. Air, on the other hand, is even more critical to man’s survival than water, as one cannot even live for 10 minutes when one is deprived of air to breathe. Yaakov asked for the kind of necessities which are essential but not critical every minute of the day.
    28,21. ושבתי בשלום אל בית אבי, “and I shall return in peace to my father’s house, etc.” We notice that every detail which formed part of Yaakov’s vow and whatever he mentioned was fulfilled for him. When he asked G’d ושמרני בדרך, “and He will watch over me on the journey,” G’d most certainly watched over him and protected him. As to his request for לחם, bread or food, this was a reference to the women whom he married. The term לחם to describe someone’s wife is used by Joseph (Genesis 39,6) when he told the wife of his master Potiphar that the only thing in his household Potiphar had withheld from him was הלחם אשר הוא אוכל, “the bread which he eats.” Another instance where לחם, bread, is used to describe someone’s wife, is found in Exodus 2,2 where Yitro tells his daughters to invite Moses so that “he may eat bread.” He did not mean to invite him merely to eat bread but to let him marry one of his seven unmarried daughters.
    As to Yaakov’s request for clothes to wear, this was part of his wealth when he had large flocks of sheep which provided him with wool. His request to return to his father’s home safely and in good health was answered when we read  in 33,18 ויבא יעקב שלם, “Yaakov arrived home safely.” As to Yaakov fulfilling his part of the bargain and making אלוקים his G’d [ to make the attribute of Justice the yardstick by which G’d would measure him; Ed.] this is  referred to in the Torah in 33,20 where we read: ויקרא לו קל אלוקי ישראל, “Yaakov called G’d the G’d of Israel.”
    
    
    28,22. עשר אעשרנו לך, “I will give two tithes of it to You.” Yaakov kept his promise to give a tithe of everything that was his, including even his children [This has been discussed in connection with 27,19. Ed.] Our verse forms the basis of a Talmudic statement in Ketuvot 50 that even someone who dispenses charity very generously should not disburse more that one fifth of his wealth so as not to risk becoming a charge on charity himself. Yaakov serves as the example seeing he tithed 20% of his wealth.
    
    29,2. וירא והנה באר בשדה, “he looked, and behold here there was a well on a field.” Every single one of our patriarchs had an encounter with a well and in each case the well was an allusion to future happenings. In Yitzchak’s case the well he encountered was called באר מים חיים. (26,19) Bereshit Rabbah 70,8 explains that to the Jewish people Torah is equivalent to spring water.
   והנה שם שלשה עדרי צאן, “and here there were three flocks of sheep, etc.” The Torah could have written והנה שלשה עדרי צאן ושם היה באר, “here there were three flocks of sheep and there was a well, etc.” The reason the syntax was changed was to allude to a similar sequence in Ezekiel 3,23: והנה שם כבוד ה' עומד, “and here the glory of G’d was standing.” Israel is called צאנו של מקום, “the flock of G’d,” as we know from Ezekiel 34,31 ואתן צאני צאן מרעתי אדם אתם, “and you are My sheep, sheep of My pasture- you are Adam, etc.” We have another verse expressing the same thought in Psalms 79,13 ואנחנו עמך וצאן מרעיתך, “and we are Your people and the flock of Your pasture.” The reason the Torah mentioned three flocks is that the Jewish people consist of three flocks, i.e. the Priests, the Levites, and the Israelites. All of the Israelites used to make a pilgrimage to the Temple three times a year in order to be in the Presence of G’d.
    
   כי מן הבאר ההוא ישקו העדרים. והאבן וגו', “for from that well the flocks would be watered; and the stone, etc.” There is an allusion here to the holy name of G’d which was engraved in the Holy Temple. [The first letters in the  words ישקו העדרים והאבן yield the basic letters contained in the Ineffable Name. The extra word גדולה after the word והאבן may hint at the fourth letter, i.e. the repetition of the letter ה in that Holy Name.] The line “for from that well the flocks would receive their water,” is a clear hint that the Temple would serve as the basic inspiration of the various sections of the Jewish people. The words והאבן גדולה is a reference to a “golden crown”, i.e. the letter ד in the line שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד. The last letter ד which is in larger script in the Torah is equivalent to the final letter in the Ineffable Name, which alludes to G’d’s attribute גדולה.
    
    29,3. ונאספו שמה כל העדרים, “all the flocks would be assembled there (next to that well);” this is an allusion to all the tribes of Israel from the extreme north to the extreme south who would assemble at the Holy Temple. The word וגללו in the sequence וגללו משם את האבן may be understood as similar in meaning to Berachot 7 ויגולו רחמיך על מדותיך, “they will roll over Your attribute of mercy to ‘exile’ Your other attribute.” The Talmud there discusses the effectiveness of prayer. The words והשקו את הצאן, “they watered the flock,” describe how the Holy Spirit was drawn down in order to provide the Israelites with blessing emanating from the Inner Sanctuary (in the Celestial Temple). The words והשיבו את האבן על פי הבאר למקומה, “and they would replace the stone to its place,” mean that  seeing that they had previously elevated the stone (figure of speech) to lofty spiritual regions, once they had absorbed the proper spiritual input from that region they descended from such a spiritual “high.” We find a parallel comment in Sefer Yetzirah 1,4 העמד דבר על בוריו והשב יוצר על מכונו, “leave a matter in its proper state and restore the Creator to His realm.”
    A Midrashic approach: Rabbi Yochanan interpreted the words וירא והנה באר בשדה as an allusion to the revelation of the Torah at Mount Sinai. The words  באר בשדה are a reference to Mount Sinai. The words שלשה עדרי צאן refer to the Priests, the Levites, and the Israelites. The words כי מן הבאר ההוא ישקו עדרים, “for from that well the flocks would be watered,” refer to the Ten Commandments whereas the words והאבן גדולה are a reference to G’d. The words ונאספו שמה, “they were gathered there,” refer to the Jewish people whereas the words וגללו את האבן refer to the Torah being received and accepted. Finally, the words והשיבו את האבן על פי הבאר למקומה, “they put the stone back on the mouth of the well, its original place,” are a simile for Moses saying to the people at the end of the revelation (Exodus 20,22) אתם ראיתם כי מן השמים דברתי עמכם. “You have seen that I have spoken to you from the heaven.”
    
    29,5. לבן בן נחור, “Lavan son of Nachor.” The Torah should have described him as “Lavan the son of Bethuel,” seeing Bethuel was his father. However, this is another instance where the Torah shows that grandchildren are equal to children (Yevamot 62). We have another such example in 20,12 where Avraham described Sarah as “my sister the daughter of my father,” although in effect Sarah was the daughter of Avraham’s brother Haran. He had meant “daughter of my father’s son (Haran).“ It is also possible that the Torah described  Lavan as the son of Nachor, seeing that Avraham’s brother Nachor was a well known personality, whereas Bethuel was relatively unknown. When people spoke of Lavan they never referred to him as the son of Bethuel but as the son of Nachor. The Torah simply described things as they were.
    
    29,10. ויהי כאשר ראה יעקב, “it happened that as soon as Yaakov looked, etc.” We find that in this verse the Torah repeats the expression אחי אמו, “brother of his (Yaakov) mother” repeatedly. This is partly in order to explain why Yaakov was so concerned with helping to water the flocks as he had pity on Rachel, Lavan’s daughter. Whatever Yaakov did,  whatever feat of strength he performed, he did not perform for the sake of Lavan but for the sake of his mother Rivkah. This is why every time the Torah had to mention the name of wicked Lavan, it contrasts him with his sister, Yaakov’s mother. Yaakov remembered his mother who had advised him to go to Lavan.
    There is yet another reason for the repeated mention of the words אחי אמו, brother of his mother.” Whenever a person hears or sees an object he desires, he is suddenly capable of performing tasks which he cannot perform in order to secure something which his heart does not covet. The reader of this passage could be forgiven if he had thought that seeing Yaakov was taken with Rachel’s beauty he desired her physically and this is what gave him the strength to move the rock single-handedly. The Torah refers time and again to the fact that Lavan was the brother of Yaakov’s mother in order to make us aware that physical passion had nothing to do with Yaakov’s sudden burst of strength in moving the rock. The Torah was so concerned not to create the impression that Yaakov’s sudden burst of strength was inspired by passion that instead of writing: “as soon as Yaakov set eyes on Rachel he rolled the rock, etc.,” Ithe Torah wrote instead (in a somewhat clumsy style) ”it was when Yaakov saw Rachel the daughter of Lavan, the brother of his mother, and the flock of Lavan the brother of his mother, Yaakov approached and rolled the rock etc.”
   ויגש יעקב ויגל את האבן מעל פי הבאר, “Yaakov approached and rolled the rock from the top of the well.” Yaakov clearly displayed superior physical strength seeing that at least three shepherds had been unable to move that rock with their combined efforts. When you consider in addition that Yaakov must have been tired both from the long journey and from Torah study, which traditionally weakens a person physically, (compare Isaiah 28,29 where the word תושיה is applied to Torah seeing its study  weakens the body of a person, Sanhedrin 26) his feat was even more remarkable. Yaakov had spent the last 14 years studying in the academy of Ever (even though this detail has not been recorded in the written Torah).
    We find that when Yitzchak his father commanded Yaakov: “arise and go to Padan Aram and take for yourself from there a wife” (28,2), that he understood that the meaning of the word אשה  also included another element, something Yitzchak had not spelled out to him. The hidden meaning of the word אשה was that it referred to Torah. King Solomon in Proverbs 31,10 already alluded to this meaning of the word אשה, when he headlined his last paragraph with the words אשת חיל מי ימצא, “who can find a woman of valour?” He described such a “woman” as עטרת בעלה “the crown of her husband.” in Proverbs 12,4. 
    Our sages, when commenting on Deut. 33,4 where Moses described the Torah as מורשה קהלת יעקב, “as an inalienable possession handed down from generation to generation,” that the word ought not merely be read as מורשה, but as מאורשה, something a Jew is betrothed to. In other words, Torah is to us what a wife is to a husband. Keeping this thought in mind, Yaakov decided to fulfill the implied command of his father first and instead of proceeding directly to Lavan he stayed at the Yeshivah for 14 years. The number of years he must have stayed there can be arrived at by comparing the age at which he met Pharaoh (130), [he lived in Egypt for 17 years and died at 147 years of age.] When you deduct 22 years during which he had not seen Joseph who had been 17 years of age at the time of his abduction, this made Yaakov 91 years old at the time Joseph had been born. Joseph was born after Yaakov had stayed at Lavan’s for 14 years. This means he was 77 years of age when he came to Charan. Yitzchak dispensed the blessing when he was 123 years of age, i.e. when Yaakov was 63 years old (compare Rashi  who said that when one approaches within 5 years of the age at which either parent died it is time to make arrangements concerning one’s own death. The Talmud Megillah 17 arrives at the same conclusion). All of this supports the view that the only way to account for an obvious discrepancy in dates supplied by the Torah is to conclude that Yaakov studied Torah for 14 years before arriving at Lavan’s house.
    
    29,11. וישק יעקב לרחל, “Yaakov kissed Rachel, etc. The reason the Torah referred to Rachel as קטנה, “small,” is that she was still a minor and Yaakov could not consummate marriage vows with her. This was the reason Lavan was not worried to hand his flocks to her instead of to his already adult daughter Leah who was liable to be molested by the male shepherds on account of her age. We should also note that Yaakov did not kiss Rachel on the mouth but on the head or the shoulder, suggesting that there was no sexual element in that kiss (Ibn Ezra).
   וישא את קולו ויבך, “he raised his voice and cried.” This was customary when family members met. According to Bereshit Rabbah 70,12 quoted by Rashi, Yaakov’s weeping was prompted by his having a vision of Rachel not being buried with him in the cave of Machpelah. Another Midrash attributes this weeping to Yaakov’s reflecting on his arrival as a potential suitor empty-handed,  whereas Eliezer, his father’s servant at the time when he met Rivkah was loaded with precious gifts. According to that version, the reason that Yaakov was penniless was that Esau’s son Eliphaz whom his father had dispatched to kill him had settled for leaving him penniless, reasoning that a poor man is like a dead man. (Sefer Hayashar). 
    
    29,12. כי אחי אביה הוא, “that he was her father’s brother.” Yaakov meant that he was related to Rachel’s father. We know that uncle and nephew describe themselves as brothers from 13,8 where Avraham told Lot “for we are brothers.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 70,12 Yaakov told Rachel that when it came to duplicity he was her father’s equal and knew how to take care of himself seeing he was biologically related to him.
    
    29,15. הכי אחי אתה, “because you are my brother, etc.” the word הכי which Lavan used here was not really a question in this instance. Rather, it was an affirmation. We have a similar use of that word when Esau exclaimed (27,36) הכי קרא שמו יעקב, “indeed his name is ‘the crooked one.’” Onkelos translates the word there as יאות, “it is fitting.”
   ועבדתני חנם, “and you have served me for free.” The meaning of the verse is that “you are most certainly my brother and so far you have served me without compensation for a whole month, as the Torah had testified in verse 14 “he stayed with him for a month.” Lavan implied that if Yaakov wanted to stay on for a longer period he should tell him what kind of compensation he expected to receive for his labour. Yaakov replied: “I will serve you for seven years.” This is most amazing. What prompted Yaakov to mention right off that he would serve Lavan for seven years? If Lavan had suggested to him that he should serve seven years to secure Rachel’s hand in marriage, it would have been appropriate for Yaakov to try and make a better deal, suggesting a shorter period of service such as two or three years maximum. What could possibly have prompted him to volunteer such a lengthy period of service? Perhaps Rachel was only five years old at that time and Yaakov needed to wait for seven years until he could consummate marriage to her as she would not biologically be able to conceive children before that time. The reason that he said ברחל בתך הקטנה, “for Rachel your daughter who is a minor,.” a fact which was well known, is that he implied “I cannot marry her now as she is too young. This is why I am willing to wait for seven years during which time I will remain in service with you.” He also implied that though Rachel was old enough to have intercourse with already at this time, he Yaakov, would not indulge his libido if he did not have a reasonable chance that such intercourse would result in his wife’s pregnancy. Marriage to him meant to fulfill the commandment to raise a family. 
    Rashi  writes that the reason Yaakov was so specific in saying “Rachel your younger daughter,” was that as far as Yaakov was concerned his uncle Lavan was a confirmed swindler, and he was afraid that at the end of the period Lavan would present him with a girl from the street whose name was Rachel. This is why he had to say: “your daughter.” The reason he had to add the words “the younger one,” was to prevent Lavan from presenting him with Leah saying: “she is my daughter.” The Torah teaches us that all of Yaakov’s precautions notwithstanding, he was outwitted by Lavan and Lavan still gave him Leah without his being aware of it at the time. 
    
    29,17. ועיני לאה רכות, “and Leah’s eyes were soft.” Rabbi Avraham commented on this that someone called Ben Efrayim said that the word רכות really should have been spelled with the letter א, meaning ארוכות. I can only comment that his own name should have been spelled without the letter א. In other words, his comment is without foundation.
    
    29,19.טוב תתי אותה לך , “it is good that I give her to you.” Rabbeinu Chananel understands Lavan’s words as follows: “even though giving her to someone else would be preferable, seeing that a woman should not be without a man, nor a man without a wife,  [and a delay of seven years is very long, Ed.] I agree.” He bases his commentary on Talmud Jerusalem Berachot 9,1 and Genesis 2,18). Lavan expressed his agreement that Yaakov was the better of two good choices as son-in-law. We  encounter the use of the word טוב  מ also in a different context where it refers to the better one of two bad choices. In Kohelet 5,4  we read טובים היו חללי חרב מחללי רעב, “the ones who were killed by the sword are better off than those killed by famine.” On a third occasion we find the expression טוב...מ as comparing a good alternative with a bad alternative. We read in Kohelet 4,13 טוב ילד מסכן וחכם ממלך זקן וכסיל. “A poor and wise child is preferable to an old but foolish king.” The expression also occurs when it clearly contrasts two positives but gives preference to one of them. We read in Proverbs 15,17: “better a dish of vegetables served lovingly than a fatted ox served grudgingly.” The author continues with more examples which I have decided to skip. Ed.]
    
    29,20. ויהיו בעיניו כימים אחדים, “they were in his eyes as if only a few days.” We would have expected these years as appearing  extremely long in Yaakov’s eyes. However, we must not look at the Torah’s description as referring to the waiting period Yaakov underwent; the Torah refers to the amount of labour Yaakov performed. Viewed from that angle Yaakov did not measure the time in months or years but in days. We find confirmation of this when at the end of the period he said to Lavan “give me my wife for my days have been completed (29,21). He was careful not to say: “my years.”
    
    29,21. ואבא אליה, “so that I may sleep with her.” Nachmanides comments on this: This does not appear to be a respectful reference to one’s wife, especially when mouthed by righteous people. The true meaning of the verse is as if the Torah had written: ואבואה אליה, “let me join her.” He did not want to take Rachel as a wife and to leave Lavan at once but he wanted to marry her and complete whatever little time was left in his contract. He explained to Lavan that he had no reason to worry that Yaakov would leave him prematurely  and would abandon the herds. Thus far Nachmanides.
    Perhaps one may understand Yaakov’s words somewhat differently. The words the Torah quotes him as saying do not reflect Yaakov’s libido speaking. Yaakov spoke rationally. From an intellectual perspective [as was man’s perspective before he ate from the tree of knowledge, Ed.] there is no difference between the various organs of the human body; all serve a useful purpose. Yaakov did not view his genitals as different in any way from the way he viewed  his arms or his legs. Each organ had to perform specific functions. Seeing that the patriarchs were on such a high moral level we need not be surprised if words spoken by them had no erotic connotation as they would have had if spoken by ordinary individuals. The same applied to our four matriarchs Rachel and Leah. When we find them quarreling about who would enjoy Yaakov’s company on a certain night, this had nothing to do with the sexual act as an activity for its own sake. They had prophetic knowledge (Bereshit Rabbah 72,5) concerning the fact that Yaakov would father twelve tribes from four wives; they competed as to who would bear how many of these children for him. This was the reason that Leah said to her sister in 30,15: “is it not enough that you have taken my husband, etc.?” As a result Rachel told Leah that seeing that her concern was to bear more of the twelve tribes, she agreed that Yaakov should spend this particular night with her although it was not her turn. When Leah said to Yaakov: “come to me this night for I have hired you,” etc. (30,16), this did not reflect her desire for physical union with him as such, but it merely meant that she had made a special effort to bear more of his children. The patriarchs and the matriarchs were concerned primarily with Mitzvah performance.
    Therefore, when Yaakov said concerning Rachel ואבואה אליה, he practically prophesied, as all utterances by the patriarchs may be viewed as in that category. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 72,3 were so convinced of this that they attributed the fact that Rachel was not buried in the cave of Machpelah with her husband Yaakov to her foregoing his company for even one night. By volunteering to miss that opportunity to conceive a child from Yaakov on the night she made the deal with Leah about Reuven’s dudaim (the aphrodisiac plant Reuven had found) she was punished. She should have treasured Yaakov’s company more. On the other hand, we are taught in that same Midrash  that Leah who did treasure the company of her husband bore two more sons for Yaakov as a result of the deal she made. Issachar was born to Leah as a reward for her giving Rachel the dudaim of her son Reuven in order to secure an extra opportunity  to conceive a child from her husband. This is also why the Torah (30,16) does not describe Yaakov as sleeping with Leah  בלילה ההוא, but בלילה הוא, the difference being that  the word הוא is a reference to G’d whereas the word ההוא simply means “that, “ i.e. “on that night.” Leah realised this when she said: “this is my reward from G’d” (30,18) when Issachar was born. When she used the word שכרי for “my reward,” this is the same word as the Torah used when she traded the dudaim for time spent with Yaakov. She meant that her reward was exactly in keeping with her purpose in trading the dudaim for an extra opportunity to conceive a child. A  similar use of that word occurs in Isaiah 40,10 הנה שכרו אתו ופעולתו לפניו, “his reward is with Him, his recompense before Him.” The prophet speaks about the reward being appropriate to the good deed. Furthermore, the words “G’d listened to Leah” (verse 17) are evidence that she must have prayed for this child. There is a tremendous lesson in this apparently insignificant detail of Leah’s and Rachel’s lives. On the one hand, Rachel was punished for doing something perfectly normal, namely securing an aphrodisiac which would help her conceive seeing that she did not have any children yet and paying for it by giving up her husband’s company for one night. On the other hand, Leah, who already was blessed with four children, was so anxious to have more that she traded that very aphrodisiac for a night with Yaakov without artificial stimuli to help her conceive. Leah was rewarded  as opposed to her sister Rachel although both her and Rachel’s actions were designed to bring about the same result. In the final analysis, the Torah demonstrates that both women were bent on performing a מצוה.
  
    29,25. והנה היא לאה, “and lo and behold it was Leah.” Our sages (Megillah,13) ask the obvious question: “had she not been Leah up until now?” What did the Torah mean by writing “and here it was Leah?” They answer that Yaakov had supplied Rachel with a secret code to protect himself precisely against the duplicity practiced by Lavan under the wedding canopy when the girl’s face is veiled so the groom cannot see her. When Rachel became aware of what her father was doing, she realised that her sister was going to be publicly shamed. She therefore decided to spare Leah the embarrassment and told her of the secret code. Bereshit Rabbah 71,5 phrases it thus: “Rachel made silence her trademark (vocation); as a result all her sons were able to keep secrets, on the other hand, Leah made gratitude her trademark (vocation); as a result we find that all her sons are recorded as confessing errors and giving thanks to G’d. Binyamin, a son of Rachel knew that Joseph had been sold but he kept the secret. Saul, a descendant of Binyamin is reported in Samuel 10, 16 as ואת דבר המלוכה לא הגיד לו not telling even his uncle that Samuel had told him he would become king. [The uncle had been aware that Saul had had an interview with Samuel the Seer and titular head of the nation. The prophet had told him not to worry, that the asses had been located. Ed.] Another descendant of Rachel who was distinguished by keeping silent at crucial times was Queen Esther who obeyed Mordechai’s instructions not to reveal her identity even when such a refusal resulted in the King threatening to depose her.” (Esther 2,20)
     Leah’s son Yehudah confessed that he had been wrong in bringing Tamar his daughter-in-law to trial as a whore. Moreover, The Torah credits him with giving thanks to the Lord (49,8), and we find David, Yehudah’s most illustrious descendant composing innumerable hymns to G’d including Psalms 136,1 in which he asks the Jewish people to give thanks to the Lord. Another descendant of Yehudah, Daniel, was in the habit of praying to G’d as a way of giving thanks to Him (Daniel 6,11).
    
    29,30. גם את רחל מלאה, “also Rachel, better than Leah.” The Torah means that whereas Yaakov did love Leah, he loved Rachel more. This was something contrary to accepted psychology prevalent in those days which claimed that a man’s greatest love is his first wife. This is the reason the Torah commenced this verse with the word גם, “also.”
    
    29,31. כי שנואה לאה, “that Leah was hated.” This certainly does not mean that Yaakov hated Leah. [If he did, he would have had to divorce her. Ed.] The word שנואה is strictly relative and tells us that by comparison to Yaakov’s feelings for Rachel Leah appeared as if she were hated.
    
    29,32. ותהר לאה ותלד בן, “Leah became pregnant and gave birth to a son.” In the case of all of the children born by the wives of Yaakov (except Zevulun) the Torah wrote the words ותהר ותלד, “she became pregnant and gave birth,” to show that pregnancy was followed shortly thereafter by giving birth. The Torah thereby hints that all these children were born after only seven months of pregnancy, the shortest period to make the fetus viable at birth. All of the twelve sons of Yaakov plus Dinah, with the exception of Binyamin were born during the second seven years of Yaakov working for Lavan.
    Let me explain why babies born after seven months pregnancy are generally viable whereas babies born after eight months pregnancy are not. At first glance this seems baffling were it not known to be a fact. Every one of the seven fixed stars [the planets according to earlier astrological concepts. Ed.] dominates the sky for one month.  The order of their appearances in the sky is: שבתאי, צדק, מאדים, חמה, נגה, כוכב, לבנה, This contrasts with the order חל'ם כצנ'ש which prevailed at the time of creation during the first seven days of the universe. This is the order of the horoscopes governing the calendar months. Nissan is under the aegis of Saturn, followed by Iyar which is under the aegis of Jupiter, followed in Sivan by Venus, etc. Seeing that the cycle of these planetary rotations is completed after seven months it is natural that a baby born after seven months of pregnancy should be viable. The seventh month, dominated by the planet לבנה, moon, symbolises life, i.e. it is the specific function of this planet to serve as key of Heaven and Earth. If however, the pregnant woman enters a month dominated by Saturn, a planet representing cold and dryness, the natural symbol of death,  it is understandable why babies born when the mother’s eight’s month of pregnancy is in a month when that planet “presides,” is not viable and will die. The biological process of death is that the original drop of semen which fertilised the ovum will dry up and as such be unable to develop into life. Once the pregnancy enters its ninth month and comes under the aegis of the planet Jupiter, a planet associated with “Life” and everything good, based on the fact that most births take place after nine months of pregnancy, viability of babies born after that time is practically assured. Some babies born after or during the tenth or eleventh month of pregnancy i.e. under the aegis of Venus or the Sun will be viable. We have it on the authority of Rava in Yevamot 80 that additional months of pregnancy up to and including 12 months produce viable babies. [Rava ruled that a woman whose husband had left her 12 months prior to her giving birth is believed when she claims that the baby is her husband’s. Ed.] There is an halachic principle, that evidence to the contrary excluded, most women sleep exclusively with their respective husbands and we do not ignore this principle when deciding if a baby is a bastard unless there is specific evidence or a natural impossibility for the baby to be the husband’s. Of the seven planets mentioned, the planets Jupiter and Venus are considered as especially fortuitous influences whereas the planets Mars and Saturn are considered as especially harmful influences. Sun and Moon are considered as in charge of light and access to the portals of heaven respectively. This leaves the planet Mercury which is considered a neutral influence. When it functions in consonance with a planet which represents a good influence it reinforces that influence, whereas when it functions in consonance with a planet considered a harmful influence it reinforces that influence.
   ותקרא שמו ראובן, “she called his name Reuven.” All the names given to the children of Rachel and Leah were inspired by Holy Spirit  assisting their mothers in naming them. The names they gave the children all alluded to certain attributes of G’d. When Leah named her first four sons she alluded to the ten emanations from the bottom up. He called the first son Reuven alluding to the attribute of Justice which corresponds to the last letter ה in the Ineffable Name. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 44,12) had said that until Avraham had that letter added to his name he was unable to have a son with Sarah. The word ראובן alludes to ראייה, “seeing, taking note of.” The faculty of seeing is derived from the attribute of Justice, and this is why the עין הרע, “the evil eye” is such a dangerous and powerful characteristic as it directs attention to the attribute of Justice, i.e. retribution. The name שמעון which is derived from שמועה, as Leah said: “for G’d has heard that I am hated,” corresponds to an attribute symbolised by the letter ו in the same four-lettered name of G’d, and the 6 directions in which it extends. When Yaakov blessed Ephrayim and Menashe, the two sons of Joseph, by saying: “they shall be to me just as Reuven and Shimon” (Genesis 48,5), he meant to protect them against this influence of the evil eye which is associated with the attribute hate. Similar considerations prevailed when naming all the rest of the twelve sons. I will go into details when we get to the relevant verses.
    29,34.על כן קרא שמו לוי,  “this is why He called his name Levi.” The word “He” refers to G’d. This is why the Torah does not write קראה, “she called,” as it had done with the first two sons of Leah. Seeing that this son belonged to G’d as the “tithe” Yaakov had vowed to give of all G’d would give him, it was up to G’d to name what belonged to Him. We had mentioned that the matriarchs had a prophetic inspiration that Yaakov would have 12 sons from four wives. Having given birth to a third son, Leah had received her fair share of sons. When Leah said after giving birth to her third son על כן ילוה אישי אלי, she was not merely referring to the attachment between Yaakov and her; rather, she used the word איש as an acronym for א=כתר, י=חכמה ש,=בינה, as indicated in the Sefer Habahir. (compare the comment in that book on Exodus 15,3 ה' איש מלחמה). Leah meant that the three emanations represented by these letters in the word איש are really part and parcel of a larger concept. This is why the descendants of Levi became teachers of Torah and wisdom in Israel as we know from Moses’ blessing in Deut. 33,10 יורו משפטיך ליעקב , “they will teach Your ordinances to Yaakov.”
    When she gave birth to her fourth son, Yehudah, she gave thanks to the emanation בינה, the emanation from which children originate. As a result of all this we find that all the important elements were represented in the first four sons of Leah. Reuven and Shimon were allusions to G’d (His attribute with the six extremities), Levi and Yehudah being allusions to the three topmost emanations
    
    29,35. הפעם אודה את ה', “this time I give thanks to the Lord, etc.” The word י-ה-ו-ה at this point is a reference to the first time this word appears in the list of G’d’s thirteen attributes revealed to Moses in Exodus 34,6. [Rabbi Chavell cites Torat Chayim as believing that there is an error here and that the author meant the second time this word appeared there. Ed] This was the attribute of repentance. The reason this attribute is part of Yehudah’s name is that  he was the first person to publicly retract and confess a mistake he had made when he accused Tamar of being a harlot. He was not ashamed to admit his error, which is the greatest impediment to repentance. According to the Talmud in Sotah 7 Yehudah’s repentance led to Reuven’s repentance. This is why Kind David became one of his descendants. David is reputed to have “been elevated,” i.e. by means of his repentance, in the matter of Bat Sheva (Samuel II 23,1). David was considered outstanding because he unabashedly repented. As soon as Leah had given birth to four sons whereas Rachel had remained childless, she became progressively more jealous and she went to Yaakov asking him to give her children at least by means of his prayer since merely sleeping with her had not made her pregnant. Yaakov told her that the matter did not depend on him and that the obstacle to her becoming pregnant was G’d. Rachel then proceeded to give Yaakov her maid-servant Bilhah so that her own potential as a mother could be fulfilled vicariously through Bilhah bearing Yaakov’s child on her behalf. Rachel reasoned to herself that her name, unlike Leah or Zilpah, did not have the letter ה in it. On the other hand, Bilhah’s name had two letters ה in it. When Rachel said to her husband Yaakov: “sleep with Bilhah and she will give birth on my knees, so that I will be built up through her,” she meant that the power inherent in the first letter ה in Bilhah’s name would enable her to have a child, whereas her additional letter ה would ensure that she as her mistress would be built up through her vicariously. As a result of Yaakov sleeping with Bilhah she bore a son whom her mistress Rachel called Dan, again involving  G’d’s attribute of Justice.
    
    30,2. התחת אלוקים אנכי?, “am I in place of G’d?” According to the plain meaning of the text, Yaakov  challenged Rachel who had assumed that the power of granting children resided within Yaakov. This was one of three keys which G’d does not normally entrust to any of His messengers. Our sages in Taanit 2 state: “Three keys have not been entrusted (on a regular basis) to G’d’s messengers. They are: ‘the key to life, the key to rain, and the key to resurrection of the dead.’” Yaakov was correct therefore when he told Rachel that her request should not be addressed to him.
    A kabbalistic approach: I have already indicated in my commentary on 28,13, that the letter ה in the word התחת need not be understood as introducing a question, but that the whole word is definitive. It is similar to Samuel I 2,27 הנגלה נגליתי, “I have indeed revealed Myself, etc.” Yaakov indicated to Rachel that his likeness (אנכי)  was indeed engraved under the throne of G’d and it was this which enabled him to know that G’d Himself had prevented her from having a child. Upon hearing this Rachel overcame her natural reluctance and gave her maid-servant to Yaakov to sleep with in order to benefit from Bilhah’s potential to bear children. In the end she herself addressed G’d in prayer as we know from 30,22: “G’d remembered Rachel and G’d listened to her.”
    
    30,6. ותאמר רחל דנני אלוקיםת  “Rachel said: ‘G’d has judged me, etc.’” When Bilhah, Rachel’s maid-servant, bore her first son Rachel said: “G’d has judged me.” It is most important for a person to be very circumspect in his words even his introductory words which could be subject to his correcting himself. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 19,20) said that four people commenced their words with the word אף and they all perished. They were: the serpent who had seduced Chavah, the chief of the bakers  (Genesis 46,16), the congregation which joined Korach in his rebellion (Numbers 16,14) and Haman (Esther 5,12). We know that Rachel died giving birth to Binyamin as the attribute of Justice had been arraigned against her. We must understand why she called this child Dan. She alluded in that name to the same attribute which Leah had alluded to when she called her first son Reuven. Seeing that the attribute of Justice always contains at least a portion of the attribute of Mercy, she added “G’d also listened to my voice.” When she called Bilhah’s second son Naftali, referring to her having “wrestled,” with her sister, that name corresponded to the same emotion which had prompted Leah to call her second son Shimon, as we explained earlier. Here too her approach to G’d i.e. to His attributes as represented by the emanations, was in ascending order just as had been her sister’s. 
    
    30,11. ותאמר לאה בגד , “Leah said  ‘in my good fortune;’” Rashi says that this reflected the fact that Gad was born without a foreskin. If we follow the reasoning behind this we may be able to account for the missing letter א in the word בגד which should really have been spelled באגד. He would have been the tenth male Jew to have been circumcised as he was preceded by Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, Reuven, Shimon, Levi, Yehudah, Dan and Naftali. He is counted as the tenth although he was born without a foreskin. Had his name been spelled with the letter א, its numerical value would have been 10. Seeing that actually he did not need to be circumcised, the Torah omitted the letter א of his name. If we nonetheless read the name as if it had been spelled wih the letter א included, this was to indicate that G’d guided Leah to make his name גד, meaning גדי, i.e. a fortunate person, a lucky person. Historically speaking, there is evidence that the tribe of Gad was very successful in war something alluded to already in Yaakov’s blessing in Genesis 49,19 גד גדוד ידודנו והוא יגד עקוב, “Gad will recruit a regiment and not one of its members will be missing (Rashi).” 
    From a more psychological point of view we may understand the name as reflecting a new insight of Leah who had previously stopped conceiving after bearing four sons in short order. The word גד is related to המשכה, “continuity.” When Leah realised what was happening she decided to draw once again upon the source which had previously enabled her to bear children and by means of her prayer גד גדי, i.e. that her good fortune be restored to her she waited for additional children. When Gad was born she named him thus as he represented a vicarious continuation of her former good fortune. A similar consideration prompted her to name Zilpah’s second son אשר, the meaning of which is similar to that of Gad and also contains an element of gratitude. She hoped that her gratitude for Asher would prompt G’d to allow her to have still more children. When she personally, bore Issachar, after the story with the Dudaim, she credited the emanation בינה with her success. We read in Chronicles I 11,32 that the members of the tribe of Issachar were extremely conversant with the requirements of whatever generation they lived in, i.e. they displayed more insight than any other tribe. [This is why a delegation of 200 men from that tribe was considered as equivalent in collective wisdom to many thousands of the other tribes. Ed.]  We have a verse in Proverbs 23,19 ואשר בדרך לבך, “make your heart take the proper path,” which alludes to something similar. [In modern Hebrew the verb אשר means to confirm, to acknowledge, something similar to giving thanks. Ed.] As a reward for such an attitude G’d gave her also Zevulun, a name which corresponds to the central emanation known either as קו האמצעי, or as שבט, i.e. the emanation תפארת. [According to more recent names the emanations are known as, this emanation is best translated as “harmony,” a fitting description of קו האמצעי, the “middle line.” Ed.]
    
    30,14. וימצא דודאים בשדה, “he found dudaim in the field.” According to Nachmanides the shape of the root of this plant resembles the shape of a human head and hands and is therefore especially likely to evoke feelings of desire to become pregnant in the person who looks at or eats this plant. [a common translation for dudaim is either “jasmine” or “mandrakes.”] The fruit of the plant supposedly looks like an apple and gives off a very pleasant fragrance The effect of such a plant as a fertility inducing agent is questioned by early commentators seeing it induces cold and dryness, the very opposite of the process of fertilisation. If, so, the plant was used in order to invoke G’d’s powers as opposed to the powers of nature. If Rachel used the dudaim being aware of this she would have demonstrated that she would attribute any pregancy to the effectiveness of her prayer rather than to natural causes. According to Nachmanides’ sources Reuven had brought his mother only the fruit, not the root of the plant. He (a young child of maybe 5 or 6 years of age) had meant for his mother to amuse herself with the fragrance of the plant. Leah herself had intended to provide her and Yaakov’s nuptial bed with the sweet fragrance of that flower. This practice has been described in Proverbs 7,17. Nachmanides adds that he has not found anything about the effectiveness of this plant in medical texts he has seen.
    
    30,20. ותקרא את שמו זבולון, “she called his name Zevulun.” As we mentioned already, she attributed her good fortune to the emanation תפארת, “harmony,” [the sixth of the emanations counting from  the lowest מלכות upwards. Ed.] This is the reason that the terrestrial Holy Temple is sometimes referred to as זבול in the writings of our prophets. [We also have the expression זבול בית תפארתנו in a song sung on the Sabbath. Altogether, the emanation תפארת represents the highest rung of the spiritual ladders average Jews are capable of attaining during their lifetime. Ed.] When Leah commented about her accomplishment of having born six sons for Yaakov she may well have had such a thought in her mind.
    
    30,21. ואחר ילדה בת, “and after that she gave birth to a daughter.” After Leah had born six sons she bore a daughter. The meaning of the word ואחר is “finally, her last birth.” The word ואחר occurs in the same context in Genesis 33,7 ואחר נגש יוסף, and at the end, Joseph approached. The six sons Leah bore corresponded to the six emanations and “extremities,” in the celestial regions which are matched by parallel phenomena in the terrestrial regions bearing the seal of G’d’s name. She bore the daughter last as the שכינה is comprised of the six extremities, representing the attribute of Justice. Leah alluded to this when she called her daughter דינה, a clear reference to the attribute of Justice, מדת הדין. The name דינה contains the two middle letters of the name א-ד-נ-י, the “pronoun” of the attribute of Justice combined with two letters of the attribute of Mercy  י-ה   She was the product בת, of מי זהב a combination of water=חסד and זהב=גבורה. (Rabbi Chavell quotes a book called האזרח בישראל  as his source for this insight. Ed.)
    One may also reason that she did not have any special deep kabbalistic thoughts when she named her daughter. When she had given birth to Zevulun, her sixth son, she did not want to “descend” and bear a son belonging to a “lower” emanation as she was in no need to receive input from those emanations having already succeeded to receie input from the relatively highest emanation תפארת.
    According to Berachot 60 Leah had been pregnant with a male fetus. She prayed to G’d to let her have a daughter. Our  sages felt that Joseph would have been born as a son of Leah if not for Leah’s prayer. She did not now want to give birth to a child under a lower aegis than the one Zevulun had been born under. As a result of Leah’s attitude, her daughter Dinah eventually suffered rape at the hands of Shechem.
    According to a more direct approach, Leah prayed on behalf of Rachel her sister seeing that if she had born another male child only one single son would have remained for Rachel and this would have shamed Rachel in the eyes of the maid-servants each of whom had already given birth to two sons each. According to this approach Leah had to have prayed within the first forty days of her pregnancy as we have learned in Berachot 60 that after that amount of time such a prayer would attempt to change facts, something forbidden. When Leah called her daughter דינה, (her judgment), this reflected the fact that her prayer had been accepted, that G’d had judged Rachel fit to have a son or sons of her own.
    
    30,23. אסף אלוקים את חרפתי, “G’d has removed my disgrace.” Apparently people had goaded her for not having children of her own.
   לאמור יוסף ה' לי בן אחר, saying: ”may the Lord grant me another son.” The name she gave her son reflected her prayer. When she said: “another son (sing),” instead of “more sons (pl),”  this shows that she was aware that there existed a prophecy that Yaakov would have twelve sons. Since Joseph was the eleventh son it would not have been appropriate to ask for more. Rachel used two expressions in connection with the naming of her son. She spoke about תוספת, “an addition,” as well as about אסיפה, “the gathering in of something, removing something from a place it had been previously.” When she referred to the visible, the obvious, the revealed act of G’d,  she used the term “an addition.” When she referred to the more concealed elements of G’d’s hand in history she used the term אסיפה, saying: אסף אלוקים את חרפתי, “G’d has gathered in, i.e. made my shame “invisible.” This was an allusion to Joseph being symbolic of the קו האמצעי, the middle emanation תפארת, the emanation which draws to itself all the other “extremities,” the emanations which are more peripheral in G’d’s scheme of things. [in order to make this easier to visualise the reader is referred to a diagram of the emanations at the end of this book, based on page eight in the book of my late cousin Rabbi Elie Munk, “Ascent to Harmony.” Ed.] It is envisaged that the two emanations נצח, הוד are “below” the emanation תפארת, whereas the two emanations חסד, דין are above it. The emanation תפארת which also intersects between כתר and יסוד is the centre of intersecting lines between נצח-דין, and הוד-חסד respectively.
    The two sons of Joseph, Menashe and Ephrayim, symbolise נצח והוד, whereas Binyamin, Rachel’s other son whose name already reflects the emanation חסד, i.e. the attribute of Mercy  she called בן אוני, “emanation of my strength.” She referred to the higher emanation דין she had encountered most of her life. In short, Joseph represented the repository of the emanations below him whereas Binyamin was the repository of forces represented by emanations above him.
    
    30,30 . כי מעט אשר היה לך לפני ויפרוץ לרוב ויברך ה' אותך לרגלי, ”for the little that you owned before I came has expanded into a multitude as G’d has blessed you with my coming.” Yaakov simply told Lavan that from the moment he set foot in his house G’d had showered Lavan with His blessing. Even Lavan himself acknowledged this when he said: in verse 27 נחשתי ויברכני ה' בגללך, “I have been divinely inspired to realise that G’d has blessed me on your account.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 73,8, originally Lavan had handed Yaakov only 70 animals to tend and these had increased by that time to 600.000. Another opinion claims that Lavan’s flocks now amounted to 1,2 million sheep. The number 70 is arrived at by comparing the expression מעט “a few,” in this verse with Deut 26,5 where the meaning of the word is a reference to the 70 people who descended to Egypt with Yaakov at the time the Israelites had left the land of Canaan (Genesis 46,8).
   מתי אעשה גם אנכי לביתי, “when will I also do something for my own family?” Up until now all my efforts were concentrated on enriching you. The time has come to do something to enrich myself. This was the meaning of (verse 31) “I will guard your sheep against payment.”
    
    30,32. אעבור בכל צאנך היום הסר משם כל שה נקוד וטלוא...והיה שכרי. “Let me pass through your whole flock today. Remove from there every spotted or speckled lamb, every brownish lamb,.....that will be my wage.” Any lambs which would be born amongst Lavan’s flocks from this day on which displayed these skin patterns although they did not have paternal or maternal animals with that skin pattern would be Yaakov’s. The other lambs would be Lavan’s. Yaakov added  that if Lavan would be able to find amongst the flocks Yaakov would segregate any with skin patterns other than agreed upon between them, he would be guilty as having stolen them. Lavan replied: “yes, let it be as you have said.” From the above we learn that Lavan kept the goats which were predominantly black. This is why he said in verse 35 ”everyone that contains some white.” He meant that as long as the predominant colour was black such goats were his. He applied a similar yardstick to sheep who had some brown in it. If the predominant colour of the sheep, כבשים, was black but they had some brown in it they would be Lavan’s. Seeing that Yaakov separated the spotted and the speckled amongst the he-goats not including the dotted ones, whereas amongst the she-goats he separated the dotted and speckled ones, it was necessary for the Torah to mention: “every animal with some white in its skin pattern.”
   
    30,37. מקל לבנה, “poplar rods;” fresh, moist rods from the cedars of Lebanon as explained by Rashi.
   ולוז וערמון, “and hazel and chestnut.” According to some commentators these were rods from almond trees and from chestnut trees.
   ויפצל בהן פצלות לבנות, “and he peeled white streaks in them.” He peeled them in such a way that part of the rods remained with a dark peel whereas he peeled off other parts so that the colour pattern that emerged on these rods resembled the spotted and speckled patterns which he wanted the young animals to have which would be his wages. He placed all these rods near the watering troughs  so that the animals had to look at them prior to drinking. When he wanted the sheep to bear young lambs with spotted skin patterns he placed the rods which were peeled in such patterns near the watering troughs. When he was desirous of the goats giving birth to speckled young he would place rods which had one pattern on the top and another pattern at the bottom in order to achieve the respective skin pattern he was interested in. When he wanted brown coloured sheep to be born he simply did not place any peeled rods at all near the watering trough but relied on the sheep responding to the natural brown colour of the bark on the rods in question.
    The entire procedure was comprised of a combination of Yaakov’s knowledge of how nature works, plus an element of divine interference, i.e. a miracle. If you were to argue that what happened was totally natural, consider for a moment how it was possible that amongst all these thousands of goats and sheep not a single one was born which had skin patterns reflecting that of its parent animal. This alone was proof that some supernatural force was at work here. Yaakov himself acknowledged this when he said (31,9) ”G’d took away your father’s livestock and gave them to me.” He attributed his success to miraculous assistance by G’d.
    30,38.ויחמנה...ויחמו , “the females, or males respectively would become stimulated.” What happened was that on the one hand the animals were drawn to the watering troughs, whereas on the other hand they were afraid of the unusual looking rods they had to encounter in order get to the water. These conflicting emotions animated them so that they backtracked. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 73,10 quoted by Rashi). The male would immediately mate with the retreating female. and the sheep would give birth to young ones of the skin pattern they had seen at the troughs.
    The  words לנכח הצאן refer to the rods which had been placed facing the sheep at the time these were in heat. Sheep normally give birth to lambs twice a year as their pregnancy lasts for five months. Our sages in Rosh Hashana 8 state “small cattle become pregnant in Adar and give birth in Av.” The ones that were born first are referred to as מקושרות, reflecting that at the time they have young ones for the first time during that year they are strong and kick so that they need to be bound when birthing. During their second birthing in the same year they have become weakened so that they are called עטופים, “covered.” At that time of year they are not too aware of what goes on and they do not react to the phenomena of the rods.” The result was that those second birthings yielded normal skin patterns, the ones that would accrue to Lavan. [According to our author nothing would accrue to Lavan. I confess I have not understood why. Ed.]
    Know that when Yaakov resorted to the stratagem of peeling different kinds of rods to expose different kinds of colour patterns he did not do so on his own initiative but an angel had instructed him to do so. This is what he himself told his wives in 31,12, quoting what the angel had told him: “it once happened at the mating time that I raised my eyes and saw in a dream ‘and behold the he-goats mounting the flocks were ringed, speckled and checkered, and an angel of G’d said to me in a dream Yaakov! etc.’...for I have seen all that Lavan is doing to you.” Once Yaakov had seen that he enjoyed heavenly support, he proceeded with his own ingenuity knowing that G’d would assist him so as to neutralise Lavan’s constant attempts to swindle him and to do him out of what was rightfully his.
    Yaakov might have relied on G’d’s help exclusively; he did not do so and resorted to the stratagem with the rods precisely in order to conceal the fact that he enjoyed heavenly assists. He did not want the evil eye to interfere with his success. You will find a similar consideration at work when Elisha told his disciple Gechazi (Kings II 4,29) on the mission to resurrect the son of the Shunamite that he should not speak unnecessarily with people whom he would encounter on the way. Gechazi ignored these instructions and even boasted about what he was about to do. The result was that he failed and the boy did not respond to his attempts to awaken him.
    Do not question how it is possible that the power of the evil eye is so great that it can even interfere with miracles! We find that the birth of Yaakov’s children was influenced by the power of the evil eye. Leah had made a single comment in that she thanked the Lord for allowing her to have born a fourth son, i.e. more than the three sons out of twelve which she could expect to bear by right, and as a result of this comment she became subject to the power of the evil eye. Immediately after she had made this comment we read ותעמוד מלדת “she stopped giving birth.” The mere fact that she had said herself that she had received more than she was entitled to exposed her to the envy of others. Furthermore, we find in connection with the tribe of Joseph who had been favoured by miraculous increases in numbers due to the special blessing of their patriarch Yaakov who had said בן פורת יוסף בן פורת עלי עין, that Joseph’s descendants would prove especially fruitful. When these people told Joshua Joshua 17,14) that G’d had made them inordinately numerous and the land allocated to them was inadequate for their needs, Joshua answered them that they would be best of to move to a wooded region . Our sages in Sotah 36 comment on this that Joshua (who was also of the tribe of Ephrayim) meant that they should hide in the forests so as not to arouse other people’s evil eye, envy.
    Furthermore, you will agree that there never was a greater miracle than occurred at the revelation at Mount Sinai, and we find that even on that occasion the evil eye was very much in evidence. In searching for a reason why the first set of Tablets were smashed, Tanchuma Ki Tissa 31 claims that it was because they were given to the Jewish people in public, [I am sure this refers to the text, and not the actual Tablets as the former was announced at the revelation. Ed.] an area where the evil eye is rampant. This is why the second set of Tablets was given in secret, i.e. Moses was told that (Exodus 34,3) ואיש לא יעלה עמך וגם איש אל ירא בכל ההר, “no one is to go up the mountain with you, nor is anyone to be seen at the mountain.” When the second Tablets were given the evil eye as not present, hence they were not smashed [even though the Jews repeatedly served idols after they had lived in the land of Israel for a while. Ed.] Yaakov therefore had good reason not to arouse the envy of Lavan and his sons.
    The second reason Yaakov let it appear as if his success was merely nature at work was in order to attract the miracle. This was not the only time in Jewish history that a clever ruse had to be used in order to encourage a miracle to occur on behalf of the very people who employed the ruse. Before the second onslaught on the town of Ai where the Jewish people had suffered an amazing defeat (due to the presence of Achan, etc.) G’d told Joshua to prepare an ambush against that town (Joshua  8,2). Seeing that all of the campaigns waged by Joshua to conquer the land of Canaan were actually fought by G’d Himself, why was there a need to set an ambush? G’d commanded this in order to have a reason to work a miracle on behalf of the people. [people who sit with their hands in their laps waiting for G’d to do their work for them do not rate miracles. Ed.] The very words spoken to Yaakov by the angel in his dream where he encouraged him to raise his eyes and see how the males mounting the females all had rings in their skin patterns, alerted Yaakov to the need for him to do something similar in order to attract divine assistance. We have a similar situation in Hoseah 1,2 where the prophet is commanded to take for a wife a known harlot. This was very strange indeed as according to Torah law one must not even look at such a woman much less marry her! (compare Avodah Zarah 20 where even looking at birds and animals is forbidden at the time such animals are mating.) How then could the angel ask Yaakov to watch these animals mate?
    Actually, it was because of this dream that Yaakov was encouraged to take measures which would ward off the evil eye. He did not mean to deceive Lavan but to protect himself against Lavan so that the latter would not swindle him. We must all learn from the utilisation Yaakov made of natural means of achieving certain desirable results, that when man and woman engage in marital relations, they too should imagine holy concepts in order for the children they hope to produce from their union to resemble the holy thoughts they entertained at that time. Our sages are on record (Shavuot 18) that at the time of marital intercourse a person should sanctify himself as a result of which he will have male children. What is the nature of this “sanctifying oneself?” He should have pure thoughts and most certainly not fantasize about another woman at the time he sleeps with his wife (Nedarim 20). This whole theory that imagination influences the quality and appearance of the child born if one has certain thoughts at the time one has marital relations is an incontrovertible theory. It is clear that if even animals which are not equipped with the brainpower and the ability to have holy thoughts influence the appearance of their offspring by such external stimuli as provided by Yaakov, then it is easily within the power of a human being to accomplish no less by concentrating on the right thoughts at such times.
    
    31,13. אנכי הא-ל בית אל, “I am the G’d of Bet El, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reference to Bet El is to G’d’s appearing to Yaakov in his dream of the ladder at that location.
    A kabbalistic approach: The angel who here calls himself “El” is a good angel, the one to whom G’d referred in Exodus 33,19 when He told Moses: ”I will let all ‘My goodness’ pass before you.” As to the word “Bet,” house, this is a reference to when G’d said to Miriam and Aaron concerning Moses in Numbers 12,6 בכל ביתי נאמן הוא, “he is thoroughly trusted in all parts of My house.” Man considers his own house as “his goodness.” The best one can do for a person is to provide him with a house which contains all the appurtenances. The angel therefore said concerning himself, that he represented such  an agent of G’d. As a result, Yaakov later called the place where he had this vision Bet El, to commemorate this site and who had reiterated his promise that he would get home safely. (35,7)
    
    31,19.  ותגנב רחל את התרפים“Rachel stole the Teraphim.” Nachmanides speculates that these Teraphim were some kinds of hour-glasses or similar instruments with which to measure time.  These vessels were employed to glean knowledge about future events. The word itself is derived from נרפים, (Compare Exodus 5,17, where Pharaoh accused the Israelites of pretending to be too weak to work hard) they called these vessels תרפים to hint that the power of foretelling events associated with these instruments was rather on the weak side. Predictions based on these instruments, while proving accurate in the majority of cases,  were frequently wide off the mark. Zechariah 10,2 refers to these instruments when he says that they disappointed those who relied on their predictions. The question which concerns us is why Rachel bothered to steal them if they were so unreliable? Apparently Rachel stole the Teraphim so that they could not reveal Yaakov’s whereabouts to her father seeing that Yaakov and family had fled from Padan Aram. The Teraphim were Lavan’s deities; he put a great deal of faith in their ability to reveal to him what he wanted to know. Lavan was an expert magician. He himself had said נחשתי, “I have consulted oracles,” and these oracles had told him that his new-found wealth was due to Yaakov. The whole country Charan was well known for its preoccupation with oracles, snake-charmers, and all these methods to divine future events. This is already referred to in Isaiah 2,6 כי מלאו מקדם מעוננים כפלשתים, “for they are full of magic practices from the East and of soothsaying like the Philistines.” Also Bileam ben Be-Or was of the same ilk as he came from the same region; this is why when the Torah quotes his opening statements we find him saying: (Numbers 23,6) “From Aram has Balak brought me, Moav’s king from the hills of the East.” 
    Concerning the significance of the Teraphim, Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes: “I am fairly convinced that these Teraphim resembled a human shape in order to enable them to receive celestial powers’ input. However, I cannot explain this in further detail (as the Torah has forbidden this). We can conjecture that Ibn Ezra was correct when we consider that Michal, David’s wife and daughter of King Saul had placed Teraphim in David’s bed to mislead the King’s police into thinking that David himself occupied that bed (compare Samuel I 19,16). [Michal had claimed that her husband was sick and could not present himself at court.] This leaves us with the question of how to explain Hoseah 3,4 ואין אפוד ותרפים, “that the Israelites would go for a long time without either Ephod or Teraphim.” The meaning there seems to be that they would practice no religion, neither the Jewish religion symbolised by the Ephod which contained the means for the High Priest to receive communication from G’d, nor Teraphim which was a means to receive such communication from spiritually negative forces in the celestial spheres.
    Rabbeinu Chananel writes as follows concerning the subject of the Teraphim: Rachel stole the Teraphim in order to force her father to become a penitent seeing he would realise that a god which allows itself to be stolen surely could not be something of substance. How could a god who cannot take care of himself take care of others? We find the same argument spelled out in detail in Judges 6,31 where Yoash ridicules the people who want to avenge their idol and execute Jerubaal (Gideon) who had smashed its altar, saying to them: “let the Baal fight his own enemies if he is as powerful as you believe him to be!”  Ezekiel  28,9 phrases it thus: “Will you then say before your murderer: ”I am a god?’ But you are a man and no god in the hand of your desecrators.” [the subject of discussion was Chiram King of Tyre, a friend of David and Solomon who developed illusions of grandeur]
    A Midrashic approach: When Lavan accused Yaakov of having stolen the Teraphim למה גנבת אלהי, “why did you steal my gods (31,31)?” The reason he thought that they had been stolen was in order that they should not reveal to Lavan that Yaakov had fled. The Midrash asks: “were the Teraphim then able to speak?” Do we not have a specific verse in Psalms 115,7 לא יהגו בגרונם, “they cannot make a sound with their throats?” The answer given is that indeed the Teraphim could speak as we know on the authority of Zechariah 10,2 “for the Teraphim spoke delusion.” How do the Teraphim “speak?” One places in front of them a firstborn person, slaughters him and salts him adding a variety of spices. One then proceeds to write the name of a deity on a headband made of gold; one places this headband under the tongue of this dead person using the appropriate idolatrous incantations and places the carcass in the wall; one lights candles in front of this stuffed human being and prostrates oneself in front of him. This is the meaning of what is written in Zechariah: “for the Teraphim speak delusions.” Rachel’s whole purpose in stealing such Teraphim was to wean her father from the practice of idolatry. After all, G’d had promised to remove idolatry from the face of the earth as is written (Isaiah 2,18) והאלילים כליל יחלוף, “and as for idols, they shall vanish completely.” 
    
    31,22. ויוגד ללבן ביום השלישי, “Lavan was told on the third day.” There was a distance of three days’ journey between the area where Yaakov and Lavan grazed their flocks respectively. When the person who told Lavan that Yaakov had left told him about it on the third day, Lavan took his brothers with him and returned to Padan Aram, so that six days had elapsed until he could begin the pursuit. On the seventh day Lavan caught up with Yaakov. This is the meaning of the words וירדף אחריו שבעת ימים, “he pursued him for (a distance of) seven days.” This shows that during the six days Yaakov had managed to cover only a single day’s distance. It is possible that Yaakov left Padan Aram on a Sunday and that Lavan caught up with him on the Sabbath, seeing Yaakov would not travel on that day.
    
    31,29. יש לאל ידי, “it is within my power, etc.” The wicked always boast of their wicked deeds; Lavan was no exception; he too boasted about his wickedness. When he coupled the statement יש לאל ידי with the words ואלוקי אביכם, he meant that for the last twenty years he had been able to inflict harm on Yaakov as the fact that G’d did not warn him not to harm Yaakov until the night before he caught up with him shows that prior to this G’d would not have prevented him from harming Yaakov. The fact that G’d did not appear to him until that night may also be taken as proof of Lavan’s goodwill towards Yaakov. Surely, if G’d was so solicitous of Yaakov’s welfare, He would have had to warn him off before now unless G’d was well aware that Lavan had not harboured any hostility against Yaakov. If Yaakov had only left because he was anxious to return to his family in Canaan why did he steal the Teraphim? He repeated mention of Yaakov having stolen something to lend emphasis to the fact that the very fact of Yaakov stealing from him bothered him the most.
   מטוב עד רע, “either good or evil, etc.” anything which was good for Lavan was bad for Yaakov. If Lavan decided not to kill Yaakov but to merely take away his possessions, this would prove to be bad for Yaakov; this is why G’d had to phrase His warning by saying טוב עד רע. We find a similar construction in Ezekiel 21,8 והכרתי ממך צדיק ורשע, “I will cut off from you righteous and wicked alike.” [Ezekiel speaks about relative degrees of wickedness; he calls someone who only occasionally worships the Baal a צדיק, whereas he who does so on a regular basis is a רשע by comparison. The fact is, however, that both are wicked (Rabbi Saadyah Gaon)]. The proof that our interpretation is correct can be seen from Yaakov’s reply לולי אלוקי אבי...כי עתה ריקם שלחתני, “if my father’s G’d had not been at my side, you would now have sent me off empty-handed.” In other words: sending Yaakov off empty-handed was Lavan’s idea of treating him “good.”
    
    31,30. כי נכסוף נכספת לבית אביך, “for you had a strong yearning for your father’s house.” When Lavan repeated the word נכסף  he hinted that Yaakov’s yearning was not only for his paternal home but also for the Holy Land. We find this term applied to yearning for the Holy Land in Psalms 84,3  נכספה וגם כלתה נפשי לחצרות ה', “I long, I yearn for the courtyards of the Lord.”
    It is possible that the letter ה at the end of the word נכספתה is an allusion to glory, i.e. the glory of G’d, concerning Whom Isaiah 64,10 has said: בית קדשנו ותפארתנו, “the house of our sanctity and our glory.” Yaakov yearned for that house. The words בית קדשנו refer to G’d’s glory, whereas the word תפארתנו refers to Israel’s glory. We have the expression עוז ותפארת במקדשו, (Psalms 96,6) “strength and splendour are in His Temple,” which reflect similar sentiments.
    He who does not yearn for the Temple is the sinner. We find that the prophet rebukes Israel in words reflecting this feeling when he said (Tzefaniah 2,1), התקוששו, וקושו הגוי לא נכסוף, “gather together, gather, o nation without yearnings!” The prophet addressed a nation that lacked the feeling of yearning for G’d and His Temple. 
    
    31,32. עם אשר תמצא את אלוהיך לא יחיה, “the person in whose possession you will find your idols shall not live!” This curse resulted in Rachel dying on route; from here we also learn that a person must be very careful not to cause a righteous person to curse him.
   נגד אחינו הכר לך מה עמדי וקח לך, “in the presence of our kinsmen ascertain for yourself what is with me and take it back.” This proves Yaakov’s integrity. It is typical of the righteous that they do not covet money which is not theirs, not even if it belongs to close relatives. Yaakov who had stayed at his father-in-law’s house for twenty years and whose father-in-law had experienced tremendous blessings due to Yaakov, as he himself admitted, allowed his father-in-law to examine every part of his household and search for any item not his. Lavan actually was not abashed to take advantage of that opportunity as we know from Yaakov saying at the end (verse 37) “for you have handled everything; what did you find?” 
    
    31,33. ויבא לבן באהל יעקב ובאהל לאה, “Lavan entered the tent of Yaakov and the tent of Leah, etc.” After the Torah had already mentioned “the tent of Leah and that of the two maid-servants”, why did the Torah have to make special mention of “he left the tent of Leah?” All the Torah had to write was “he left the tent of the two maid-servants.” It is possible, however, that Leah’s tent was the biggest of them all, so that it contained the private tents of the two maid-servants within it. If so, Lavan would still have been standing within the tent of Leah at the time he left the respective tents of the maid-servants. This is why the Torah had to be precise in saying “he left the tent of Leah.” According to Rashi there were a total of three tents, seeing that the tent of Rachel and the tent of Yaakov were one and the same. Add to that the tent of Leah and the tent of the two maid-servants and you have a total of three tents.
    According to the opinion of Nachmanides, on the other hand, there were a total of five tents; each of the matriarchs had a tent of her own; each of the maid-servants had a tent of her own; Yaakov also had a tent of his own. It would have been a prerequisite of Yaakov’s privacy that his wives each had her own tent. Etiquette demanded that none of his wives would be aware when her husband visited the tent of her companion. According to the author it would be a Biblical prohibition for them to know with whom Yaakov was sleeping at the time.
    
    31,35. כי לא אוכל לקום מפניך, “for I am unable to rise before you.” This verse proves that the ancients already practiced the restrictions of ritual impurity when their women were menstruating. In fact, they treated such impurity as equivalent to the ritual impurity associated with a dead body. According to Niddah it was forbidden to enquire after the welfare of a menstruating woman. Rabbi Nechemyah there says that that even the words which come out of the mouth of a menstruating woman are ritually impure, and one is not to walk on the ground such a woman has walked on. One must also not make use of what such a woman has produced with her hands while in such an impure state. This is why Lavan kept quiet and left her tent. The high level of Yaakov’s chastity is attested to by the fact that each of his four wives had her own quarters.
    
    31,38.רחליך ועזיך לא שכלו , “your ewes and she-goats never miscarried.” Yaakov attributed this to his merit. The Torah promises such a blessing to people observing its commandments (Exodus 23,26).
   ואילי צאנך לא אכלתי, “and I did not eat rams of your flock.” Other shepherds do eat these rams and their owners know about it. Ezekiel 34,3 writes: את החלב תאכלו ואת הצמר תלבשו הבריאה תזבחו הצאן לא תראון, “should you eat the fat, should you don the wool, should you slaughter the choicest- but not tend the sheep!” Clearly that verse proves that provided the shepherd carries out his duties he is entitled to the fringe benefits mentioned by the prophet.
    
    31,39.טרפה לא הבאתי אליך , “that which was mangled I never brought to you.” Yaakov meant that while under his care no ferocious beast mangled any of Lavan’s animals. The expression טרפה is employed as in 37,33 חיה רעה אכלתהו, טרוף טורף יוסף, “a wild beast has devoured him, Joseph has been horribly mangled.” We have other verses in Scripture using the word in the same sense.
   אנכי אחטנה, “I myself would bear the loss.” The word is closely related to אל השערה ולא יחטיא, “accurate to a hair, without missing.” Yaakov assumed responsibility for such eventual loss in the event it would occur. He would consider it as his own fault. The author quotes Kings I 1,21 where Bat Sheva says to King David והייתי אני ובני שלמה חטאים, “and I and my son Solomon would be considered at fault,” as a similar meaning for the word אחטנה in our verse.
   מידי תבקשנה, “from me you would exact it.” Lavan would hold Yaakov responsible for any animal stolen from the flock under Yaakov’s control. He considered Yaakov a שומר שכר, a paid watchman who assumes such risks as thievery, robbery etc. We find a verse in Ezekiel 34,4 making a similar point where the prophet writes את האובדת לא בקשתם, “you have not sought out the lost one.” In that chapter the prophet scores the kings who are charged with tending their sheep, i.e. their human subjects, and who have been remiss in doing so, doing the reverse of what Yaakov considered himself charged with. 
   גנובתי יום וגנובתי לילה, “whether it had been stolen by day or by night.” “I was always considered liable to make restitution.” A  שומר שכר is responsible for these kinds of losses as we know from Exodus 23,11 ואם גנב יגנב מעמו שלם ישלם לבעליו, “if it be stolen, the keeper has to pay compensation to its owner.” Our sages (Baba Metzia 94) query “if the paid keeper is liable to compensate the owner for animals stolen, something akin to an accident, beyond the keeper’s control, why did Yaakov have to add that he was also liable for “lost” property, i.e. that negligence is also subject to restitution by the keeper? Yaakov simply stated here that whatever the cause of any loss, he personally assumed responsibility.
    
    31,41. זה לי עשרים שנה בביתך, “this is my twenty years in your household;” The plain meaning of the text here is “seeing that I served you faithfully for twenty years you should have treated me with some respect; all the more so, seeing that I served for your two daughters for fourteen years and another six years for your flocks. However, you did not relate to me according to accepted standards You changed the type of remuneration I was to receive ten times, i.e. twice a year.”
    What Yaakov really alluded to was this: seeing that the sheep birth twice a year, you changed my wages twice a year, after every time the flock bore young ones. You received the benefit of ten throws in five years.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word זה is an allusion to זה אלי ואנוהו, ‘this is my G’d and I want to exalt Him,” There are other such verses; the point of the commentary is that we already know that Yaakov spent twenty years at Lavan. Why then did he make such a superfluous statement? The fact is that when Yaakov referred to the length of his stay at Lavan’s house earlier he spoke about himself. Here he alluded to the שכינה, the benevolent presence of G’d. He acknowledged that G’d had been with him during all these twenty years he had endured at Lavan and had worked for him. This is why he spelled it out even more forcefully in the next verse when he said: “if the G’d of my father had not been with me, you would now have sent me away empty-handed.”
    
    31,42. ופחד יצחק היה לי, “and the Dread of Yitzchak had been with me, etc.” The plain meaning of these words is that “the same G’d whom Yitzchak reveres has been with me.” This, at least is what Onkelos had in mind. There are commentators who believe that he referred to the merit Yitzchak had acquired when he lay bound on the altar on Mount Moriah, a merit which had now benefited his son Yaakov.
He was lying bound on the altar on Mount Moriah expecting to be sacrificed as a burnt-offering for G’d. Alternatively, it was a reference to the dread Yitzchak experienced when he  saw the portals of Gehinom open before his eyes (Bereshit Rabbah 67,2), or it was the dread which resulted in Yaakov receiving confirmation of the blessing his father had given him (27,33).
    When Yaakov said to Lavan: “you would now have sent me away empty-handed,” he meant: “if the dread which my father experienced on those occasions had not benefited me, this is what would have happened.”
    A kabbalistic approach: the words ופחד יצחק היה לי are a reference to Yitzchak’s overriding attribute. Yaakov told Lavan: “if I had not made this attribute also my own, you would now have sent me away empty-handed.” When we follow this approach we will note that Yaakov enumerated the three outstanding characteristics of the patriarchs in their chronological order. He would do so again when he would pray to be delivered from the threat of encountering Esau and his four hundred armed men (32,10). When he first mentioned לולי אלוקי אבי, this was a reference to the merits of his father. A person is obligated to mention the merit of his immediate father first before he mentions the merits of his grandfather (Bereshit Rabbah 94,5). Afterwards (as a mention of merit) he mentioned the merit of his grandfather Avraham when he said אלוקי אברהם, followed by the merits of his father, i.e. פחד יצחק. Finally, he referred to G’d observing his own distress and reacting to it :
    According to Nachmanides, the wording of the Torah is quite clear and does not require us to read between the lines. Yaakov first acknowledged the attribute of Justice in the heaven and that is why we find in Hoseah 3,5 אחר ישובו בני ישראל ובקשו את ה' אלוקיהם ואת דוד מלכם ופחדו אל ה' ואל טובו באחרית הימים. “Afterwards, the Israelites will turn back and seek the Lord their G’d and David their King, and they will thrill over the Lord and over His bounty in the days to come.” The prophet sketched the order in which national repentance would occur. He used the order Yaakov described here as his pattern, that they would beg for  the attribute of Mercy and Justice available on earth before qualifying to measure up even to the more stringent attribute of Justice which reigns in the celestial regions. Thus far Nachmanides
     את עניי ואת יגיע כפי ראה אלוקים ויוכח אמש, “G’d saw my wretchedness and the toil of my hands, so He admonished you last night.” He warned you last night not to kill me. If so, the merit of the toil of my hands has saved me from death whereas the merit of my fearing the Lord has saved my material wealth for me. This is what he meant when he connected the words “and the dread of Yitzchak worked on my behalf for else you would have sent me away empty-handed.” This teaches us that the way a person conducts himself in practice, i.e. “the toil of my hands,” is even more important than his philosophical and theological beliefs here described as פחד יצחק.
    
    31,43. הבנות בנותי והבנים בני, “the daughters are my daughters and the sons are my sons.” Rabbeinu Chananel comments on this that Lavan simply tried to deceive when he said that “the sons are my sons.” When the sages in Yevamot 62 said that “the grandsons are just like the sons,” they did not refer to grandsons who were the sons of daughters. Lavan similarly falsified the legal meaning of that statement of our sages when he described the flocks as “being my flocks.” He had given these flocks to Yaakov as wages for his hard toil and dedicated service. When Lavan continued: “and all that you see is mine,” he was equally wrong. Had not Yaakov already said to him: “here you have rummaged through all my things and you have not found a single thing of yours?” Lavan had not replied to this challenge. How could he now make a statement claiming everything Yaakov had was his?  Lavan’s claim reminds us of Kings I 20,3 when Ben Hadad the King of the Syrians said to King Achav of Israel: “your silver and your gold, your wives and your good children are all mine.” At that juncture the prophet reports Achav as telling his own elders (verse 7) [after having been very conciliatory and even debasing himself vis-a-vis Ben Haddad. Ed.] “see for yourselves how this man is bent on evil.”
    Concering Yaakov’s counter claim: “why did you pursue me?” Lavan answered: “because the daughters (you took away) are my daughters.” In other words, Lavan claimed that he merely came to see his daughters.
   ולבנותי, מה אעשה לאלה היום, “and as to my daughters, what could I do to these today?” He meant: “what favours could I do for them today or to the sons they have born?” Lavan hinted that there was something else he could do for his daughters which did not involve “today,” i.e. something immediate. He could conclude a covenant with Yaakov in which Yaakov undertook never to discriminate against these wives or to treat them unfairly. His main point was that Yaakov should not marry additional wives. When Lavan said הבנות בנותי, both words in the plural, he referred to the four wives of Yaakov all of whom were Lavan’s daughters though not from the same wife, or that Bilhah and Zilpah had been raised in Lavan’s house.
    
    31,46. ויאמר יעקב לאחיו  לקטו אבנים , “Yaakov said to Lavan’s brothers: gather stones.” The word לאחיו in Genesis 47,3 where the Torah writes: “Pharaoh said to his brothers:(לאחיו) what is your trade?” also refers to Joseph’s brothers not to Pharaoh’s.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 74,13 the word אחיו must be a reference to Yaakov’s sons; he called them “brothers” as they were all of an imposing physique as well as righteous just as he was. Another approach: Seeing that Yaakov himself had proven capable of lifting a stone which became a monument as we know from verse 45, he then called upon Lavan’s brothers to gather stones and make a monument also. However, Lavan’s brothers made a mound instead of a monument to the G’d in heaven. The word גל which is part of the word גלגל, planet, (in particular the sun) is an indication that the brothers of Lavan did not mean to make an undertaking vis-a-vis the G’d in heaven. They were sun-worshippers and the word גל is repeated in the paragraph to leave no doubt of its idolatrous connotation. The Torah could easily have written in our verse ויאכלו עליו, “they ate there,” instead of repeating the word גל once more. When Lavan said in verse 48 הגל הזה עד ביני וביניך, “this mound is a witness between me and between you,” the word גל was meant to link up with the first word גל in verse 46 and to form the name of the deity sun, i.e. גלגל. The five  words גלגל חמה אלוהו  שהזמינו לעד, “the sun-god which Lavan and his sons called upon as their witness” amount to the numerical value of the words יגר שהדותא, i.e. the official name Lavan gave to this stone-mound. When Lavan had proposed making the stone-mound he had said to Yaakov that it would serve as witness and he used the word והיה, i.e. letters which are the letters of the Ineffable Name. Had he not done so they would have had a difficult time agreeing on what belief they had in common which should be represented by the mound-monument. By referring to the word והיה, Lavan had wittingly or unwittingly referred to the two attributes (י+ה ( which between them were the attributes G’d used when He created the universe. This was what Rashi referred to in his commentary. He added  that the words יצף ה' ביני וביניך in verse 49 mean that the reason for calling the mound-monument מצפה was that each of the stones which formed part of it would remind one another of their function to be a witness to this mutual understanding Yaakov and Lavan had reached there. In reiterating the function of the tower or mound, Lavan first mentioned the attribute of Mercy when he referred to his part of the bargain. He said: “may the merciful G’d keep watch between me and you.” When it came to Yaakov’s part of the bargain however, Lavan invoked the attribute of Justice saying: ראה אלוקים עד ביני וביניך, “see here the attribute of Justice is witness between me and you.” Having referred to the G’d of Yaakov as well as to the deities he himself worshiped he was able to say afterwards: (verse 53) “may the G’d of Avraham or the god of Nachor judge between us.” When the Torah uses the word אלוהי in connection with Nachor, the word is not sacred and may be erased (according to Jewish law). 
    Phenomena which appear in the sky are referred to as גל or גלגל which is a reference to height. Seeing these phenomena appear high above us their common name is גלגל. This is why Zophar said to Job in Job 11,8 referring to the planets גבהי שמים מה תפעל, “higher than heaven, what can you do?” The reason the word גל  is repeated when we refer to planets, i.e. גלגל, is to describe the vast scope of the orbits of these planets.
    
    31,49. והמצפה אשר אמר, “as to the watchtower he spoke of;” this line is a continuation of the word קרא in verse 48. The Torah explains the reason for the tower being called מצפה, “lookout, or  watchtower.”
    
    31,52. עד הגל הזה ועדה המצבה, “both the mound and the monument are to serve as witness, etc.” After Lavan had already said in verse 50 that G’d is a witness, etc.,  why did Lavan have to repeat here “This mound or monument is a witness?” Lavan did so only in order to make both heaven and earth his witness. We find that the prophet Samuel did something similar when he made the Jewish people take an oath (Samuel I 12,5 and again in verse 6 of that chapter)) when he said to them: “the Lord is witness  and His anointed is witness, etc.”
   אם אני לא אעבור אליך, “that I may not cross over in your direction,” he meant that just as his crossing this watchtower must not be motivated by any hostile intent, so your crossing must not be motivated by hostile intent either. The word “for hostile purposes,” is spelled out at the end of the verse, i.e. לרעה. This is not the only place where the expression העברה is used in the sense of crossing a demarcation line with hostile intentions.  We find In Leviticus 26,6 וחרב לא תעבור בארצכם, “and a sword will not traverse your land.” The covenant which Lavan and Yaakov concluded here was not to cross into each other’s territory. The land of Gilead is considered the boundary of the Holy Land as we know from Deut. 34,1 “and G’d showed Moses the whole country, the Gilead as far as Dan.” This is also why Lavan added at the end of our verse לרעה, “for a harmful purpose.” Our sages are at pains to emphasise the restrictive nature of the word לרעה, when they said (Bereshit Rabbah 74,15) “crossing was forbidden only for hostile purposes, not for the purpose of trade and commerce.” When the wicked prophet (Sanhedrin 105) Bileam who was a descendant or even reincarnate of Lavan commenced to violate this covenant as is recorded in Deut 23,5 “who hired Bileam son of Be-Or from Aram Naharayim to curse you,” his birthplace is mentioned to show that in coming to where the Israelites were encamped he had crossed the line with hostile intent. Another such violation of this covenant occurred when Cushan Rishatayim (Judges 3,8) invaded the land of Israel. He too came from Aram Naharayim. At that point the prophet had written: “and G’d had become angry at Israel.” Had the Israelites not first caused G’d to become angry at them, He would not have allowed Cushan Rishatayim to get away with such an invasion for eight years. On the other hand, we find that David established an Israelite garrison in Damascus (Aram Naharayim) in Samuel II 8,6  because the people of Aram Naharyim had come to the assistance of Haddadezer. This was in the nature of a punitive expedition. The reason the town is called Aram Naharayim, “Aram of two rivers,” is because the city is located at the confluence of two rivers (Amana and Parpar) mentioned by Naaman the Syrian General cured by submerging himself in the Jordan and the blessing of Elisha (Kings II chapter 5). Eliyahu had also been told by G’d to go to Damascus and to crown Chazzael as King (Kings I 19,15) ostensibly to wage war against the Northern Kingdom of Israel at whom G’d was angry.
    
    31,53.  אלוהי אביהם, “the gods of their father.” The meaning of this verse may be: “the respective gods of Terach the father of both Avraham and Nachor.”
    
    32, 2. ויפגעו בו מלאכי אלוקים, “and angels of G’d met him.” These were the same angels who had been mentioned at the beginning of the portion who had been ascending and descending the ladder Yaakov had seen in his dream. This is what the Torah added כאשר ראם, “as he had seen them.” In other words, he was already familiar with these angels. We have a similar construction in Ezekiel 10,20 היא החיה אשר ראיתי , “this is the angel whom I had seen, etc.” Actually, the Torah could have written ויפגע במלאכי אלוקים, “he encountered angels of G’d.” The reason the Torah wrote that the angels met Yaakov instead of vice versa is a compliment to Yaakov. The purpose of the encounter was in order to protect Yaakov. It is similar to Psalms 91,15 כי מלאכיו יצוה לך לשמרך בכל דרכיך, “for He will command His angels to guard you (the righteous)  on all your paths.”
    There is a discussion in the Midrash Bereshit Rabbah 78,2 as to who is greater, the guardian or the person whom he guards? The Midrash concludes that the person being guarded is greater than the guardian. The Midrash came to this conclusion based on the verse (Psalms 91,12) “to guard you on all your paths to  carry you in their hands lest you hurt your foot on a stone.” The Midrash also asks: “who is greater the carrier or the one being carried?”  It concludes that the person being carried is the more important of the two. Finally, the Midrash asks: “who is more important the one being met or the one who goes out to meet someone?” The Midrash concludes that the person being met is the more important of the two. We find some support for this in connection with the prophet Elisha. We read in Kings II 6,15: “when the attendant of the man of G’d rose early and went outside, he saw a force, with horses and chariots, surrounding the town and he said to his master: ‘what shall we do?’” The verse goes on to say: “do not be afraid there are more on our side than on theirs.” A little later the verse continues: “G’d opened the eyes of the servant and he saw and here the mountain all around Elisha was covered with horses and chariots of fire.” [the paragraph started with the one who meets, only to conclude with the ones being met, the latter becoming the victors in the ensuing battle. Ed.]
    
    32,3. ויקרא שם המקום ההוא מחנים, “he called the name of that place Machanayim,” i.e. “two camps, meaning the camp of Yaakov and the camp of the angels. The Torah compared, i.e. accorded similar stature, to both camps. This teaches that the righteous are as important on earth as are the angels in the celestial spheres, the function of both being to carry out the will of their Creator.
    Another meaning of the name מחנים may be that it is an allusion to the future when the Jewish people would receive the Torah. At that time the angels would descend to earth in their hundreds of thousands to witness that event in order to watch the 600,000 Israelites who were all descendants of Yaakov. This is the meaning of Tanchuma Tetzaveh 11 that the words מחנה אלוקים זה, “this is the camp of the Lord,” refer to the 600,000 Israelites encamped around Mount Sinai. Concerning this same phenomenon we read in Song of Songs 7,1 שובי שובי השולמית, שובי שובי ונחזה בך מה תחזו בשולמית כמחולת ה-מחנים. “Turn back, turn back, O maid of Shulem! Turn back, turn back, that we may gaze upon you. “Why will you gaze at the Shulamite in the dance of Machanayim? [the joy at the giving of the Torah]”
    
    
    
    
   וישלח יעקב
    
    
    
    
   מעין נרפש ומקור משחת צדיק מט לפני רשע אכול דבש הרבות לא-טוב וחקר כבודם כבוד. “A righteous man who falters in front of the wicked, is like a murky well and a polluted fountain. It is no good to eat too much honey, nor is it honourable to seek personal glory.”(Proverbs 25, 26-27) According to Bereshit Rabbah 75,2, Solomon taught us something here about the true measure of a righteous person. When you observe such a person falter in the face of the superior might of a wicked person, such a weakness is only momentary; it does not represent a capitulation of the righteous in face of evil. He will recover from such weakness (with the help of G’d.) This is why Solomon already wrote in Proverbs 24, 16: “For the righteous will rise even if he falls seven times.” In the end he will regain his composure and his honour and dignity. The whole matter can be compared to a well of spring water which someone steps into and momentarily causes the waters in that well to become murky. After a short while of leaving those waters to themselves they will become clear again. Similarly, the righteous will regain his composure and hence his dignity. The wicked is unable to permanently suppress the superior qualities of the righteous.
    Why did Solomon, or the sages who interpreted these verses of Proverbs, choose this comparison between a murky well and a polluted fountain? It is a well known fact that a river is fed by a fountain whereas the fountain draws on an original source of water. Both are recipients of their respective waters. The reason why the fountain is called מעין, i.e. something derived from עין, and we have the expression עין המים, (Genesis 24,13 where Eliezer met Rivkah) is that the eye, i.e. עין receives its water from the דמעה, the tear. Tears originate in the brain. When someone indulges in too much weeping he causes his brain to dry out. The מקור, “the source,” does not rely on outside sources for its input. It is a “self-starter.” Its waters keep increasing and never stop flowing. This is why the name מקור is an apt name applied to G’d, seeing that He is the fountainhead of everything, and seeing that because of this there is no danger that this source will ever fail. This is reflected in Jeremiah 17,13 מקור מים חיים את ה', that “the source of (life-giving) spring water is G’d Himself.” We also have Psalms 36,10 where the psalmist describes the source of such water as being with G’d, i.e. כי עמך מקור חיים, “with You is the fountain of life.” These considerations prompted Solomon to describe a righteous person who falters in the presence of a wicked person as comparable to murky waters and a polluted fountain. Both of these defects are temporary in nature and the force of the clear water is bound to reassert itself in time.
    Having told us that it is impossible to permanently sully and debase the reputation of a righteous person, just as it is impossible to permanently pollute such waters as he had described,  Solomon goes on to say that one must investigate, i.e. seek out and praise the good qualities of the righteous. He describes the moral/ethical value of discovering these good qualities of the righteous by a conscious effort to find these qualities as something better than eating a lot of honey. Whereas the consumption of too much honey is not beneficial, spending a lot of effort in finding the good character qualities of the righteous is a very worthwhile discipline and trains a person to think along the right lines. There can be no question that praising the character of a righteous person is the result of a good nature, one that seeks out the good in a person rather than the negative qualities he may have. This is why Solomon describes the time spent extolling the righteous, the virtuous, as better than the time spent eating honey. The reverse is true of someone who praises good qualities he has found in a wicked person. This reflects bad  characteristics of the person doing so and if persisted in will lead to the one who thought he had discovered “goodness” in the wicked person praising him altogether, not just a particular good characteristic he had discovered in such a person. It is a psychological truth that a person is apt to extol the virtues of people whose general characteristics he shares, i.e. when you hear who praises whom you know that they are “birds of a feather.” In chapter 28,45 of his Book Proverbs, Solomon is on record as עזבי תורה יהללו רשע, that “praising a wicked person is typical of someone who has abandoned the path of Torah.” The reason is simply that people have a habit of praising those with whom they have the most in common, or מין במינו, in the parlance of our sages. King David already made the same point in Psalms 15,4 when he said: ואת-יראי ה' יכבד, “but who honors those who fear the Lord;” [he had previously spoken about that same person saying that if he considers himself a הולך תמים, living without blame, he would have to display his disdain for the wicked. Ed.] Our sages in Makkot 24 understood this verse to apply to Yehoshaphat, King of Yehudah, who used to rise from his chair when he saw a Torah scholar and who would embrace him and kiss him and call him “my teacher.”
    There is something puzzling in all this. Why did the sages of the Talmud describe this particular characteristic of King Yehoshapat as something remarkable, when it is something which is incumbent upon every single Jew? Why was Yehoshaphat so special that if he complied with a virtue practiced by many, his complying with it should deserve special mention? Did not our sages comment on Ezekiel 4,14 נבלה וטרפה לא אכלתי, “I have not eaten that which died by itself or that which was torn,” (the prophet speaking) that they could not see what news the prophet told us that we had not known before? Had we then expected the prophet to have been guilty of eating such things? The sages explained that the prophet spoke about that which was permitted to him legally but which he had refrained from as there was a question if such animal had been rendered unfit as a sacrifice due to some concealed defect which had come to light too late for the sacrifice to have qualified for consumption. 
    In the case of Yehoshaphat we could have assumed that the fact that he was King and as such not only not obligated but maybe even not allowed to waive his honour in favour of Torah scholars, he would have refrained from paying them such honour. If, nonetheless, he did honour them it was worth noting as it demonstrated an exceptional virtue.
    Coming back to our verse and the Midrash’s interpretation of it, we must remember that when Yaakov displayed a demeaning attitude when bowing repeatedly to Esau the wicked and addressing him as “my master,” as well as when sending gifts to him, this was all part of Yaakov’s momentary weakness though in the end he roused himself and assumed the posture fitting to a man of his stature.
    
    32,4. וישלח יעקב מלאכים לפניו אל עשו אחיו ארצה שעיר שדה אדום. “Yaakov sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau to the Mountain of Se-ir the land of Edom.” The word מלאכים includes both messengers dispatched by human beings and messengers dispatched by G’d. Seeing that at the time Yaakov had been forced to flee to Padan Aram due to his fear of his brother Esau, he now made an attempt to assuage Esau’s hurt feelings and to ask his goodwill by sending messengers, i.e. servants, members of his household. These messengers were accompanied by the messengers (angels) who had met him at Machanayim as we had read in the previous paragraph. In this matter he acted just as had his grandfather Avraham when he had sent Eliezer on an errand to secure a wife for Yitzchak when he had prayed to G’d and had assured Eliezer that a celestial messenger would assist him in his quest (compare Genesis 24,7 “He will send His angel ahead of you.”) I already explained in that connection that the angel preceded Eliezer at the well. Something similar happened here in that the angels G’d had sent to meet Yaakov and who went with the messengers whom Yaakov sent out with the gifts preceded the gifts and thus prevented Esau his brother from harming Yaakov. All of this is based on the fact that the word מלאכים can have either of the two meanings we mentioned earlier. If we need to look for proof that celestial messengers were involved here also, all we need to look at are the words: וישובו המלאכים אל יעקב לאמור, “the messengers returned to Yaakov saying, etc.” If these returning messengers had been human beings, the Torah should have reported: “the angels came to Esau and told him such and such; subsequently they returned to Yaakov reporting that they had carried out their instructions.” The Torah does not mention any of this. This proves that the messengers in question were celestial creatures and the words (verse 7) in which the Torah reports a reply by the messengers telling him that Esau approaches with 400 armed men indicate that they answered Yaakov (וישובו) without having bothered to first go there. They had been there and they knew that Esau approached with hostile intentions.
    When the Torah continues in that same verse with the words באנו אל אחיך, “we have come to your brother,” this refers to human messengers; this is why the Torah had to report things in a sequential manner, i.e. that the messengers returned and told Yaakov they had completed their mission.
    When analysing the more mystical aspect of the matter, it is possible to view these messengers as fulfilling a dual role, i.e. both as Yaakov’s messengers and as G’d’s messengers, similarly to Eliezer functioning both as a celestial messenger when the Torah described him as האיש, and as an ordinary human being, servant of Avraham, when the Torah referred to him as העבד, “the servant.” This would account for the fact that the Torah described the messengers as מלאכים, although they were creatures of flesh and blood. Both approaches correspond to the truth. It is simply a   matter of emphasis, i.e. whether we concentrate on the external aspects of what occurred, i.e. that which was visible to the physical eye, or whether we concentrate on the more fundamental aspects of the matter, something not visible to the naked eye. It appears that the opinion of Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra is based on his commentary on Parshat Balak (Numbers 22,28), where he writes ”the correct interpretation is that the she-ass actually spoke,” [i.e. that this was one of the ten miracles mentioned in the Mishnah in Avot 5,6 and Pessachim 54, involving a radical departure from the laws of nature]. If one understands the mystical aspect of the mission of the angels who came to visit Avraham, one can  similarly understand the mystical aspect of the mission of the messengers described in our verse.” Thus far Ibn Ezra.
    It is well known (based on Nachmanides) that Yitzchak, Yaakov’s father, resided in the southern part of Eretz Yisrael at this time, so that Yaakov would have had to pass through the land of Edom on his return from Padan Aram in order to rejoin his father. This is why he was so scared of Esau, as he feared Esau would come out to block his way. This is why he sent the messengers to head off any hostile confrontation.
    The sages of the Midrash in Bereshit Rabbah 75,2 take a different view. They describe Yaakov as taking hold of the ears of a dog by getting involved in a struggle which was not his. The last we had heard of Esau was that he pursued his own interests and married another wife to mollify his parents (28,9). According to Bereshit Rabbah 75,5 Yaakov acted very precipitously by sending messengers to Esau and reminding him of his existence, almost provoking him into a confrontation. This is how they interpret the verse in Proverbs we started out with, i.e. that Yaakov unnecessarily muddied the waters. They ascribe an overly obsequious letter from Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi to the governor of Palestine Antoninus as reflecting this lack of backbone displayed here by his ancestor Yaakov. Antoninus reputedly replied to this letter by questioning Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi: “are you then my servant? I wish I would become your servant in the hereafter.” Rabbi Yehudah replied “I am not greater than my ancestor Yaakov; and  you are not smaller than your ancestor Esau.” After all, my ancestor Yaakov sent a message to your ancestor Esau in which he addressed him as ‘your servant Yaakov.’” According to an opinion in that Midrash, we learn from here that Royalty must be addressed deferentially.
    
    32,5. כה תאמרון לאדוני לעשו,  this what you are to say to my lord Esau, etc.” This does not mean that Yaakov addressed Esau as “my lord” even in his absence. It means that Yaakov instructed messengers that if they would be asked  they were to say that what they were guarding and guiding was destined as “a gift for my lord Esau”, just as the Torah describes in verse 19.
   עם לבן גרתי, “I have stayed with Lavan, etc.” He was anxious to at one and the same time describe the fact that he had not stayed away from home for 22 years out of fear of his brother’s vengeance, but had remained with Lavan as he had had to work very hard. We find the words  גרתי משך in that context in Psalms 120,5 where the psalmist bemoans the fact that he had to dwell for a long time with the Meshech and the clans of Kedar. Secondly, he informed Esau that he had become very wealthy though this was of secondary importance to him. G’d had granted him wealth in return for his hard labour. His wealth was the result of the sweat of his brow, he had not inherited it from his fathers. Had his wealth derived from an inheritance, Esau would have been entitled to his share of the inheritance. Thirdly, he wanted Esau to know that he came in peace and was interested in a brotherly relationship with Esau. He was sending the messengers and the gifts to prepare the way for a friendly reunion.
    
    32,6. ויהי לי שור וחמור, “I acquired oxen and donkeys, sheep and servants.” Yaakov mentioned his great wealth by understating it, i.e. as if he had only acquired a single ox and a single donkey, etc., as he did not want to appear boastful. He followed the dictates of Jeremiah 9,22 “let not the wealthy boast of his wealth.” It is customary for all righteous people to belittle themselves and their belongings. The wicked, by contrast, boast of their wealth as we see from Esau who claimed יש לי רב, “I own a great deal” (33,9). Actually, if the Torah had followed its own rules, it should have mentioned the sheep first, i.e. צאן וחמור, שור  seeing that the category called צאן, i.e. sheep and goats, is the  most superior species amongst the animals. We find that the Torah does so in the case of Avraham (Genesis 12,16) “and he treated Avram well on her account so that he acquired (flocks of) sheep and (herds of) cattle, etc.” We find a similar sequence in the way the Torah describes Yitzchak’s wealth (Genesis 26,14) “he acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.” We also find this order of Yaakov’s wealth when the Torah (as distinct from Yaakov) describes it in 30,43: ”he acquired many sheep and maid-servants and men-servants and camels and donkeys.” You will note that in all of these instances the sheep (and goats) are mentioned first. If Yaakov did not want to mention his sheep and goats first this was because Esau had “lost” his blessing on account of these goats. Rivkah had sent Yaakov to the צאן, instructing him to select two good goats to prepare a meal for Yitzchak which could compete with the venison Esau was expected to hunt.(27,9). Mentioning the צאן first would have sounded like rubbing salt in Esau’s  wound. It is interesting to note that after the angels had returned to Yaakov with their report of Esau approaching in a hostile manner, the Torah describes Yaakov as dividing his earthly possessions into two camps (32,8).  Again the Torah lists the צאן before any other livestock. Even after Yaakov and Esau had reconciled and Esau had accepted Yaakov’s gifts as a sign of the reconciliation, the Torah again lists the צאן first in 33,13
    A Midrashic  (Tanchuma Vayishlach 1) approach to our verse: “Why did Yaakov first mention the fact that he had acquired oxen? He hinted that Joseph, who was going to be known as שור, “ox”, had already been born. Joseph was to be the natural enemy of Esau and what Esau represented. When describing future events, the prophet Ovadiah, 18 uses Joseph as symbolic of the entire Jewish people when he predicts: “and the House of Joseph flame, and the house of Esau straw; they shall burn it and devour it, and no survivor will be left of the House of Esau, -for the Lord has spoken.” In Deuteronomy 33,17 when Moses blesses the Jewish people, he wrote of Joseph: בכור שורו הדר לו, “like the firstling bull in his majesty, he has horns like the horns of a wild-ox.”
    
    32,7. וגם הולך לקראתך, “and he is also coming towards you, etc.” It is possible to explain the word וגם as including the celestial representative of Esau. who was also on the way to engage Yaakov in battle as we know from verse 25 ויאבק איש עמו, “a man wrestled with him.” This would reinforce what I have written earlier that if the מלאכים which the Torah describes Yaakov as having sent ahead as spies or messengers had been mere mortal human beings, how would these have known anything about  the celestial representative of Esau being on the way to engage Yaakov in mortal combat? The reason the Torah uses two expressions to describe Yaakov’s fear, i.e. ויירא ויצר לו, is that Yaakov worried both about the approaching physical ecounter with Esau and at the same time he worried about the spiritual confrontation which was apparently about to take place between his and Esau’s spirit.
   וארבע מאות איש עמו., “and four hundred (armed) men with him.” These men were all ready for combat. The reason the Torah did not describe these men as coming with Esau by the word אתו rather than עמו, is that the expression אתו is reserved for the righteous. We find it in connection with the righteous Joseph such as in Genesis 39,23 באשר ה' את, seeing that G’d was with him.” The reverse is true of the wicked when we read in Chronicles 2,32,8 עמו זרוע בשר, ועמנו ה' אלוקינו לעזרנו, “with him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our G’d.”
    
    32,8.ויירא יעקב מאד ויצר לו , “Yaakov was  very fearful as well as distressed.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 76,2  comment on this that the word ויירא refers to Yaakov’s fear of being killed, whereas the word ויצר refers to his discomfort at the thought of having to kill Esau in self-defense. Seeing that twenty years earlier G’d had assured him in the dream of the ladder that He would be with him and would protect him, why did he have any reason to be afraid at all? Our sages answer that Yaakov never considered G’d’s promise as ironclad but as subject to his conducting himself as worthy of it. Yaakov worried that he might have committed sins during the last twenty years which had invalidated G’d’s promise to him. This, at any rate is the approach of the Talmud to this problem in Berachot 4. The sages of the Talmud there comment further: “why is there a dot in Psalms 27,13, on the word לולא? David said: לולא האמנתי לראות בטוב ה', “If I had not had the assurance  that I would enjoy the goodness of the Lord, etc.” He meant “O Lord, I am certain that You will repay the righteous in the hereafter for the good deeds they have performed on earth. However, I am not at all sure that I will have a share in the hereafter as I may have forfeited my share through sin.” Seeing that David referred to himself as חסיד, “pious,” (compare Psalms 86,20), how could he doubt that he would have a share in the hereafter? Again the sages answer that he was afraid that some sin he had committed would result in his forfeiting his claim to the hereafter. [the dot on the second letter ל in the word לולא is considered as restrictive, as if to say “if nothing contrary to the present condition will occur.” Ed.] 
    Another approach: Yaakov was altogether not concerned about anything happening to himself, personally. After all, he was a recipient of G’d’s promise and he considered this as perfectly adequate. He was concerned about his children, his wives, and the members of his household who had not received such an assurance from G’d. This is the meaning of (verse 8) “he divided up the children (between two camps).” As proof for this interpretation look at the words פן יבא והכני אם על בנים, “lest he come and smite  me by killing children with their mother.” He did not say the word והכני, “and strike me,” as an independent statement referring to him personally, as something that he was afraid of for himself. After all, Esau’s quarrel was with Yaakov, not with his wives or children. He was not concerned about himself per se. His only fear was of what might happen to his children and to his wives.
    You ought to appreciate that this paragraph contains an explanation of what exactly did happen to Yaakov as a result of his encounter with Esau. There is also a hint of what would be a correct form of relationship between the respective descendants of Esau and Yaakov during the long course of Jewish history. It is worth our while to consider Yaakov’s preparations for his fateful encounter with Esau as something to use as a model for ourselves in our dealings with the descendants of Esau. Basically, Yaakov used a three-pronged approach. 1) He prepared to wage war if it were forced upon him. 2) He prayed to G’d for deliverance. 3) He prepared gifts to soften the mood of his adversary. The first stage of his preparation, mobilising for war, is described in our paragraph in verse eight when the Torah writes that he divided the camp in two to give himself the maximum chance for at least one camp to escape unharmed. He then engaged in prayer when he appealed to G’d, saying (verse 12) “please save me from my brother, from Esau.” The third part of his preparation, i.e.. sending gifts (or bribes if you will), is found in verses 14-21. A great Jewish King, the King Chiskiyah learned from Yaakov when Jerusalem was under siege when he faced Sancheriv, [who during his time was the foremost conqueror of the world who had already liquidated the Northern Kingdom and exiled the Ten Tribes, Ed.]. We read in Kings II 18,15 that Chiskiyah gave all the silver that was in the treasury of the Temple and in his own vaults to Sancheriv in accordance with that King’s  demands. He also readied what few forces remained at his disposal for war (Chronicles II 32,6). Finally, he prayed  (Kings II 19,15) asking G’d to demonstrate His power to the world at large by saving the Kingdom of Yehudah. We have to act similarly whenever we find ourselves threatened by hostile Gentile forces.  However, nowadays when G’d’s displeasure with us has become manifest seeing we are still in exile, we must not provoke war against our enemies as is evident from Song of Songs 2,7 השבעתי אתכם בנות ירושלים וגו', “I have made you take an oath o daughters of Jerusalem, etc.” One opinion in the Talmud Ketuvot 111 understands the oath as an undertaking by Jews in exile not to rebel against the local rulers and try and recapture the land of Israel by force of arms.
    
    32,9. אם יבא עשו אל המחנה האחת והכהו, “if Esau comes to one of the camps and defeats it, etc.” The first camp Esau was to encounter was that which contained Zilpah and Bilhah and their respective children. If he were to kill the people in that camp, והיה המחנה הנשאר לפליטה, “then the remaining camp would survive.” The second camp contained Rachel, Leah, and their respective children. In order to explain this verse completely, we have to understand it as follows: “Yaakov divided the children to Rachel and Leah respectively and to the two maid-servants and their children respectively in order for them to survive attempted murder by Esau.” The expression לפליטה occurs in that sense in Jeremiah 51,50 פליטים מחרב, “fugitives from the sword.” This verse is also the source which taught the prophet Ovadiah to divide the fledgling prophets whom he hid by separating them into two groups, each in a different cave. This is why Jeremiah wrote in Kings I 18,13  quoting Ovadiah: “I have hidden 100 of the Lord’s prophets, 50 each per cave; and I have fed them bread and provided them with water.” Our sages in Baba Metzia, basing themselves on our verse, made the rule that a person is well advised to diversify his wealth into three types of investments. 1) land. 2) commerce; 3) ready cash or easily convertible and immediately accessible assets. They also base this on Deut. 28,8 “G’d will command His blessing for you in your storehouses.” The “storehouses” are a reference to warehouses serving as the place where the merchant keeps his stock-in-trade. The next words in that verse ובכל משלח ידיך, “and your every undertaking,“ are understood as a reference to ready cash or otherwise easily cashable assets. The last expression in the above verse, i.e. וברכך בארץ, “and He will bless you on the land,” refers to G’d blessing one’s investment in land (for agriculture).
    The Midrash Bereshit Rabbah 76,3 sees in the line “if he will come to he one camp and smite it,” a reference to our brethren in the South, meaning if the Jews who reside in the South [either of the land of Israel under foreign occupation, or the Jews in Yemen? Ed.] will be smitten, at least the ones in exile under various other host countries will be safe. What these sages had in mind was that Yaakov knew for certain that in the future one part of the Jewish people would be saved. No matter what efforts Esau or his descendants would make to annihilate all the descendants of Yaakov, one part of the nation would always survive. Yaakov wanted to facilitate the survival of part of the Jewish people by demonstrating already now that the best way to ensure this was not to have all of them in the same camp, i.e. the same location. In fact, there is an allusion here to the historical truth that whenever a Kingdom or Empire expelled all its Jews, there was some other country willing to grant these exiles refuge and opportunities to establish themselves anew.
    
    32,10. אלוקי אבי אברהם, “the G’d of my father Avraham, etc.” It would have appeared more appropriate for Yaakov to first mention the Ineffable Name (as he did later in the same verse). He should have said ה' אלוקי אבי אברהם. This should have been followed by אלוקי אבי יצחק האומר אלי. According to a kabbalistic approach, if Yaakov had done as we have just suggested, the Ineffable Name would have been perceived as an allusion to repentance, i.e. as if it represented the attribute of Justice. [Rabbi Chavell, quoting האזרח בישראל, as well as תורת חיים, explains that the emanations are perceived as proceeding from the highest to the lowest. In a descending order we have כתר, חכמה, בינה,, (the latter being symbolic of repentance). It is followed by חסד -גבורה- תפארת and their branches. Had Yaakov used the Ineffable Name in connection with Avraham, that name would have alluded to the emanation בינה. [Our sages want Avraham to be associated primarily with the attribute of חסד, akin to “Mercy,” and when we begin to pray we first mention the patriarch Avraham as a symbol of that attribute. Ed.] We also conclude the benediction with a reference to Avraham in order to stress that we rely primarily on the attribute of Mercy when addressing our prayers, i.e. our requests to G’d. Yaakov lalso used that attribute last and that is why the attribute appears next to Yitzchak, though Yitzchak  represents a higher attribute as we have pointed out elsewhere..
    You will note that when G’d spoke to Yaakov earlier when He told him to return to the land of birth (31,3), He also employed first the Ineffable Name. You are aware that the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 82, have already stipulated that the patriarchs are the true מרכבה, “carriers of the Presence and glory of G’d.” You are also aware that based on Ezekiel’s vision in chapter one of Ezekiel, as interpreted in Berachot 16 that there were only three patriarchs, i.e. Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov. Four such carriers are needed. But only three people have qualified as “patriarchs” (compare Berachot 16). We know this because G’d describes Himself only as אלוקי אברהם, אלוקי יצחק, ואלוקי יעקב (Exodus 3,15). We do not find that the prophets such as Moses or Jonah ever qualified for G’d calling Himself: “the G’d of Moses, or the G’d of Jonah.” Although we find that Moses is described as imploring his G’d in Exodus 32,11 (ויחל משה את פני ה' אלוקיו) and something similar in the case of Jonah, this does not mean that these prophets qualified as being part of the מרכבה, the Divine entourage, or “chariot.” There is not a single instance in which G’d associates His name in an exclusive manner with either of these two prophets. On the other hand, we do find G’d saying to Chiskiyah in Kings II 20,5  אלוקי דוד אביך, “the G’d of your father David.” This verse caused the senior Kabbalist in Spain הרב יצחק בן הרב אברהם to say in his prayers אלוקי דוד ובונה ירושלים, "G’d of David and the builder of Jerusalem.” He did so in order that he should be able to mention a מרכבה of G’d consisting of the required minimum of four carriers and that these carriers should all be human beings. 
    However, Elisha’s question in Kings II 2,14 איה ה' אלוקי אליהו, “where is the Lord, the G’d of Elijah?” is not of the same category. This was a prayer and the wording is to be considered as merely rhetorical. This leaves us with the question  why our sages never included David in the list of the patriarchs or as one of the pillars of the מרכבה at all. Our sages were concerned with the vision of Ezekiel in the first chapter of his Book. There we find the מרכבה consisting of four phenomena of which only three are assigned a specific location. The text reads: ודמות פניהם פני אדם, ופני אריה אל הימין לארבעתם ופני שור מהשמאל לארבעתם ופני נשר לארבעתם.  (Ezekiel 1,10) “Each of them had a human face (at the front). The meaning of the words that “each of them had a human face,” is this was the face facing the prophet. The face on the right was that of a lion, whereas the face on the left was that of an ox. The prophet did not describe the location of the face of the eagle, such as saying that it was facing the back, for instance. The reason is that this was an attribute of G’d which deserved to remain hidden. Keeping this in mind, the Kabbalists followed this approach and did not include David in the regular number of the pillars of the מרכבה. [There is an interesting Midrash in which David implored G’d to become one of the patriarchs, meaning that when we commence the daily עמידה prayer we should begin with the words “G’d of Avraham, G’d of Yitzchak, G’d of Yaakov and G’d of David.” G’d explained to David that the three patriarchs had attained their stature due to their having successfully passed tests G’d had subjected them to. When David heard this he begged to be tested also. Although G’d warned him not to take such a chance, David insisted and was subjected to the test with Bat Sheva. We all know that he failed this test and this is why he did not join the ranks of the patriarchs. I do not recall the source of this Midrash at the moment. Ed.]
    
    32,11, קטנתי מכל החסדים, “I am not worthy of all the kind acts You have performed for me.” This teaches us that when a person engages in prayer that the should emphasise his own inadequacies and extol the power of the One to whom he addresses his prayer. Yaakov made this point plain by describing his relationship with G’d as “your servant.” One must also mention the manifold and varied kind deeds which G’d had already performed for the supplicant. This is what King David did in Psalms 16,2 when he said אתה טובתי בל -עליך, “You are my Lord, my benefactor; there is none above You.” He meant that the experience he had had of G’d’s kind deeds had convinced him that there is no one equal to Him as a master. A master’s kindness vis-a-vis his servant is something entirely voluntary. Similarly, all the acts of kindness performed by G’d are not rooted in any claim man has upon G’d, but are totally spontaneous. Only after having expressed such sentiments as an introduction to one’s prayer does one proceed to ask for one’s specific needs. At this point Yaakov asked: “please save me!”
    As to the meaning of the words ומכל האמת, “and of all the truth,” This suggests at first glance as if G’d acted out of a sense of obligation, i.e. attribute of Justice when performing these kind deeds. Onkelos, aware of our being apt to misconstrue the meaning of the word אמת in this instance, changed the meaning of the words when  he translated them as מכל טבוון instead of as קשוט. 
    The plain meaning of the word אמת in our verse is: “seeing giving the land of Canaan to Yaakov was fulfillment of a long-standing promise by G’d to both Avraham, Yitzchak and himself, the fulfillment of that promise was not so much an act of kindness as an act of truth.” This is also the plain meaning of the verse in Micha 7,20 תתן אמת ליעקב חסד לישראל, “You give as an act of truth to Yaakov something that You promised to Avraham as an act of pure kindness.” G’d had not been under any obligation to promise the land of Israel to Avraham; He was, however, under an obligation to fulfill His promise to Avraham in Yaakov’s time.
   כי במקלי, “for with my staff, etc.” this teaches that one must remember the days of starvation during the time one has prospered in order not to forget the fact that one is so much better off now than then. Solomon also taught us this in Kohelet 7,14: ביום טובה היה בטוב, וביום רעה ראה, “in a time of good fortune enjoy the good fortune; and in a time of misfortune reflect.” What Solomon meant was: “reflect on the time when you suffered misfortune now that you enjoy good fortune.”
    
    32,12. הציליני נא מיד אחי מיד עשו, “save me please, from my brother, from Esau!”  (According to Rashi) the prayer was the result of Yaakov having been told that Esau does not come to meet him in order to welcome him back like a brother, but that he is coming to meet him as an adversary, as an Esau. This is why Yaakov prayed for Divine help.
    One may also explain the wording of this prayer in a different way. Yaakov prayed for what he needed immediately and for his needs during future generations. As far as his immediate needs were concerned, he needed to be saved from “my brother.” During future generations, throughout a good part of Jewish history, he or his descendants would need to be saved “from Esau.” Concerning such future times, David also formulated a prayer in Psalms 10,15 when he said: שבור זרוע רשע, “break the power (arm) of the wicked!”
   כי ירא אנכי אותו, “for I am afraid of him.” Yaakov’s fear stemmed from the fact that Esau knew no mercy. We have proof of this in the writings of our prophets (Amos 1,11) על רדפו בחרב אחיו ושחת רחמיו, “because he pursued his brother with the sword and repressed all pity.”
   פן יבא והכני, “lest he come and smite me,” and he would then also murder the mothers and the children. 
    The Midrash  wonders how such a thing is possible in view of the Torah expressly forbidding the slaughter of both mother animal and her young on the same day (Leviticus 22,28)? We have a similar prohibition concerning fowl in Deut, 22,6 where the Torah words it thus: “do not take the mother bird together with her young ones.” Yaakov was fearful of Esau violating this commandment in the future as it is written in Hoseah 10,14 אם על בנים רוטשה, “when mothers and babies were clubbed to death together.”
    
    32,14. מן הבא בידו, “from that which had come into his hand, etc.” The Torah means “from that which he had acquired rightfully, as opposed to things which are acquired by illegal means. We have a verse in Maleachi 1,13 specifically targeting gifts (offerings to G’d) which the owner had not acquired honestly.  “and you bring (as a gift) the stolen or the lame. Would I accept it from you- said the Lord?”
    Another meaning of the words: מן הבא בידו could be that it referred to gemstones, i.e. literally: “valuables capable of being carried in one’s hand.”
    There is a commentator who understands that expression to mean that there is a certain bird called falcon which is an expert hunter. Seeing that Esau was a hunter, Yaakov thought that presenting him with such a bird which had been domesticated like a hunting dog would please Esau. We would then have to translate the whole verse something like this: ”he took a gift for Esau his brother from amongst these birds, i.e. from a species Esau used to carry in his hand .”
    
    32,15. עזים מאתים ותישים עשרים, “two hundred she-goats and twenty he-goats.” Yaakov sent ahead the goats as is customary amongst the flocks. We have other examples in Scripture when the species of goats precedes a list of other animals, such as in Jeremiah 50,8 “and be like the goats which lead the flock.” Another piece of information contained in our verse is the fact that the males of the goats and the sheep were more numerous than those of the other herds of animals Yaakov sent Esau as a gift. We observe that the camels appear to have been monogamous, seeing that Yaakov sent identical numbers of males and females. When it came to mentioning the cows and donkeys, each of which were the same number, the Torah first lists the pure species, i.e. the cows. You will observe that in each instance the female of the species was mentioned before the male seeing the females outnumbered the males.
    Another way of looking at the sequence in which these animals are listed is that they are listed in order of the time it takes for the respective species to reproduce, i.e. the length of pregnancy of the mother animal. Sheep and goats reproduce after a pregnancy of five months, camels after six months, cows after nine months and donkeys after a pregnancy of twelve months.
    I have written earlier (verse 1) that Yaakov did not really want to commence with the goats seeing that the goats had been what had enabled him to snatch the blessing away from Esau and that this was the reason he listed oxen as the first in a list of the possessions he had acquired; why then did he send precisely these goats ahead of any other flock? The answer is relatively simple. As long as he had not prayed for G’d’s help and it was a matter of how the angels (or human messengers) were to announce his impending arrival to Esau, Yaakov did not want to do anything which could be interpreted as provocative. Now that he had prayed and had prevailed over the celestial force representing Esau,  he had changed his stance and wanted to do something which would make Esau afraid of him rather than the reverse. He therefore deliberately placed the goats first to hint that he had no reason to feel  afraid of him. Had he not obtained the blessing through having presented his father with two goats and obviously G’d had approved the part in which his father had said “be an overlord over your brothers, etc.?” He wanted to remind his brother that their father had designated Esau as becoming a servant to Yaakov. By placing the asses and donkeys last, in that order, Yaakov hinted that in the distant future the descendants of Esau would become the victims of the Jewish messiah who would appear riding on a donkey. We find the following verse in Zechariah 9,9 concerning this future event: “Rejoice fair Zion; raise a shout fair Jerusalem! Lo, your king is coming to you He is victorious, triumphant, yet humble, riding on an ass, on a donkey foaled by a she-ass.” When you look at things in that way you will find that Yaakov caused Esau to become afraid of him both by the first part of the gift he sent, i.e. by the goats, as well as by the last item, the donkeys.
    When looking at the immense wealth possessed by both Esau and Yaakov, the gift listed here did not represent a meaningful addition to the wealth of either brother. The meaning of the gift was therefore more in its symbolic significance. Keeping this in mind, Rabbeinu Chananel points out that the total number of animals sent by Yaakov to Esau amounts to 550. This number corresponds to the number of years the descendants of Esau preceded Yaakov (Israel) as an organized state. 
    
    
    32,17. ורוח תשימו בין עדר ובין עדר, “and place a space between one herd and the next.” He wanted the eye of this wicked person Esau to satiate himself by these successive gifts. Yaakov hoped to impress him with the generous size of the gift.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 76,8 Yaakov said to G’d: “if the Jewish people will be beset by troubles in the future, please let these troubles befall them at intervals so that they have a chance to recover between successive waves of persecution.” He referred specifically to heavy taxation which would be imposed by rulers in the countries in which Jews were going to be exiled.
    
    32,23.ויעבר את מעבר היבוק , “he crossed the ford of the Yabok.” He wanted to test if the river bed would rise for him  (according to Nachmanides) and would enable him to cross on foot. Once he saw that the water level was shallow enough, 
   ויקחם ויעבירם את הנחל, “he took them and brought them across the river.”  He then retraced his steps and 
   ויעבר את אשר לו, “and he brought his belongings across.”  He commanded his servants to do this. As a result he himself was the last one left on the wrong side of the river.
    
    32,25. ויותר יעקב לבדו, “when Yaakov had remained alone, etc.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 77,3 state that  these words should be read as if Yaakov was trapped there. (read לכדו instead of לבדו). This teaches that Yaakov went back across the river to retrieve small vessels which had been overlooked. This teaches that the righteous are very meticulous even with relatively low-cost items seeing that when you acquire things by making certain none of them has been tainted by being stolen or otherwise illegally acquired, one does treasure what one has more than do other people who do not mind to acquire things less honestly. This is Rashi’s approach to our verse. Another approach: the vessels were used to drink out of and Yaakov was concerned that the younger children should have a chance to drink from them on the journey. [According to this interpretation, the correct translation of the words פכים קטנים, would be “vessels that the little ones drink from,” rather than “small vessels.”] He endangered himself in order to have convenient drinking vessels for his small children.
     ויאבק איש עמו, “a man wrestled with him.”  According to the plain meaning of the text, the meaning of ויאבק is the same as ויחבק seeing that the letters אהע'ח are frequently interchangeable. Our sages in Sotah 21 use the word אבוקה and חבוקה interchangeably. An אבוקה, torch, is so called as it is composed of pieces of wood which “embrace” each other, i.e. חבוקה.
    A Midrashic approach. (Bereshit Rabbah 76,3 and 77, 2) The word ויאבק  is derived from אבק, “dust.” It means that Yaakov became enveloped by the dust of the person engaging him in a struggle. The “man” was the celestial representative of Esau. It is well known that had it not been for the original sin in Gan Eden there would not be a noticeable difference between man and angel. On the contrary, man would outrank the angel in every respect. We base this on Sanhedrin 93 “the righteous are greater than the angels.” Accordingly, the “angel” came to try and find a sin Yaakov was guilty of in order to use the sin as a weapon to overpower him. However, he did not succeed. The only “sin” he could find was that Yaakov had married two sisters during their lifetime, something which had not yet been forbidden The Torah alludes to this when writing: “he inflicted an injury on Yaakov’s hip joint.” This was a euphemism for his sexual organs and the seat of sexual desire. The “punishment,” such as it was, was administered near that organ so that Yaakov limped for a while.
    Another allusion included in the words ויגע בכף ירכו, “he struck the socket of his hip,”  is that the damage inflicted by the celestial representative of Esau would manifest itself in later generations, amongst descendants of Yaakov who would suffer under the Romans. When the Torah wrote that the “angel” was unable to harm Yaakov, i.e. כי לא יכול לו, the meaning is that he was unable to harm Yaakov personally. He did not have permission to do so as Yaakov was unblemished. Later generations who would not be so unblemished  would become victims of Esau, however. This happened in the generation of Rabbi Yehudah ben Bava and his colleagues when that Rabbi became a martyr in order to save his students during the period when the Romans tried to wipe out Jews and Judaism (Sanhedrin 13). The Talmud tells the following story. Rabbi Chiyah bar Abba said: “if someone were to tell me to offer my life for the holy name of G’d I would be prepared to do so on condition that they would kill me quickly. If I had been asked to do the same during the period of שמד, [the persecutions of Jews and Judaism under Emperor Hadrianus] I would not be able to do so as I am not able to undergo such tortures.” What did they do in that generation? They brought iron bars which had been made white-hot. They then placed these bars under the arm pits of the victims and this is the way these people died.
    
    32,27. ויאמר שלחוני, “he (the angel) said: ‘let me go!’” The angel was afraid that if he were to leave without having obtained Yaakov’s permission they would punish him in heaven with having to endure the פולסי דנורא [some physical punishment administered by a fiery rod and mentioned in Chagigah 15 and elsewhere as an instrument for disciplining wayward angels. Ed.] We have another reference to this incident in (Hoseah 12,5) “He strove with an angel and prevailed; the other had to weep and implore him.”
   כי עלה השחר, “for dawn as risen.” When the angel asked to leave before daybreak Yaakov asked him: “are you a thief that you need to fear daylight?”  He answered “I am an angel and ever since I have been created I have not yet had the opportunity to sing a song of praise to the Lord in the heavenly choir. Today is my opportunity.” There is a reference to this in Scripture (Job 38,7) ברן יחד  כוכבי בוקר ויריעו כל בני אלוקים. “When the morning stars sang together and all the angels shouted for joy.” The time of dawn is the time when the קדושה is recited as mentioned by Isaiah 6,3 “and one would call to he other: Holy, Holy, Holy.” Hearing this, Yaakov replied:
   לא אשלחך כי אם ברכתני, “I will not let you go unless you first bless me.” He wanted Esau’s angel to acknowledge that the blessing he had received from Yitzchak was acknowledged by Esau as being rightfully his. Thereupon the angel said:
     לא יעקב יאמר עוד שמך כי אם ישראל, “your name will no longer be Yaakov but Israel.” He meant that from now on people will no longer say that you obtained the blessings by subterfuge, but they will admit that you are the rightful recipient of them. Alternatively, what the angel meant was that if anyone were to accuse Yaakov of having swindled Lavan they would be proven wrong as Yaakov had been accorded the attribute “Truth”, i.e. that he had acted truthfully in all his undertakings. This was confirmed in Michah 7,20 “You have given “truth” to Yaakov.”
    
    32,29. כי שרית עם אלוקים, “for you have contended with Divine forces.” In this instance the word elohim refers to the angel representing Esau with whom Yaakov had wrestled. The words ve-im anashim, in the same line, refer to Lavan and Esau. According to Bereshit Rabbah 78,3 the words כי שרית עם אלוקים mean that Yaakov’s countenance was engraved on the throne of G’d and the angel had realised this after looking at Yaakov.
    
    32,30. למה זה תשאל לשמי, “why is this that you ask for my name?” He meant: “we do not have a fixed name; our names always change according to the mission we are sent on.” Another meaning of these words: “why do you ask for a name seeing that we are not in the habit of revealing our names?” The reason an angel does not like to reveal his name is so as not to appear to crown himself with the success of any mission he has been sent on. He does not want a human being to go around saying: “this and this angel has performed such and such a miracle.” He is a servant, a mere extension of his Master in Heaven and he is careful not to to do something which would create the wrong impression. This was the reason that the angel who had announced to Manoach and his wife that they would have a son resented being asked for his name (Judges 13,18) saying that his name was פלאי, “something concealed. This is the meaning of Isaiah 43,7: כל הנקרא בשמי-לכבודי בראתיו, “everything which bears My name,- I have created it for the sake of My honour.” This is also the thrust of David saying in Psalms 29,1: “ascribe to the Lord, O divine beings, ascribe to the Lord glory and strength.”
    There are some commentators who have explained the words “why do you ask for my name” as “seeing that I have been defeated, what is the pointed in your knowing my name? Usually the victor wants his own name to become known. The loser does not want his name known so as to suffer the minimum of embarrassment.
   ויברך אותו שם, “he blessed him there.” He acknowledged that Yaakov was the rightful owner of the blessings his father had bestowed upon him.
    According to a Midrash the blessing the angel bestowed upon Yaakov at this time was identical with what would later on become the standard formula of the Priests blessing the Jewish people as recorded in Numbers 6,24-27.
    A logical/investigative approach. The words: “a man wrestled with him,” refer to Gavriel [we have shown on other occasions that Gavriel is referred to as איש “man.” Ed.] According to the philosophers, Gavriel is symbolic of the active investigative intelligence. [according to Kabbalistic writings this disembodied intelligence supplies the outer form to human beings based on their endowments (genes), Ed.] This force is the tenth of the emanations (the lowest counting from the top) the one we call מלכות which is just one rung above the physical universe, the עולם העשיה. This is the reason that the term איש which is usually only associated with tangible creatures is applied to Gavriel. Yaakov wanted to know if it is possible that this “man’s” soul while still enclosed in a body could attain or represent a spiritual level equal to disembodied intelligences such as the force with whom he had done battle. [In other words, this category of angel might be perceived as the link between the highest intelligence found inside a body and the lowest intelligence able to exist as a disembodied entity. Ed.] The angel, i.e. Gavriel, answered him that this was possible only after dawn, i.e. until the various forces which darken the soul have disappeared with the light of morning. This physical light, though symbolic of spiritual light, is here described as עלות השחר. 
    Let me now explain the whole episode to you based on the premise we have just outlined. I am basing myself on a Jewish philosopher in Seville who wrote this commentary in the course of his discourse on Song of Songs. I have merely translated what he wrote into Hebrew. ויותר יעקב לבדו, “Yaakov remained alone deep in thought, divesting himself of the influences exerted upon him by his body so that his thinking was unimpaired by such influences.” He desired to know if his own intellect had attained the level which  when the Torah speaks of certain celestial forces (such as Gavriel) is described as איש. It is understood that what is described as התאבקות, “a wrestling match,” takes place between evenly matched opponents. The Torah informs us here that in that struggle Yaakov did not attain superiority, i.e. the ability to function just like a disembodied spirit free from bodily influences, until the break of dawn. The word שחר stands for the restrictive influence of the body on the mind. Until Yaakov was able to rid himself of that influence, i.e. עד עלות השחר, “until the departure of that שחר,” he was not able to fully assert his שכל הפועל, his free-roaming intellect.
   וירא כי לא יוכל לו, now that the disembodied intellect no longer held an advantage over Yaakov’s intellect, though the latter was imprisoned in a body, ויגע בכף ירך יעקב, and the forces of the body are identified by the expression כף ירך, the part of the physique which is essential in man, it became clear to Yaakov that his disadvantage vis-a-vis disembodied intellects  was due only to the fact that he was imprisoned in a body.
   ויאמר שלחני כי עלה השחר, at this point the disembodied intellect hints that the intellect embodied within Yaakov will become totally independent once the restrictive shackles of being imprisoned in a body, i.e. שחר  are removed. The נפש השכלית, the intellectual life-force within Yaakov is on a par with the intellects of such disembodied beings as the angels. He (the “angel”) mentioned this simile as something similar to someone who dismisses a servant or friend as he no longer needs him. It was a compliment the angel paid to Yaakov.
   ויאמר לא אשלחך כי אם ברכתני, this teaches that the intellectual life-force within Yaakov’s body held on to the disembodied intellect represented by the “angel”. He (Yaakov) was not prepared to let go of the disembodied spirit he had embraced during this nocturnal encounter until this force had left an imprint on him which would not become dispelled as soon as he released the disembodied intelligence from his “embrace.” He insisted on attaining the intellectual level he had aspired to in an irreversible manner, not merely as a temporary spiritual-intellectual “high.” 
   ויאמר "לא יעקב יאמר עוד שמך", remember that the name Yaakov has a connotation of “humiliation, degradation.” We encounter this when he was born when the Torah described him as holding on to his twin brother’s heel (Genesis 25,26). Such an  activity as holding on to someone else’s heel is certainly creating an image of someone servile, someone in a degrading condition. After all, the heel is the very lowest part of the body. The name ישראל by contrast evokes the image of something superior. This is why the “angel” said: “you are entitled to be known by a name which conveys something lofty.” He gave as the reason for this change of name the fact that כי שרית עם אלו-הים ועם אנשים, that Yaakov’s intellectual life-force had proven to be equal to the intellect of disembodied spiritual beings even though his own intellect was still imprisoned within a body, This is the meaning of the words ועם אנשים. Actually, there had been no need for this word; if someone holds his own in a contest with divine forces he is most certainly understood to be even to or superior to any human contestant. The use of the words עם אנשים therefore adds a new dimension to our verse. Yaakov was very anxious to have confirmation that his own נפש השכלית, was on a par with that of disembodied spiritual creatures though his own spirit was still connected to his body.
   הגידה נא שמך, he wanted confirmation of what the “angel” had said by being able to identify him by name. The name would give Yaakov a clue as to the essence of that spiritual force.
     למה זה תשאל לשמי? The “angel” responded that Yaakov did not need this information as he had already achieved a great deal and had risen  to the level of disembodied heavenly spirits.
    The Torah goes on with a report of the consequences of this encounter by writing על כן לא יאכלו בני ישראל את גיד הנשה אשר על כף הירך, “this is why the children of Israel are not to eat the displaced sinew of the hip-socket.” This means that seeing the נפש השכלית is meant to adjust to the norms of the disembodied intellect, the true Israelites are not to engage in activities which arouse the libido which is seated near the hip-socket. The meaning of the word “eat” here does not only mean the actual consumption of this part of animalistic tissue but also what it symbolises, i.e. absorbing the philosophy it represents.
    From a purely physical point of view, this sinew is a very tough sinew and comparable to a tough cord. Cords become harder and tougher with use through pulling wagons, etc. Similarly, when one engages in such activities as arousing one’s libido, this leaves a progressively deeper imprint on one’s personality. The more frequently one engages in such activities the more they become part of one’s personality. Hence, the prohibition of “eating” that sinew has also deep psychological significance for the Jewish people. Preoccupation with such concerns gradually estranges one to G’d. The act of “eating” if performed within reason, i.e. in quantities appropriate to the body’s need, actually promotes both good physical and spiritual health. Eating to excess results in corruption of the body and ultimately the soul. The same is true when one indulges any of the other תאוות הגוף, physical desires.
   אשר על כף הירך, the importance of this particular sinew is that the entire body relies heavily on it so that if it is damaged one cannot even move. It therefore represents all physical desire.
   עד היום הזה, this does not refer to a specific date. The meaning of the words is that as long as the desires of the body assert themselves in man the restriction expressed in this prohibition remains in force. The arrival of the hereafter signifies a new יום, “Day,” as documented by many of our prophets. Hence, the Torah says that as long as man (Israel) is a mortal human being this prohibition will remain in force.
   כי נגע בכף ירך יעקב, the reason the Torah deliberately reverts to naming Israel “Yaakov” at this juncture, is to stress that the influence of physical desire is what “separates the men from the boys,” i.e. what is the true impediment of every “Yaakov” developing into an “Israel.” It is within the power and scope of physical desires to drag down the נפש השכלית in man to the level represented by Yaakov at birth, i.e. a degraded person who hangs on to the heel of his totally physically oriented brother.
    We find an interesting parallel of this concept in Kings I 18,31 ויקח אליהו שתים עשרה אבנים כמספר שבטי בני-יעקב אשר היה דבר ה' אליו לאמור ישראל יהיה שמך. “Eliyahu took twelve stones according to the number of the tribes of Yaakov, to whom G’d had said: ‘your name shall be Israel.’” What was the need for the Book of Kings to add the words: ‘to whom G’d had said: ”your name shall be Israel?’” Are we then fools that we did not know who Yaakov was? The answer is that at the time of the prophet Eliyahu the Israelite people were in a state of rebellion against G’d. They actively worshiped the Baal, misled by the prophets and priests who preached the religion of the Baal. Eliyahu reminded them in the verse quoted that they were guilty of devoting themselves to the physical, to the desires of the body, whereas their task in life had been to devote themselves to the meta-physical, to the Divine. The word יעקב in the verse above symbolised the physical whereas the word ישראל symbolised the spiritual, the meta-physical. Eliyahu reminded them that G’d had instructed them to become שכליים, intellectually oriented people, similar to the angels. We also find in Psalms 82,6 that at one time G’d had said of Man “you are divine,” only to find that due to their having committed a sin involving following their physical desires they became mortal, far from divine. In 35,9 when G’d says to Yaakov לא יקרא שמך עוד יעקב כי-אם ישראל יהיה שמך, “you will no longer be called Yaakov but your name shall remain Israel,” the message is not so much a compliment but a moral/ethical imperative to live according to the yardsticks applied to individuals deserving of the distinctive title ישראל. This is why our sages in Berachot 13 stated that ישראל was henceforth Yaakov’s major name, the name Yaakov being used only in a secondary sense. This also explains G’d’s instructions to Moses in Exodus 19,3 prior to the giving of the Torah כה תאמר לבית יעקב ותגיד לבני ישראל , “thus you shall say (briefly) to the house of Yaakov, and tell (in detail) to the children of Israel.” The women were referred to as “Yaakov,” as they are adjuncts to the men (in terms of Torah study), the men as “Israel.” Thus far the words of the philosopher.
    If I perhaps have not translated his words verbatim, this was because I basically wanted only to convey the gist of his approach. I would add, based on the approach of this philosopher, that the fact that the Torah calls the name of the  place where Yaakov had this encounter  once פניאל and another time פנואל, is a hint that the first name alludes to this angel representing the tenth emanation (meaning of the letter (י the type of angel known as איש. Once Yaakov/Israel had passed that place and had properly assimilated this new concept of man’s נפש שכלית being capable of matching the spiritual level of the intellect of the disembodied angels, the place was called פנואל with the letter ו, as we now find that Yaakov was limping on his hip-socket. He had become aware of his body’s being an impediment to spiritual progress which needed to be overcome.
    A kabbalistic approach to this episode: The words ויאבק איש עמו are a reference to כבוד נברא במלאכים, a concept we encountered when the angels visited Avraham. [Briefly, if I understand it correctly: on the one hand we find the term מלאך applied to man, on the other hand, we find the term איש applied to angels. Whenever such “inverted” terms are used they are expressions of honour, compliments to the person or angel undergoing the respective experience. In this instance the מלאך assuming human form compliments the human being who is to experience his presence, whereas when a human being is described as מלאך this is a compliment to the angels into whose spheres he has been transplanted for the experience described. In more mundane terms “when in Rome do as the Romans do,” and vice versa. Ed.]
    
    33,3. וישתחו ארצה שבע פעמים “he bowed earthwards seven times.” The Torah could have written “three times,” as we find in connection with David and Yonathan (Samuel I 20,41) where we are told: ויפול לאפיו ארצה וישתחו שלש פעמים, that David bowed 
    his face to the ground and prostrated himself three times before Yonathan (the crown prince). The reason the Torah here mentions the number seven is to remind us that when a righteous person falls down even seven times, he will rise again and regain his composure (compare Proverbs 24,16).
    
    33,4. וישקהו, “and he kissed him.” The word is written with dots on top of the letters. We know that whenever the sages of the massorah have seen fit to place these dots on top of a word or a letter they did so in order to attract our attention. Here the reason they placed these dots was to let us know that this kiss was not whole-hearted. It was a kiss which originated in anger. We find a similarly motivated kiss in Proverbs 27,6 ונעתרות נשיקות שונא, “the kisses of an enemy are profuse.” Amos 1,11 explains the matter when he writes: ויטרוף לעד אפו ועברתו שמרה נצח, “because his anger raged unavailing, and his fury stormed forever. “
    
    33,9. יש לי רב, “I have a great deal.” Esau spoke very haughtily. If you take a close look at the verses you will note that Yaakov is rather long-winded whereas Esau is brief and succinct. This is proof of his arrogance. Moreover, you will note that Yaakov introduces the name of G’d into every aspect of his speech, such as when he says: “the children with whom G’d has graciously endowed me.” He refers to Esau’s accepting his gift being comparable to his being allowed to see  the “face of G’d;” (verse 10) or  to G’d as having granted him this wealth (verse 11). Esau, on the other hand, did not refer to G’d a single time.
   אחי יהי לך אשר לך    , “keep what is yours my brother.” Bereshit Rabbah 78,11 comments on these words of Esau that up until that moment Yaakov still entertained doubts whether the blessings were securely his. Now that he heard Esau acknowledge “keep what is yours,” he was visibly relieved concerning the validity of these blessings. He based this on the precise wording of Esau’s comment which contained ten letters. These ten words corresponded to the ten blessings which formed  the blessing commencing with the words ויתן לך (Genesis 27,28-29).
    33,10. כי על כן ראיתי פניך, “inasmuch as I have seen your face.” I believe the correct interpretation of this verse is: “accept this gift from me in order to demonstrate your goodwill towards me, just as someone who offers a gift to his ruler feels reassured when the ruler condescends to accept his gift.” 
    Our sages (Sotah 41-42) understand the words כראות פני אלוהים as follows: Rabbi Yochanan said: “it is permissible to flatter the wicked people of this world as we know from the above verse where Yaakov flattered Esau.” He disagrees with Rabbi Pedot in this regard as the latter said that even if the motivation of such flattery is based on fear, it is not permissible. He bases his opinion on Psalms 101,7: “he who speaks untruths shall not stand before My eyes.” We also have a verse in Job 13,16: “for no flatterer can come into His presence.” As to how one can reconcile the message of these verses  with Yaakov’s behaviour in our verses, or rather, with Rabbi Yochanan’s view that what Yaakov did was in order, Rabbi Yochanan will reply  that the type of flattery attributed here to Yaakov is permissible as it was of a general nature and his wording allowed of more than one interpretation. His words were capable of a favourable interpretation or an unfavourable interpretation. The word ראיתי,  “I have seen,” could be interpreted as Yaakov being critical of Esau just as we find such a meaning in Psalms 22,18: “while they look on (יביטו יראו בי) and gloat.” A similar negative meaning can be attributed to Yaakov using the word אלוהים in describing Esau’s face. The word is meant as a description of an idol. If the wicked person to whom Yaakov’s words were addressed chose to interpret them as flattering him, then this is Esau’s problem, not Yaakov’s. Our sages in Chulin 94 are on record as saying: “if he wants to deceive himself, he cannot claim that I have deceived him.” We similarly find that the sages ( Nedarim 62) permitted the Torah scholar to say: “I am a servant of fire,” in order to secure exemption from head-tax.” The reason such apparently flagrantly idolatrous statements are admissible is that G’d Himself has been described in the Torah as אש אוכלה הוא, “a consuming fire’ (Deut. 4,24). The Torah scholar may have referred to that verse when describing himself as the “servant of fire.” Seeing that such double-entendres were motivated by fear they were permissible.
    
    33,12 נסעה ונלכה ואלכה , “travel on and let us go!” Seeing that Esau uses both the singular and the plural when he said “let us go,” and “I will proceed, etc.,” it is  possible to understand that Esau made two requests of Yaakov. He said: “if you want to we can travel together. Alternately, I will  keep my distance and proceed on a course parallel to yours”. The word נגדך would then have a similar meaning to Genesis 21,16 ותשב לה מנגד הרחק, “she sat down some distance away.” Yaakov replied that he could not travel together with Esau. This is why he said: “my lord knows that  the children are tender, etc.” However, Esau did travel a parallel route some distance away. This is what the Torah means  that he went to Seir, whereas Yaakov went to Sukkot. 
    According to the Midrash: There is a deeper meaning behind the mention of these names. When Esau said נסעה ונלכה, “let us travel on,” Esau had said to Yaakov: “let us divide the world”  i.e. both the present life as well as the hereafter between us. Yaakov replied: “the children are tender;” he meant that they are  still not trained to perform the commandments. If I choose to give them part of the attractions in the present life before they are able to handle such temptations, ומתו כל הצאן, “the whole  flock may die,” (figure of speech for forfeiting one’s afterlife) and they will not be ready to cope with judgment in Gehinom. Therefore, יעבר נא אדוני, “go ahead my lord (and take possession of the good life in this world) and I will take my time in exile, etc. i.e. אתנהלה לאטי “according to my own slow pace”. The word אט occurs as an expression signifying שפלות,  humiliation, in Kings I 21,27 “Achav walked in humiliation.” Yaakov implied that while in exile in this world he would not rebel against his humiliating conditions by provoking war against the host countries. This is implied by the words לרגל המלאכה. As to how long such a condition of the Jewish people in exile would continue, he said עד אשר אבא אל אדוני שעירה “until I come to my lord to Se-ir,” meaning until the time of the redemption arrives when ועלו מושיעים בהר שעיר, when they will conquer Mount Se-ir.
    33,14.עד אשר אבא אל אדוני שעירה , until I come to my lord at Se-ir.” Actually Yaakov had no intention of traveling to Se-ir; on the contrary, he wanted to put as much distance as possible between himself and Esau. This is why he told Esau that he had a distant target although we find he stopped already at Sukkot, way short of that distance (compare Rashi). Basing themselves on what Yaakov said here, our sages in Avodah Zarah 25 advised “if a pagan asks you where you are headed, tell him a destination which is twice as far removed as your true destination just as did Yaakov at the time he met Esau.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Bereshit Rabbah 78,14. We cannot find a single reference in Scripture that Yaakov ever arrived in Se-ir. Was the truthful Yaakov then a liar? He was no liar. He referred to the time in the future of which Ovadiah 21 prophesied that the Jews, i.e. Yaakov’s descendants, would capture Mount Seir as part of the process of redemption of the Jewish people. This is why you find an allusion to this when you put together the last letters in the words אבא אל אדוני שעירה where you found that they combine to make the name אליה the harbinger of the redemption, the period when Israel will defeat Edom, Se-ir. This is a reference to Maleachi 3,23 “Here I am going to send you Eliyahu the prophet, etc.”
    
    33,15. למה זה, אמצא חן בעיניך, “why all this? Let me find favour in your eyes.” The words למה זה do not form part of the four words למה זה אמצא חן, but they are two separate statements.  The first two words refer to Esau’s offer (or threat) to provide Yaakov with an escort. The second part of the verse means: “you have already done enough for me by letting me find favour in your eyes.” Yaakov implied that this was more important to him than an escort of numerous people.
    
    33,18. ויבא יעקב שלם, “Yaakov arrived whole.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah tells us that Yaakov arrived at the border of the land of Canaan, a place called Salem. 
    According to Onkelos and Rashi the word שלם is not the name of a town but describes a condition in which Yaakov arrived at Shechem. They say that Yaakov was whole both in spirit and in body and with all his possessions intact when he arrived in the land of Canaan. This view is based on Shabbat 33. Dinah left her father’s house while they resided at (near) Shechem. This is where she was raped. When the Torah writes in verse 19 that Yaakov acquired a plot of land from the people of Chamor (the inhabitants of Shechem) upon which he pitched his tent, this showed that he was unwilling to be a mere tourist in the neighbourhood, but wanted to establish rights of citizenship in that area. Although Yaakov had not planned it, it so happened that in the future when the Jewish people conquered the land under the leadership of Joshua, this was the first part of the country they took possession of even before they dispossessed the local inhabitants. Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra comments that the words: “he acquired a plot of land,” teach us that the land of Israel is so beloved that anyone who owns a piece of it is assured of his place in the hereafter.
    
    33,20. ויצב שם מזבח ויקרא לו אל אלוהי ישראל , “he set up an altar there and he called it G’d, G’d the Lord of Israel.” The plain meaning of these words is that Yaakov named the altar after the G’d who had performed a miracle for him at that site. Moses did something similar as the Torah reports in Exodus 17,16 after Israel had warded off the attack by Amalek “Moses built an altar and called it: ‘G’d is My banner.’”
    A kabbalistic approach: the G’d of Israel called Yaakov “EL.” This is also what our sages have said in Bereshit Rabbah 79,8. The wording there is that G’d said to Israel: “I am G’d in heaven whereas you are  “EL” on earth.” This would reflect what we have quoted repeatedly that Yaakov’s likeness is engraved on the throne of G’d. The meaning of these strange words in the Midrash is that the שכינה resides in the land of Israel. This would account for Bileam having said in Numbers 23,8 “how can I curse when “EL” has not cursed?” He referred to Yaakov when he said “EL.” [the wording in my edition is quite different, i.e. Israel speaking in those terms to G‘d. The Midrash adds that Yaakov spoke out of turn and that G’d criticised him and the rape of Dinah was a result of his overbearing statement. Ed.]
    
    34,1. ותצא דינה בת לאה, “Dinah, Leah’s daughter went out, etc.” What happened to Dinah was a punishment for Yaakov for several misdemeanours. Firstly, he had said to Lavan (30,33) “let my integrity testify for me in the future.” Secondly, he was punished for denying Esau a glimpse of Dinah, for maybe she could have exercised a beneficial influence on him if he had married her. Thirdly, he was arrogant in assuming authority on earth as indicated by the name he gave the altar. According to Bereshit Rabbah, G’d told him: “never praise yourself with something that is in the future.” You have said: “let  my integrity testify for me in the future. Tomorrow your daughter will leave her house and she will be raped.” [The implication is that if he had seen to it hat she was properly chaperoned this could not have happened. Ed.]  Furthermore,  the Torah had reported (32,23) “he took his two wives and his maid-servants and his eleven children and presented them to Esau.” Where was Dinah? The report in the Torah alerts us to the fact that Yaakov had hidden Dinah in a box so that Esau would not become aware of her. G’d said to Yaakov: “because you did not make an effort for her to be married to a circumcised male she will become married to an uncircumcised male. Not only that, but she will be raped first.” Another criticism of Yaakov mentioned in the Midrash in the name of G’d is the fact that he had assigned G’d sovereignty in the heavens whereas arrogating to himself something parallel in the terrestrial spheres as we explained in connection with his naming the altar. G’d said to him: “even the reader in the synagogue does not arrogate to himself the right to act on behalf of the congregants. He waits for an invitation by the congregation to act on their behalf. Tomorrow your daughter will be raped.” The reason this punishment followed the misdemeanour so promptly was because Yaakov had spoken to G’d in a somewhat provocative manner.
    The reason the Torah describes Dinah as ”Dinah the daughter of Leah went out,” when we all know she was Leah’s daughter is because she was trying to attract attention to herself; she had bedecked herself  (Bereshit Rabbah 80,1). She proved to be a true daughter of her mother who had also attracted attention to herself by leaving her tent as we have been told in 30,16. Scripture is critical of women who leave the security and modest environment of their homes unnecessarily. Solomon wrote in Proverbs 7,11-12 “She is loud and rebellious, her feet would not stay home. Now outside, now in the streets, she lurks at every corner.” David had written about a woman who stays at home. that “the true measure of a princess is found in the fact that she remains indoors.” (Psalms 45,14) When the angels asked Avraham where Sarah was, he answered: “here she is in the tent (Genesis 18,9).” The Midrash explains in that connection that a woman who remains within the confines of her home confers forgiveness upon the members of her house by her very presence therein,  just as the altar in the Temple conferred forgiveness on the Jewish people. We have an allusion to this in Scripture when David wrote  (Psalms 128,3)  “your wife shall be like a fruitful vine within your house;” the inside of the house is called ירכתי ביתך in that verse. We also have a verse  concerning the function of the altar in which a similar point is made when the Torah wrote (Leviticus 1,11) ושחט אותו על ירך המזבח, “he is to slaughter it on the ירך, ‘the side’ of the altar. The word ירך also describes the function of the woman to bear children. The altar and woman have something vital in common. If woman fulfills here role of presiding first and foremost within the confines of her home, she will have the kind of children who will be anointed with the oil of anointing (the oil with which the High Priest was anointed) compare Psalms 128,3 “your sons will be like olive saplings.” Our sages in Yuma 16 have also said  that there was a woman by the name of Kimchit who lived to see all her seven sons anointed as High Priest at one time or another. In response to the question how it was possible that she enjoyed such a singular distinction, she replied that the ceiling in her house had never seen the plaits of the hair on her head.
    The reason the psalmist chose to compare the fertility of a model wife to the vine (“your wife shall be like a fruitful vine“, Psalms 128,3) is that vines are planted inside the rear of the house. As they grow, its branches find the sun through holes in the walls. In other words, this is the only tree whose trunk grows inside whereas its branches develop outside. This tree is therefore an appropriate simile for the kind of woman we have discussed. Such a woman not only stays inside her house but she is not near the entrance of her house where she would be exposed to everyone’s view. This is what Solomon criticised about the foolish woman whom he described as sitting at the entrance to her house (Proverbs 9,14). Seeing the mother takes care of everything within the house, her sons go out to the field to do their various kinds of work. These sons are compared to olive saplings. The reason David chose this simile is that unlike other trees which are receptive to the practice of grafting, the olive tree rejects grafts (Jerusalem Talmud Kilayim 1,7). [much like the human body has a tendency to reject even organs from another human being. Ed.] Similarly, the paternity of the sons of such a chaste woman will never be questioned. Another reason for comparing the children of such a woman to olive saplings is that the fruit of the olive tree matures after nine months similar to the fruit of woman. Such a woman does not experience miscarriages and all her children are born after a full pregnancy of nine months. We have been taught in Bechorot 8 that the pure domestic animals of the beef variety carry their young for nine months.
    You are no doubt aware that the Levites sang 15 psalms commencing with the words שיר למעלות, “song of the steps” on the Temple steps corresponding to the 15 steps which led up to the level of the Sanctuary from the antechamber. The song from which the above-mentioned verse is taken is the ninth in that series (compare Psalms 120-134). The words סביב לשלחנך “all around your table,” in the verse above mean that the sons are all assembled at the table to serve their mother at meal-time.
    Furthermore, it is a well known fact that all trees have a “heart” which becomes exposed when you cut down the trunk. The only exception to this rule is the olive tree. Perhaps this is the reason why eating olives led to the person who has consumed them forgetting the Torah he has studied, his heart becoming dull and unresponsive to learning. Our sages have distinguished between the effect of eating olives and consuming olive oil. The former has a negative effect even on matters one has studied for seventy years whereas the latter has a beneficial effect, restoring to one’s memory what one had forgotten for a long time. (Horiot 13)
    An additional explanation of the words אשתך כגפן פוריה, “your wife shall be as fruitful as a vine,” is a reference to the time when the woman menstruates and observes blood oozing from her insides. The additional words בירכתי ביתך, “in the innermost part of your house,” are a hint that during her period of menstruation her husband has to keep his distance from her. The psalmist assures such a woman that if she does observe this legislation meticulously, then “your sons will be like olive saplings.” The reason that the psalmist spelled the word אשתך with the vowel segol under the letter א instead of the vowel chirik which we would have expected, [making the word sound like “your fire”. Ed.] is that during the period in question she is to stay away from the fire (of sexual passion). When she conducts herself in accordance with Jewish norms her sons will not display any character blemishes.
   לראות בבנות הארץ, “to look around amongst the daughters of the land.” She wanted to watch the girls perform dances. We find a similar expression in Judges 21,21 וראיתם והנה אם-ילאו בנות שילה לחול במחולות, “as soon as you see the girls of Shiloh coming out to join the dances, etc.”
    A Midrashic approach: the word לראות, “to see,” means “to see and to be seen.” We read in verse six: ויצא חמור אבי שכם אל יעקב לדבר אתו, Chamor the father of Shechem went out to Yaakov to speak with him.” About this the Tanchuma 7 Vayishlach writes:  He said to him: ‘I know that your grandfather Avraham was a prince as the Hittites had acclaimed him as: “you are a prince in our midst” (23,6). I, however, am a prince in the land also. Give the daughter of a prince to a prince (my son) as a wife.” Upon hearing this Yaakov replied: “The title ‘prince’ is applicable only to a שור, ox” (not to a donkey, meaning of the name Chamor.) The Torah had written that Avraham ran to the cattle, (ox) (18,7) and it is written in Proverbs 14,4: ורב תבואות בכח שור, “a bountiful harvest is due to the strength of the ox.” An ox and a donkey cannot mate together. The Torah writes expressly: “you shall not plough with an ox and a donkey together.” In the Book of Prophets (Kings II 14,9) we find the following statement: “The thistle in Lebanon sent the following message to the cedar in Lebanon. ‘give your daughter to my son in marriage.’ But a wild beast in Lebanon went by and trampled down the thistle.” The wild beasts in that parable are the sons of Yaakov who have been compared to wild beasts. In the blessings bestowed on Yaakov’s sons by their father, Yehudah is compared to a lion (49,9); Dan is compared to a snake (49,17); Binyamin is compared to a wolf (49,27); Naftali to a gazelle (49,21). When the Book of Kings spoke about the wild beasts trampling the thistle, the reference was to the sons of Yaakov Shimon and Levi killing the male inhabitants of Shechem. The prophet Hoseah also complains about a similar occurrence in Hoseah 6,9 where he wrote about what would happen to the people of Shechem in his own time because they encouraged depravity. The people would be murdered because they had been guilty of sexual misconduct.
    
    34,3. ותדבק נפשו בדינה, “His soul became attached to Dinah.” At that time Dinah was eight years and one month old. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 72,6) arrive at this conclusion by assuming that Leah’s prayer that her fetus should be a girl was offered when she was in a state of advanced pregnancy. Dinah was born before Joseph as the Torah mentions Rachel as becoming pregnant after her birth. Joseph was born 14 years  after Yaakov had arrived in Charan when Yaakov started serving Lavan an additional six years for his sheep. They stayed in Sukkot for 18 months before moving on to Shechem. This makes Joseph seven and a half years old at that time. Dinah was seven months older than he (Joseph was born at the end of a seven month pregnancy) so that made Dinah eight years and one month when she was raped.
    
    34,4. אל חמור אביו לאמור, “to his father Chamor, to say:” The word לאמור means that he wanted his father to speak to Yaakov on the subject. Alternately, the word is merely used to underline the urgency with which Shechem viewed the matter. He wanted his father to be insistent. We find a similar use of the word לאמור in connection with the wife of Potiphar in Genesis 39,14, where she wanted to underline that the fact that her husband had brought a Hebrew slave into the household resulted in her almost being  raped.
    
    34,13. ויענו בני יעקב את שכם ואת חמור אביו במרמה, “the sons of Yaakov answered Shechem and his father Chamor cleverly.” It would have been appropriate for their father Yaakov to conduct these negotiations. After all, they were in their father’s presence and they should have kept quiet. However, seeing that they felt that their honour had been besmirched and they therefore had a vested interest in the matter they did not want their father to take part in the conversation at all. When they spoke up in lieu of their father they meant to honour him.
    Nachmanides writes as follows: seeing that what the brothers answered was at the advice of their father and with his consent, why did Yaakov afterwards become angry at Shimon and Levi when he said “you have caused me anguish?” He had been aware that they had spoken cleverly, i.e. misleadingly, in order to succeed in obtaining Dinah’s release. Besides, Yaakov had known full well that there was no question of Dinah marrying the man who had raped her and defiled her! All the brothers had answered with the same מרמה, deceitfulness, not just Shimon and Levi. Whereas Shimon and Levi carried out the retribution by themselves their father cursed only the anger of these two brothers who had carried out the deed.
    Actually, the deceit had consisted in the brothers leading Chamor and Shechem to believe that if they would all circumcise themselves they would be ready to intermarry. They had assumed that the people of Shechem would never allow their leader to go through with such a plan. If, by chance,  they would listen to their leaders and all circumcise themselves they would then attack the town on the third day when the inhabitants were defenseless. They would then take their sister and free her. This part of the plan enjoyed a consensus and the blessing of Yaakov. When Shimon and Levi decided to kill all the menfolk this was something which had not been part of the original plan and this aroused Yaakov’s displeasure.
    
    34,11לתת את אחותינו, “to give our sister.” Afterwards they spoke of “we will take our daughter.” In the first instance they spoke on their own behalf,  whereas later on they spoke on behalf of their father. It is possible that the word “our daughter” is used here in a sense similar to “our sister,” as we find in Kings II 8,18 where Yoram the son of King Yehoshaphat of Yehudah is  reported to have taken a daughter of king Achav of Israel as a wife although Achav did not have a daughter. The word “daughter” there clearly refers to “sister.” This is also the way Targum Yonathan translates it.
    
    34,25. ויהי ביום השלישי בהיותם כואבים, “it was on the third day, when they were in pain, etc.” It is an accepted fact in science that amongst all creatures the “third” is always relatively weak. It makes no difference whether it is the third day after a woman has given birth or whether it is the third day in the development of anything else. This is all due to the fact that the third day was under the aegis of the planet Mars. This is why the pain after a wound has been inflicted is always greater on the third day. This is why the pain of circumcision is greatest on the third day, weakening the person who has undergone this procedure. Our sages in Shabbat 86, have ruled that it is permissible to perform all kinds of procedures otherwise prohibited on the Sabbath for a person on the third day after he has been circumcised, as he is weak and even his life may be  in some danger.
    Experts of a science known as Techunah, (a form of astronomy) wrote that the third day is the day under the influence of the horoscope cancer which in turn is presided over by Samael. Samael’s personal servant is the planet Mars. This knowledge prompted our sages in Taanit 27 to decree that the אנשי מעמד, the Israelites representing the people every day in the Temple, were not to fast on Sundays (first day of the week) as this was the third day after Adam had been created on Friday, the 6th day of the week, so that in counting a completed universe this day was actually the third day. This is also the reason we take some fragrant plants at the conclusion of the Sabbath and pronounce a benediction over them as the third day is ushered in and we want to face it having performed an additional mitzvah. Our spiritual self is strengthened by means of the pleasant fragrance.
   ויקחו שני בני יעקב שמעון ולוי, ”and Shimon and Levi, two of Yaakov’s sons, took, etc.” By reading the text carefully it is possible to deduce the ages of these two sons of Yaakov when they destroyed the city of Shechem. We know from the text that Yaakov stayed at his uncle Lavan for twenty years. During the first 14 years he worked for his two wives Rachel and Leah, whereas during the remaining six years he worked in order to establish an economic base for himself and his family. After the first seven years of his service Lavan cheated him by giving him Leah instead of Rachel as his wife. Leah bore Reuven for Yaakov after a pregnancy of seven months. Another seven months (or so) later Shimon was born. It follows that when Yaakov left Lavan and interrupted his journey at Sukkot, Shimon was 2 months shy of 12 years old. Yaakov stayed at Sukkot for 18 months before moving on to Shechem. This means that at that time Shimon was 13 years and four months. His younger brother Levi was only 12 years and nine months old at that time. The Torah called both of them by the name איש, meaning they had attained puberty. This is the meaning of the words איש חרבו, “each man his sword.”
    
    34,30. עכרתם אותי, “you have caused me to become tainted.” Yaakov referred to their having spilled innocent blood. He used the term עכירה, similar to a person who introduces a  turbid appearance into wine by adding sediments. Yaakov’s previously clear image had now been tainted. The inhabitants of the land were now able to point at Yaakov saying that he had dealt evilly with peaceful people. Bereshit Rabbah at the end of Genesis 80, describes this as a barrel of wine which had contained clear wine now having turned cloudy. Although it had been a tradition  that the Canaanites would become the victims of the Jews, Yaakov felt his sons should have waited until they were numerically strong enough to overcome the Canaanites without miracles. Once they had taken possession of the land of Israel they could have punished the people of Shechem with Yaakov’s blessing. This is why he added ואני מתי מספר, “and I am few in number.”
    
    34,31. הכזונה יעשה את אחותנו, “is our sister to be treated like a whore?”  Rashi wrote  כתרגומות ית אחתנא, but I have not been able to understand what he had in mind.
    
    35,1. ויאמר אלוקים אל יעקב קום עלה בית אל ושב שם, G’d said to Yaakov: “rise and move to Bet-El and settle down there.” The meaning of the word ושב, in this instance is “let your mind come to rest.” He was to erect an altar to G’d there when he had recovered from his disturbed frame of mind. The fact that G’d appeared to him would contribute to Yaakov’s recovering his peace of mind.
    
    35,2. הסירו את אלוהי הנכר, “remove the alien deities!” These were the various images captured as part of the loot of the town of Shechem which the Torah mentioned as described already by Rashi. 
    In spite of the fact that such artifacts were permissible for use by people prior to the Torah having been given seeing that they had undergone a process of involuntary abandonment by their owners which disqualified them from further use as idols,  (Avodah Zarah 52), Yaakov commanded the members of his household to remove these former idols and to sanctify themselves in order for them to qualify to serve G’d. This is what is implied in the words: “let us arise and go to Bet-El.” He meant that he would offer a sacrifice there to G’d. Yaakov based himself on a concept found in Kohelet 4,17: שמור רגלך כאשר תלך אל בית אלוקים, “watch your step when you are on the way to the House of the Lord.”
   והטהרו, “and become ritually clean!” The verse teaches us that sin itself  is called ritual impurity. We have a similar verse in Ezekiel 20,7 where the prophet warns his compatriots  ובגלולי מצרים אל תטמאו, “and do not defile yourselves by committing the kind of sins committed by the Egyptians.” On the other hand, anyone who abandons sin is described as ritually pure, as we know from Leviticus 16,30 מכל חטאתיכם לפני ה’ תטהרו, “you will become cleansed (ritually pure) from all your sins against G’d.” Another verse expressing a similar sentiment is found in Joshua 22,17 המעט לנו את עון פעור אשר לא הטהרנו ממנו, “is it perhaps not enough to have committed the sin of Pe-or from which we have not yet been cleansed (completely)?” King David also mentioned such a thought when he said (Psalms 51,9) “Remove my sin by means of hyssop until I am pure.” In verse 4 of the same psalm he said: ”wash me thoroughly of my iniquity so that I may be purified from my sin.”
   והחליפו שמלותיכם, “and change your garments!” From this we learn that both they and their garments had become defiled through contact with idolatrous images, or through contact with the bodies of the people who had been slain in Shechem.
    
    35,4. ויטמון אותם יעקב, “Yaakov buried them, etc.” The Biblical requirement of disposing of idolatrous objects prescribes not burial but scattering to the winds or throwing such items into the sea. Moses did so when he scattered the dust of the golden calf as we know from Exodus 32,20 “he ground it until it was quite fine particles (of dust) and then he sprinkled it on the face of the water.” The fact that Yaakov contented himself with a lesser degree of destruction of these one time idols proves that actually they were no longer forbidden from a Biblical point of view. 
    Another way of explaining this episode is that even assuming that these artifacts had still retained their status as idolatrous and therefore forbidden objects, the fact that he could not destroy them by throwing them into the Dead Sea, made Yaakov do the next best thing, i.e. to bury them. He was also unable to burn these artifacts so that he would not be unduly delayed giving the people around Shechem a chance to organise themselves against him. Under the circumstances, he did the best he could in order to dispose of them and buried them.
    
    35,6. הוא וכל העם אשר עמו, “he and all the people who were with him.” It is recorded in a Midrash called מלחמות השם, (and quoted by Nachmanides) that the neighbouring towns of Shechem did indeed gather together and fought three battles against he sons of Yaakov. Had it not been for their father Yaakov who personally girded himself with his sword and other weapons, they would indeed all have been in mortal danger. Our sages refer to this when they interpret the words of Yaakov on his deathbed when he described himself as personally having taken the town of Shechem from the Emorite with his sword and bow (Genesis 48,22). It is the custom of the Bible to furnish us with only the barest details of such encounters, seeing that the kind of miracle which G’d employed was a “hidden miracle,” i.e. not a miracle in which known laws of nature have been visibly changed. Another example of the Bible being sparse with information about such encounters is what happened to Avraham in Ur Casdim i.e. when Nimrod threw him into a furnace and he escaped unharmed. The wars fought by the sons of Esau against the people of Chorite (36,21) are similarly not mentioned here. The Torah contents itself by referring to the “hidden” miracle by simply writing that Yaakov and all those with him arrived at their next destination, i.e. that not a single casualty was sustained by Yaakov’s entourage during the attacks upon them by the Emorites.
    
    35,7. ויקרא למקום אל בית אל, “he called the name of that place ‘El Bet- El.’” According to the plain meaning of the text, the line means: “after G’d had appeared to him, he named the site: ‘the house of G’d.” I have already explained a kabbalistic approach to this verse when I discussed the meaning of Genesis 31,13.
    
    35,8. ותמת דבורה מינקת רבקה, “Devorah, Rivkah’s nursemaid died.” This verse has been inserted between the report of two appearances by G’d which Yaakov enjoyed. This fact serves to prove the words of our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 81,5 on this verse who see in it a hint to Yaakov that his mother Rivkah had died. This justified the fact that Yaakov named the oak beneath which Devorah was buried “the oak of weeping.” This is the opinion of Nachmanides. He writes that it would not have been appropriate for the Torah to describe Yaakov as grieving thus merely about the death of his mother’s nursemaid, a woman who must have been very old, that the site would be called after her for all future time. Yaakov grieved over the fact that his mother who had promised to send him word when it was safe to return and face Esau was no longer able to do what she had intended to do and that therefore there would not be a reunion between him and Rivkah. According to Nachmanides, the Devorah mentioned here was one who had never accompanied Rivkah when she left her brother’s house to marry Yitzchak. Her death in Yaakov’s presence triggered his awareness that his mother must have died. G’d’s next appearance to Yaakov was intended to console him over this loss of his mother. 
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 82,4, explain that the words “G’d blessed him” in our verse represent the blessing given to mourners. We find a similar blessing being bestowed by G’d on Avraham in Genesis 25,11. The Talmud in Sotah 14 reports something similar concerning Genesis 25,11 where G’d is reported as blessing Yitzchak. This occurred immediately after the death of Avraham, Yitzchak’s father. G’d’s blessing is understood as a blessing bestowed on mourners. We find support for this interpretation of the words “G’d blessed Yaakov” in verse 27 in our chapter where the Torah reports Yaakov as returning “to his father Yitzchak in Mamre the city of Arba.” We all knew of the city of Arba and Mamre, so why tell us where Yitzchak lived at that time? The implication of the verse is that Rivkah had died. Had she been alive, surely the Torah would have described Yaakov as returning to both his parents, i.e. Yitzchak and Rivkah, especially so since it had been Rivkah who had promised to call Yaakov back to come home as soon as she thought it was safe for him to do so. Seeing she had died, the Torah did not consider it appropriate, i.e. as in her honour, to mention this fact outright. The Torah concealed the time of her death.
    Nachmanides quotes a Midrash (Tanchuma Ki Tetze 4) where the matter is explained. Although G’d promised Avraham that he would die of a ripe old age, he died at 175 years of age, 5 years younger than his son Yitzchak. The reason was in order to save him the mental anguish of seeing his grandson Esau become corrupt. In the case of Yitzchak, the latter was blind and could not see what his son Esau was up to. According to this Midrash, both Avraham, Yitzchak, and Rivkah ended their lives experiencing a degree of shame. Rivkah’s funeral lacked the presence of her loving son Yaakov, and presumably the presence of her son Esau who hated her. When she died, people cursed the passing of a woman whose breasts had nursed an evil person such as Esau. For these and other reasons G’d decided to console Yaakov by blessing him at this time. The plural form בכות, “weeping,” is accounted for because as soon as Yaakov was about to weep for the death of Devorah, he received word that his mother had died. His weeping was for the passing of both these women.
    
    35,10. שמך יעקב, “your name Yaakov, etc.” According to Nachmanides, although Esau’s guardian angel had already told Yaakov that his name would henceforth be Israel, (32,29) G’d told him that as of this moment his name was still Yaakov. However, from that time on his name would be Israel. This is the meaning of the words: ויקרא שמו ישראל. Thus far Nachmanides’ comment. This then is the meaning of Isaiah 48,12 וישראל מקוראי, ”and Israel whom I have called.”
    Rabbeinu Chananel explains  that the name Israel which G’d bestowed on Yaakov was in addition to the name Yaakov which Yaakov retained. The word עוד in our verse means “only, exclusively.” The correct translation of our verse is: “your name will no longer be Yaakov exclusively, but your name will (also) be Israel.” We find something analogous to this in Jeremiah 3,16  לא יאמרו עוד ארון ברית ה’, “they will no longer refer to the ark of G’d as the only location where G’d can be found, etc.” but the whole of Jerusalem will be so designated.” They will refer to the whole of Jerusalem as כסא ה’, “the throne of the Lord.” Similarly, here; the words כי אם ישראל יהיה שמך, “but Israel shall be your name, i.e. sometimes you will be referred to as “Yaakov,” other times as “Israel.” This is precisely what the prophet had in mind in Isaiah שמע אלי יעקב, ישראל מקוראי. We find something similar in Isaiah 46,28 אל תיראי עבדי יעקב, ואל תחת ישראל, “do not fear My servant Yaakov, do not be scared Israel.”
    
    35,12. אתן את הארץ, “I will give the land.” The promise is repeated twice in the same verse. The Torah does not indulge in such repetitions unless there is a compelling reason. If we adopt a kabbalistic approach the word הארץ at the beginning of the verse is a reference to an attribute of G’d, i.e. the attribute with which all three patriarchs were blessed when the Torah categorised these blessings with the words בכל, מכל, כל, respectively. The meaning then would be “that which I have already granted to Avraham and Yitzchak I will grant to you also, i.e. I will give this land to you (in your own right). It would be similar to Kings I 5,26 “and G’d had granted wisdom to Solomon.” [Seeing that verse commences with an unaccounted for letter ו, our author understands the whole word as a reference to the gift of authority, מלכות (in this instance control of the land of Israel) which G’d had bestowed on David’s son Solomon.] The meaning of the repetition of the word ארץ is that Yaakov’s descendants too would receive the gift of that land in their own right at the appropriate time. We also find a repetition in verse 13  where the Torah writes ויעל מעליו אלוקים במקום אשר  דבר אתו, “G’d ascended from upon him in the place where He had spoken with him.” This “place” had already been mentioned earlier (verse 9). It is therefore likely that the word refers to an attribute of G’d such as we find in ברוך ה’ ממקומו, (Ezekiel 3,12) or ברוך המקום (Haggadah shel Pessach). Seeing that our sages have said that the patriarchs are the true carriers of the Shechinah, the Torah has to repeat itself on occasion in order for us to know when it refers to them in such a capacity and when not.
    
    35,14. ויצב יעקב מצבה במקום אשר דבר אתו אלוקים, Yaakov erected a monument in the place where G’d had spoken with him.” The Torah repeats the words “where G’d had spoken with him,” with which the last verse had ended. The meaning is that G’d had spoken to Yaakov at that place already on a previous occasion at Bet El. At that time Yaakov had erected a monument. When the Torah makes reference to Yaakov erecting a monument at this point, it meant to tell us that this monument had already been erected by Yaakov many years ago; he did not now erect a second monument (compare Genesis 28,18).
    The difference between the meaning of the terms מזבח and מצבה respectively, is that the word מצבה refers to an altar consisting of a single stone, whereas מזבח is an altar consisting of a number of stones. Both structures serve the purpose of offering sacrifices. The מצבה serves the purpose of offering drink-offerings and the anointing with oil, whereas the מזבח is suitable for any kind of offering acceptable to G‘d. Seeing that G’d had just told Yaakov that he would no longer be called Yaakov but Israel, it is surprising that the Torah describes the person erecting the monument as Yaakov instead of as Israel. The fact that the Torah here refers to Yaakov by his original name is further proof that the name Israel was an additional name and not a substitute for the name Yaakov. We will find from now on that the Torah uses both these names on different occasions.
    
    35,16. ויסעו מבית אל ויהי עוד כברת דרך לבא אפרתה, “they journeyed from Bet-El, and there still remained a tract of land before their arrival at Efrat, etc.” Efrat is another name for Bethlehem. The Torah spells this out in verse 19 where Rachel’s being buried is being described. Nachmanides explains that he personally had measured that the distance between the tomb of Rachel and Bethlehem is less than a mile. He concludes therefore that the commentators who want to derive the word כברת as stemming from כביר, “something major,” are in error. Yaakov could not have excused his burying Rachel there because the distance to Bethlehem was too great. The word כברת describes a certain land measure just as Rashi has said. The three letters ברת are root letters, the letter כ is not. The measure was one which was well known in those days.
    
    35,19. ותמת רחל ותקבר בדרך אפרתה, “Rachel died and was buried on the way to Efrat.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah claim that the dignity of women requires that they be buried at the place they die. [not found in my edition of Bereshit Rabbah. Ed.] They use the example of Rachel being buried at the site she died as the precedent for their statement. We also find that Sarah was buried at the site she died as the Torah wrote: “Sarah died at Kiryat Arba which is presently called Hebron,” i.e. she died in Hebron and was buried in Hebron as the Torah reports in Genesis 23,19 “afterwards (after the purchase of the local burial ground) Avraham buried his wife Sarah.” We also find that Miriam was buried where she died (Numbers 20,1)
    
    35,21. ויט אהלו ההלאה למגדל עדר, “and he pitched his tent to beyond Migdal Eder.” The meaning of the word מהלאה is “close to.” The same word occurs in the same sense in Genesis 19,9 where it means “come closer.” We also find the word having this meaning when Jonathan told his lad in Samuel I 20,22 החצים ממך והלאה, “the arrows are closer to you.” So here too the meaning of the word is that Yaakov pitched his tent opposite the place called Migdal Eder. This was the place where the number of the twelve tribes had become complete with the birth of Binyamin. In commemoration of that event we read in Micah 4,8: “and you O Migdal-Eder, outpost of Fair Zion.”
    
    35,22. וישכב את בלהה, “he slept with Bilhah.” Our sages in Shabbat 55, describe this act as  בלבל מצעו של אביו, “he disturbed the couch of his father.” When his father referred to the incident on his deathbed (Genesis 49,4), he too used the same expression, saying אז חללת יצועי עלה, “then you desecrated Him who mounted my couch.” Yaakov did not criticise Reuven for sleeping with Bilhah but for mounting the couch on which his father used to sleep with. her.
    You find something similar in Samuel I 2,22 where the sons of the High Priest Eli are accused of sleeping with the women (married women) who performed certain tasks at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. Eli reprimanded his sons after the rumors had come to his attention. The Talmud in Shabbat there also explains that this verse is not to be taken at face value but that what the sons of Eli did made them subject to such accusations being leveled against them. What is described there as the severe sin of the sons of Eli is the fact that they delayed offering the bird-offerings of women who had  either been ritually impure through having given birth or had suffered the disease known as זבה. By delaying these offerings, these women’s husbands were effectively prevented from sleeping with their wives until the matter of the offerings had been taken care of. The prophet Samuel accounts this for the sons of Eli as if they had prevented these husbands from sleeping with their wives because they themselves had slept with these wives.
    If you will count the words from  ויסע ישראל until שנים עשר, you will find that the number of words in this verse amounts to 26, the numerical value of the four-lettered name of G’d י-ה-ו-ה. Perhaps this is the way of the Torah hinting that Reuven did not in fact commit a culpable offense as otherwise G’d would not have associated His Holy Name with him by including him in the twelve sons of Yaakov. [a reference to their loyalty to their father’s religious principles, Ed] We have mentioned elsewhere that  when he tribes were counted in Numbers 26,7  the ancestor of the tribe of Reuven is described as הראובני, a description which is the same as that of Shimon. In both of these instances the addition of the letters ה-י in the case of these two tribes was meant to stress that they (the tribal ancestors) were not considered morally or religiously inferior to their brothers of whom no negative deeds are recorded in the Torah.
    Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah stated “the sons of Yaakov were twelve,” is meant to tell us that Yaakov did not later beget any other sons. Reuven disturbed the couch of his father precisely because he was afraid that his father wanted to sire more children with Bilhah as their mother. The Torah therefore saw fit to inform us that Yaakov did not beget any more children at all after this episode. An additional reason for the Torah making this statement at this point was to reassure us that all of his sons were equally worthy of being sons of their illustrious father. Just as the other sons were not guilty of culpable sins neither was Reuven.
     
    35,23. בכור יעקב ראובן, “Yaakov’s firstborn was Reuven.” The distinctive title “firstborn” is accorded to Reuven at the very place where his misdemeanour has been recorded. The Torah informs us that although as a result of this misdemeanour Reuven lost the distinction of being looked up to by his brothers as the firstborn, the Torah implies that what Reuven lost to Joseph as a result was only the double share in the father’s inheritance that the firstborn is entitled to and possibly the respect normally accorded to the firstborn by his younger siblings. The status of being a “firstborn” in matters of genealogy, etc. remained unchanged. This is why the Torah underlined: “Reuven was the firstborn of Yaakov.” We find this confirmed in Bereshit Rabbah 82,11. The Midrash uses the words ויהי בשכון ישראל in verse 22 to elaborate on this theme. Rabbi Simon is quoted as saying that it is difficult for G’d to uproot genealogical facts. The Torah proves this when describing Reuven as the firstborn immediately after having recorded his misdemeanour. Rabbi Yudon added that Reuven remained the firstborn in respect to officiating as the family’s priest (as was customary prior to the sin of the golden calf); he remained officially the oldest; and he remained the firstborn in respect of תשובה, (i.e. that his repentance was accepted assuring him his claim to his former title). Rabbi Azariah added that he also remained the firstborn in respect of prophecy as we read in Hoseah 1,2 that G’d communicated first with Hoseah (seeing he enjoyed the privilege of being senior to the other prophets who were his contemporaries).
    
    36,3. ואת בשמת בת ישמעאל אחות נביות, “and Bosmat daughter of Ishmael, sister of Nevayot.” The Torah makes clear on this occasion that the basic name of Ishmael’s daughter was Bosmat, even though she was referred to as Machalat in Genesis 28,9. This lends support to the words of our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 67,13 that Esau intended to convert Machalat, and that G’d forgave him all his sins. (this מחילה, pardon, was alluded to in the name מחלת). Three kinds of people qualify for total forgiveness for their past sins: A convert to Judaism; a person who is promoted to high public office; a person who marries a woman. The source for this statement is the verse describing Esau as marrying Machalat.
    
    36,6. וילך אל ארץ מפני יעקב אחיו, “he went to a (different) country on account of his brother Yaakov.”  The plain meaning of the verse is that Esau went to the land of Seir which was his real home at that time, just as the Torah had mentioned already in Genesis 33,16: “Esau returned on that day on his way to Seir.” We have independent support for the fact that Esau resided in Seir in 36,8: “Esau resided in the mountain of Seir.” Ibn Ezra comments on this that this mountain is adjacent to the land of Israel as the Torah reports in Deut. 2,8: “we by-passed our brothers the sons of Esau who reside in Seir.” We also have Deut. 1,2 where Moses speaks of “eleven days march from Mount Chorev by way of Mount Seir.” This mountain is not identical with the country in which the Edomites live in nowadays, i.e. the land of Greece.
    
    36,12. ותמנע היתה פילגש, “and Timnah had been a concubine.” After the Torah has provided a list of the principal descendants of Esau, i.e. the ones born by either Adah or Oholivamah, Esau’s major wives, it goes on to mention that Amalek was also a descendant of Esau through his son Eliphaz and a concubine by the name of Timnah. The Torah uses this paragraph to tell us that Amalek, the son of a servant maid was not included in the list of Esau’s true offspring from his proper wives. We know already from Ishmael and Sarah that the son of a servant-woman has no share in the father’s inheritance seeing he is a slave and as such whatever he has belongs to his master. (compare Genesis 21,10). The reason that the Torah had to tell us these details is that the descendants of Seir HaChori intermarried with the descendants of Esau so that their respective families were completely integrated with one another. At a later time the Torah commanded the Jewish people not to harass the descendants of Esau nor to invade and conquer their land. In fact the Torah (Deut. 23,9) deliberately commands us לא תתעב אדומי, “do not despise or reject an Edomite (descendant of Esau)” while at the same time commanding us to wipe out Amalek completely (Deut. 25,19), something which appears contradictory in view of the fact that Amalek is a descendant of Esau/Edom. In order to know which people qualify for treatment according to the commandment in Deut. 23,9 and which are subject to the commandment to destroy Amalek and any memory of it, it was necessary to describe the makeup of the descendants of Esau and the respective mothers who bore his or his sons’ children. When the Israelites left Egypt and Amalek attacked them in no man’s land, these were the Amalekites who were descended from Timnah the concubine of Eliphaz. This Amalek was not considered as a direct descendant of Esau, neither was he the product of any major wife of Esau or his sons.
    Our sages (Tanchuma Vayeshev 1) claim that Esau slept with the wife of Seir HaChori and that as a result Timnah was born. This is why Timnah had not been included in the count of the sons of Seir, seeing that though she was the daughter of Seir’s wife she was not Seir’s daughter. The Torah teaches that Amalek was the product of an illegitimate union which his mother had indulged in. The Torah underlines this by describing her as a sister of Lotan instead of as a daughter of Seir, Lotan’s father (compare verse 22). Timnah was not only Eliphaz’s concubine but his sister from his father Esau. Eliphaz begat a son from Timnah who died at the birth of that son. They therefore called the son Timnah in order to keep her name alive. This is the reason that you find that name cropping up amongst the descendants of Esau. This is what is meant in verse 40 אלוף תמנע אלוף עלוה. The chieftain in question was a son of Eliphaz from his concubine Timnah.
    The following paragraph beginning with אלה בני שעיר החורי,  was written only in order to avoid us misunderstanding the words “Timnah was a sister of Lotan.” It teaches that this particular Timnah was the sister of chieftains and was interested in intermarrying with the family of Avraham even if it meant to become merely a concubine of one of Avraham’s descendants. This shows in what high regard Avraham’s family was held. Consider the fact that the verse commencing with ותמנע contains eight words totaling forty letters. This is an allusion to the eight times Yaakov addressed Esau as “my lord,” and to the words ארבעים יכנו, in Deut. 25,3 “that the guilty, evil party is to have forty strikes administered against him.” 
    
    36,24. ואלה בני צבעון ואיה וענה, “and these were the sons of Tzivon,  Aiah and Anah.” The letters ו in front of these names are merely prefixes and have nothing to do with the names of these two people. We find something parallel in Samuel Ii 15,34 עבד אביך ואני מאז which means “I have been a servant of your father from way before.” In this verse we are told that Anah was a son of Tzivon, whereas from verse 20 it is clear that both Anah and Tzivon were brothers, sons of Seir HaChori. In order to ensure that we would not think that the Anah mentioned was the uncle of the other Anah, the Torah added that the Anah mentioned here was the one who discovered the mules in the desert.
    Our sages in Pessachim 54 explained that we are dealing with the same Anah who had been mentioned previously and that he had been sired through his father having slept with his mother. The reason the Torah lists him here as one of the sons of Seir HaChori is because all the people of his generation thought that he was the son of Seir HaChori. The Torah, however, was concerned with relating his true ancestry. The Torah mentions him as either himself crossbreeding a donkey with a mare or discovering the products of such crossbreeding, to illustrate how illegitimate sexual relations between human beings result eventually in bastardy or association with animals which were the product of such crossbreeding. At the time it was considered very astute of Anah to have discovered or crossbred two such species of animals.
    According to the opinion of Onkelos who translated the verse as Anah having found גבריה, “men in the desert,” the word ימים must be understood as a variant of אימים, antediluvian giants. According to Onkelos the plain meaning of our verse is that Anah was met or attacked by members of that people who wanted to rob him of the donkeys belonging to Tzivon which he was minding. The Torah reports that although alone, Anah managed to save the donkeys from the hands of these אימים. Nachmanides interprets the verse in this fashion.
    36,26. ואלה בני דישן, “these are the sons of Dishan, etc.” This is the same Dishan mentioned earlier in verse 21, the fifth son of Seir HaChori. Sometimes the Torah spells his name דישון; other times it spells the name דישן. It is the same person each time. We find such differences in the spelling of the names of one and the same person elsewhere, such as in Kings where Chirom is sometimes spelled חירם other times חירום (compare Kings I 7,9). This principle applies only when these names appear in different verses. When both spellings appear in the same verse, however, it is clear that two different people of similar names are meant. The spelling is changed so that we become aware that the Torah refers two separate people. 
    
    36,31. ואלה המלכים אשר מלכו בארץ אדום, “and these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text all of the kings listed here were descendants of Esau. There were a total of eight of them, namely: Bela ben Be-or, Yovav ben Zerach, Chusham, Haddad ben Bedad, Samlah, Saul of Rechovot, Baal Chanan ben Achbar, and Hadar.
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 75,11 state that these eight kings corresponded to the eight times Yaakov called Esau אדוני, “my lord.” According to this Midrash G’d immediately told Yaakov that as a consequence of his demeaning himself in front of Esau, Esau would produce eight kings before Yaakov’s descendants would produce the first king. (compare the beginning of our portion to see the eight times Yaakov called Esau: “my lord”). An additional allusion to this is found in the eight words of the verse beginning with the word תמנע as I have already pointed out in my commentary on verse 12. The names of the places mentioned by our portion as belonging to Edom are: Bazra and Teyman; the former has been mentioned also in Isaiah 34, 6 ”for the Lord holds a sacrifice in Bazrah, a great slaughter in the land of Edom.” The name Teyman is mentioned in Ovadiah 9 “your warriors shall lose heart O Teyman and not a man of Esau’s mount shall survive the slaughter.” Interestingly, we find that not a single king mentioned in the list given by the Torah was the son of his predecessor. This is in sharp contrast to the kings who ruled over Israel, most of whom were succeeded by their sons. The reason the Torah reports all these seemingly irrelevant details is that it wanted to demonstrate that Yitzchak’s blessing that Esau would live by the sword came true.
    
    36,39. ושם אשתו מהיטבאל בת מטרד בת מי זהב, “the name of his wife was Mehetabel, daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-zahav.” The Torah provides these details to teach that the wife of Hadad was the daughter of a wealthy man whose entire pursuit in life was the amassing of material wealth. The gold was as plentiful in his house as water.
    A Midrashic approach to the verse commencing with the words “these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom.” These kings were direct descendants of Esau as appears from the reading of the text. According to Shemot Rabbah 15,4 [not exactly, Ed.] these were all descendants of Esau, idol worshippers, indulging in promiscuous sex, and possessing great material wealth. Bereshit Rabbah 83,4 states that the name Mehetabel is an allusion to the fact that they tried to please many deities. The name “daughter of Matred” is interpreted as an allusion that she who had first been prepared and beautified for her husband was subsequently a source of trouble for her husband as the people of his generation indulged in illicit sex with her. The word “daughter of golden waters,” is an allusion to the material wealth of these people.  They said of gold and silver: “so what?” (they had so much of it they did not treasure it). The whole paragraph teaches that the descendants of Esau were all wicked people. These verses contain further allusions to the characteristics of Esau’s descendants throughout the ages.
    We are told, in the same Midrash for instance, that the name אלוף מגדיאל “chieftain of Magdiel,” is an allusion to Rome and its Empire. In Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 38 we are told that Esau received 100 provinces or countries during the period between then and the ascendancy of the Roman Empire as a reward for clearing out all of his belongings from the land of Israel at that time and leaving Yaakov free to live there unimpeded by his presence or the presence of any of his belongings. This is derived from the wording אלוף מגדיאל אלוף עירם, suggesting that the former name is that of a city, the latter that of a person.
    Daniel prophesied  concerning the Roman Empire (Daniel 11,36) “The king will do as he pleases and he will exalt himself greater than any god, and about the G’d of the gods he will speak fantastic things.” This is why the term מגדיאל is applied to this king in the Torah, a reference to גדול, “great”. Actually, he was the tenth of these Alufim, ”chiefs.” This is what Daniel said (7,24) ”And the ten horns- from that kingdom ten horns will arise, and another will arise after them who will be different from the former.” What Daniel had in mind was that ten kings would arise of whom the tenth would rule over Rome, and that his Empire would spread from Rome outwards. encompassing most of the civilised part of the globe. Concerning that nation, the Torah did not provide us with its name. All our prophets also constantly mention the greatness of that Empire without revealing its name. Daniel, who compared various Empires to “the lion,” “the bear,” and to “the leopard,” did not reveal the name of the fourth beast to which the fourth Empire could be compared. All he said concerning this unnamed beast (7,7) was that “it is excessively terrifying, awesome and strong; with immense iron teeth, it was eating and crumbling and trampling the rest with its feet.” Isaiah (13,1) also speaks of messages to or concerning the Empire of Egypt, (19,1) the Empire of Babylon (15,1) and the Empire of Moav. When it comes to specifying to whom the fourth message is addressed, all he said was (21,11) “a call comes to me from Seir:” משא דומה אלי קורא משעיר, שמר מה מלילה, שמר מה מלילה, “watchman, what of the night? Watchman what of the night?” Elsewhere (Isaiah 35,9) the  prophet speaks of ”no lion shall be there, no ferocious beast shall set foot on it, these shall not be found there but the redeemed shall walk it.” We also find that the prophet Jeremiah mentions all these various Empires without naming the last one. Compare Jeremiah 5,6: ”therefore the lion of the forest strikes them down, the wolf of the desert ravages them; a leopard lies in wait by their towns whoever leaves them will be torn to pieces.” In the whole Torah only Moses, and in Psalms only Assaph, mentions the name of the fourth beast. The name עירם is a reference to Rome and it is the subject of Psalms 80,14 in Assaph’s psalm where he wrote יכרסמנה חזיר מיער, “wild boars gnaw at it (Israel).” You will note that the letter ע in the word מיער has been suspended above the line. leaving the letters that remain as an allusion to Rome, i.e. רמי,  this is why here when the tenth chief is mentioned, the Torah amplifies by adding the word עירם in addition to the name אלוף מגדיאל, the  letters in the word עירם being the same as those in Assaph’s psalm where he speaks of מיער. In other words: “who is this אלוף מגדיאל? Answer: none other than the חזיר מיער, the wild boar mentioned in Psalms 80,14. The letters in the word עירם may be read as מעיר, an allusion to Numbers 24,19 והאביד שריד מעיר, “he (the redeemer of Israel) will destroy the remnant of the city (Rome).” Isaiah 25,2 may also be understood in the same vein כימת מעיר לגל קריה בצורה למפלה, “forYou have turned a city into a stone heap never to be rebuilt.” The letters in the word מעיר can also be rearranged to read ירעם. Concerning this word, David said in Psalms 18,14 וירעם בשמים ה’ ועליון יתן קולו ברד וגחלי אש, that in “the future the Lord will thunder from heaven, the Most High will give forth with His voice- hail and fiery coals.” He will destroy Rome.
    Daniel prophesied  similarly concerning the end of the Roman Empire when he wrote in Daniel 7,11 “I was watching. Then because of the sound of the haughty words which the horn spoke, I watched till the beast was slain and its body destroyed and consigned to the fire’s burning” The prophet Ovadiah also prophesied concerning the destruction of Edom when he wrote (Ovadiah 1) that the Celestial Court had ordained the destruction of Edom and his entire prophecy concerns only this subject and the justification for the destruction of Edom. 
    The Midrash (Yalkut Shimoni near the end of Isaiah) remarks that only two prophets described their prophesies as חזון, “a vision,” i.e. Isaiah and Ovadiah. The numerical value of the combined letters in that word totals 71. Isaiah cursed Edom in the Celestial Court, whereas Ovadiah judged Edom in that same Court. There is a book called פרקי היכלות, from which our author quotes on occasion in which the various afflictions that Rome will experience in the future are discussed, i.e. that the decline of that Empire will be so drastic that a person will offer it for sale for a small copper coin and he will not find anyone willing to buy it even at that price. 
    Included in these ten אלופים you also find one who is described here as אלוף עלוה, whereas in Chronicles I 1,51, he is described as אלוף עליה. In order to maintain the uniformity of the Torah and to counter accusations of inaccuracy, the name in Chronicles is read as אלוף עלוה just as in the Torah. The reason the spelling is different is that it is an illusion to the negative characteristic of the descendants of Esau who speak untruths and do not even write their names truthfully. Psalms 144,8 alludes to such practices and refers to people who speak lies in order to make G’d’s words appear not to be true.
    Bereshit Rabbah 83,1 describes the fact that in the early stages, before Israel had kings of its own, the Edomite nation  was in a state of some turmoil, as evident from the fact that their leaders are referred to as merely אלופים, whereas subsequently, after the Israelites had elected a king, the Edomites were presided over by kings who possessed the authority which the word implies. Eventually they would suffer the fate predicted in Ovadiah 21 when “the liberators would march up on Mount Zion to wreak judgment on Mount Esau; and dominion shall be the Lord’s.”
    A kabbalistic approach to the above chapter. The words: “and these are the kings who reigned over the land of Edom,” are an allusion to the numerous worlds G’d had created (prior to our universe) and before He had manifested Himself as G’d in this universe. This is meant by the words לפני מלך מלך לבני ישראל, “before a king reigned for the Israelites.” During this period G’d “experimented” by creating worlds and then destroying them until eventually, He co-opted the attribute of Mercy and created the present universe. I am unable to explain all these things in detail as they are beyond me. It is a cardinal principle of the kabbalistic approach that there is no qualitative difference between the various matters described in the written Torah, and that statements such as: “Hear O Israel the Lord your G’d is one,” and statements such as “the name of the wife of Hadar was Mehetabel.” Seeing that the entire written Torah is understood as an elongated name of G’d as we have learned from Nachmanides, how could there be one part of the written Torah which is more important than any other part? We are entitled to wonder why the wife of King Hadar rated mention more than the wives of any of the other Kings of Edom. We would dearly love to know who this woman was who has not been mentioned elsewhere in the Torah. How do we profit by knowing the name of a woman when we have not been told anything about her virtues or otherwise?
    I will now proceed to enlighten you about this subject. The Torah first mentions that one of the kings was called Hadad  (verse 35) whereas in verse 39 we are told that a King by the name of Hadar followed the King Baal Chanan. Both these names are derived from the expression הוד והדר both of which expressions describe attributes, character traits. The meaning of the name (הדד (בן בדד whose letters comprise a numerical value of 13 is that that King possessed 13 character traits. These traits derive from the ten emanations (the numerical value of the word בדד, whereas בן means “derived from”). The 13 characteristics are the ones required to guide this terrestrial universe along the lines G’d desires. This world is also perceived as the world of בחינה, “perceptions”, i.e. in which we have to decide what is right and what is wrong and act accordingly. [I believe the term is borrowed from the writings of the author of Chovot Halevovot and means that by means of observing both the evidence of our eyes that there was a Creator, etc., as well as the evidence of history and how G’d revealed His attribute of Mercy as well as that of Justice, we can form a more or less accurate picture of both the wisdom and the Justice which are the foundations of this universe. Ed.]
    Hadad called the name of the city which was his capital עוית, “something corrupt,” to symbolise  the presence of the evil urge which is bent on corrupting man. It was a place from which onlookers perceived perverted justice as emanating. In verse 39 the Torah goes on to write וימלך הדר תחתיו, “Hadar ascended the throne in his place, and the name of his capital was פעו, (a reference to flying creatures)” as the souls would fly from there. The word “his city (capital)” i.e. עירו, is derived from the expression עיר וקדיש, in Daniel 4,10, i.e. “a wakeful flying angel.” The wife of this Hadar was called מהיטבאל, Mehetabel, a reference to the attribute of “goodness” which G’d promised Moses to let parade in front of him (compare Exodus 33,19). This attribute is also known as אל seeing that G’d had said of Moses (to Miriam and Aaron in Numbers 12,8, Ed.] that  the latter was thoroughly at home and trusted in G’d’s entire “house,” i.e. in His universe. The house is the place where a human being feels “good,” at ease. When the Torah continued to describe Mehetabel as “the daughter of Matred,” this is a euphemism and does not refer to Matred being an actual mother of Mehetabel and her as being a biological daughter of someone called Matred. The expression בת מטרד means that Mehetabel in turn was a derivative of the major attribute Matred. We find the term בת as meaning a measure (attribute) in Kings I 7,26 where the size of the basin in which the priests washed their hands before proceeding to perform Temple service is described as containing 2000 such measures of water. This attribute was capable of misleading man’s thoughts as our sages said when they sought to explain how Rabbi Elisha ben Avuyah (known as אחר, “the other one, the heretic,” as he took the wrong theological-philosophical turn). The Talmud Chagigah 14 described this Elisha as becoming guilty of קצץ בנטיעות, becoming a heretic in his thinking.
    The Torah here explains further that this attribute (Matred) was one which was composed of a combination of Mercy and Justice; the Torah alludes to this by calling it בת מי זהב, “a derivative of water and gold.” The Shechinah, which is also known as בת, is perceived as radiating in 6 directions all combining elements of the attribute of Mercy as well as elements of the attribute of Justice.
    We also know that the letter ד in the Holy Tongue is sometimes substituted for by the letter ת, so that the word מטרד could be understood as מטרת, the Aramaic translation of משמרת, “protective supervision.” In Psalm 121 we encounter this word  (שמר) no fewer than 6 times when the psalmist describes G’d as watching over him in every direction.
    Up until now, the Torah spoke about what goes on in the celestial regions of the universe. From here on it addresses itself to what goes on in our terrestrial regions. These “lower” regions are presided over by “mere” אלופים, mortal chiefs, rather than מלכים, “kings, celestial attributes, forces.”
    May the Lord grant us the wonderful insights which the prophet Hoseah  prayed for (Hoseah 6,3) when he described the heart as gaining knowledge of G’d comparing this new-found knowledge to a fountain of water gushing forth. After all, the Torah has been compared to a fountain of water as we know from Solomon who is on record in Song of Songs 4,15  מעין גנים באר מים חיים ונוזלים מן לבנון, “purified in a garden spring, a well of living waters flowing clean from the Lebanon.” We also have an assurance from the prophet Isaiah 12,3 concerning the future insights we shall be accorded when he wrote ושאבתם מים בששון ממעיני הישועה, “and you will draw waters joyfully from the fountains of salvation.”
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   וישב יעקב
    
    
    
    
    
    
   אל תגזול דל כי דל הוא ואל תדכא עני בשער, כי ה’ יריב ריבם וקבע את קובעיהם נפש.  “Do not rob the poor for he is poor; do not oppress the poor in the gate, for the Lord will fight their battle, He will put in their place those who tried to put them in their place (Proverbs 22,22-23).”
    In the two verses quoted above Solomon informed us of the penalty for stealing from the poor. It is well known that there are four categories of people concerning whom the Torah has expressed especial concern, asking people to be merciful towards them and not to inflict any harm upon them. They are: the poor, the orphans, the widows and the proselytes. Indeed we find that the Torah expresses a warning against discrimination against the aforesaid in one and the same verse in Deuteronomy 16,14 where we read: ושמחת בחגיך, אתה ובנך ובתך ועבדך ואמתך והלוי והגר והיתום והאלמנה אשר בשעריך. “You are to rejoice on your festival, you, your son, your daughter, your male servant and your maid servant, the proselyte, the orphan and the widow in your cities.”
    Our sages as quoted by Rashi comment: “these four are Mine (G’d speaking). If you will give joy to those who are Mine, I will provide joy for those that are yours.” Mention of the Levites is equivalent to mentioning the poor as the Levites have no source of income other than the generosity of the Jewish farmer. G’d Himself is their portion as we read in Numbers 18,20 אני חלקך ונחלתך, “I am your share and your inheritance.” When the Torah legislated the treatment of the poor it did so both as a positive as well as a negative commandment. It is written (Deut. 15,10) נתון תתן, “you shall surely give (repeatedly),” (15,8) “and you shall repeatedly open your hand for him (the poor).” The negative counterpart of this commandment is found side by side (15,10), לא ירע לבבך בתתך לו, “your heart must not feel bad when you give him.” We also find another basic aspect of this commandment in Deut. 15,7 לא תאמץ את לבבך ולא תקפוץ את ידך מאחיך האביון, “do not harden your heart or close your hand against your destitute brother.”
    Seeing that the Torah legislated against stealing altogether already in the Ten Commandments as well as in Leviticus 19, 19,13, there was no need to stress a prohibition against stealing from the poor. The instruction to give to the poor would have been sufficient to make it plain that it is forbidden to steal from the poor instead of giving to the poor. The fact that the Torah nonetheless writes words prohibiting this prompted Solomon to tell us that the penalty for stealing from the poor is far harsher than that for stealing from ordinary people. It was not Solomon’s habit to repeat commandments which have been spelled out in the Torah already and to simply repeat them in his volume משלי, Proverbs. Whenever he does so, he does so only in order to reveal an additional dimension to such a commandment. After all, who is so great that he could arrogate to himself to add to the Torah something Moses had not already thought of or been told by G’d to write down? Solomon, in common with later sages, only added “fences” to the Torah, i.e. warned against conduct which might lead to infringing Biblical commandments. This is why he said: “do not steal from the poor because he is poor,” i.e. stealing from him is  so commonplace seeing that the poor is defenseless, that we must be warned not to exploit his weakness. The poor does not have protagonists such as the rich have. Everybody hates the poor  and keeps his distance from him, even his relatives. This is why Solomon emphasises that the temptation to steal from the poor is great precisely “because he is poor.” Solomon therefore warns us not to think that because the poor do not have defenders of flesh and blood that they are without recourse. On the contrary, G’d Himself is their advocate and will see to it that they do not suffer because they are being exploited due to their poverty. He will go out of His way to administer punishment to anyone who steals from the poor. Contrary to the penalty for thieves who do not steal from the poor specifically, whose penalty the Torah expressed in terms of financial restitution and penal charges, someone who steals from the poor will endure chastisement of body and soul. This is the meaning of the words וקבע את קובעיהם נפש, “he will put in their places those who have tried to put the poor in their place.”
    The Torah warns us in many places not to disadvantage orphans and widows, i.e. כל אלמנה ויתום לא תענון, ”do not oppress any orphan or widow” (Exodus 22,21). Our sages in the Mechilta comment on this verse: “even the widow of a king (presumably wealthy and influential) is included in this commandment.” The same applies to children of a king left orphaned. The reason is that in spite of their financial resources, the state of mind of such widows and orphans is one of melancholy and they are apt to cry at the slightest provocation. It is unfortunately a fact of life that people do take advantage of orphans and widows. The Torah goes on to say: אם ענה תענה אותם.....והרגתי אתכם בחרב והיו נשיכם אלמנות ובניכם יתומים, “if indeed you will persecute them..then I will kill you and your wives will become widows and your children orphans.” The Torah conditions this harsh punishment on the assumption that the victim cried out to G’d for vengeance. Generally speaking, people faced with unfair treatment put their faith in seeking recourse from a human tribunal. The orphan and  
widow  have no  other recourse than G’d Himself. This is why G’d listens specifically  to their outcries and fights their battles for them
    Solomon also addresses the plight of orphans and widows in this chapter, and this is why he said (Proverbs 23,10-11) אל תסג גבול עולם, ובשדי יתומים אל תבא. כי גואלם חזק. הוא יריב את ריבם אתך. “Do not remove ancient boundary marks; do not encroach upon the field of orphans. For they have a powerful redeemer; he will fight their battles against you.”
    The Torah also takes up the plight of the proselytes (strangers, immigrants to the land of Israel) on many occasions For instance, we find in Exodus 22,20 וגר לא תונה ולא תלחצנו כי גרים הייתם בארץ מצרים. “And do not taunt or oppress a stranger (convert) for you were strangers in the land of Egypt.” The Torah cites an additional reason for treating the proselyte fairly when it writes (Exodus 23,9) כי אתם ידעתם את נפש הגר, “for you are familiar with the mentality of the stranger.” Significantly, the Torah did not speak of your “knowing the stranger,” but of your being familiar with נפש הגר, the soul, the mentality of the stranger. You know that the mentality of strangers is one of feeling subdued, humbled, etc., so that his eyes are constantly turned towards G’d seeing he lacks in self-confidence.
    Baba Metzia 58 speaks of the prohibition of reminding a proselyte or even his son  of his former deeds or the deeds of his father. When such a proselyte comes to study Torah one is not to say to him: “ how can the mouth which used to enjoy all manner of forbidden foods presume to qualify to study the holy Torah.” The reminder of the Torah that when the Jewish people were still enslaved in Egypt their status was not superior to the recent proselyte is an example of the Rabbinic dictum מום שבך אל תאמר בחברך, “do not speak to your fellow man about a blemish as long as you yourself are afflicted with a similar blemish.” (Baba Metzia 59). In fact we find that the righteous themselves are referred to as גרים, strangers, the expression גר being derived from גרגיר, something that has been separated from its origin. The righteous is in the habit of viewing himself as distinctive, a loner, in the sense that he is different from the majority. For instance, he does not view his residence on this earth as something other than temporary. This is what King David had in mind when he said (Psalms 119,19)  “I am only a stranger on earth, do not hide Your commandments from me.” He viewed himself as a tourist who has already been invited  to commence a journey though he does not know the time of departure. Seeing that he does not know when he will depart, he must accumulate provisions for his journey to guard against a sudden and unprepared departure. What do these “provisions” consist of? The observance of G’d’s commandments. This is what David meant when he asked G’d not to hide His commandments from him. We also note that all of the patriarchs have been referred to as גרים on different occasions. Avraham said of himself (Genesis 23,4) “I am a stranger or a resident stranger amongst you” when he prepared to buy a burial ground for Sarah. Yitzchak was commanded by G’d to remain in the land of Canaan during the famine, albeit as a stranger. The wording is גור בארץ הזאת, “sojourn in this land on a temporary basis” (Genesis 26,3). Yaakov is referred to as a stranger in our verse (first verse of our portion וישב) as well as in Genesis 47,4 and when he described his long stay at Lavan’s as that of a stranger in Genesis 32,5.
    
    37,1. וישב יעקב בארץ מגורי אביו בארץ כנען, Yaakov settled in the land in which his fathers had lived as sojourners, in the land of Canaan. The Torah uses the term וישב, i.e. permanent residence, instead of ויגר, “he sojourned (as a stranger)“ in order to create a parallel with Esau who had been described as securely settled in the mountains of Seir in 36,8. Esau was so described as we were told about the kings, etc., which he established in his country starting at that time. His descendants remained on the same soil never to migrate again. The Torah had to contrast this with the fact that Yaakov took undisputed possession of a part of the (subsequent) land of Israel for the first time. Such possession is here described by the words וישב. His tenure is contrasted with that of either Avraham or Yitzchak, who a) lived there as nomads, b) as individuals, not having produced a clan of 70 people plus their in-laws as had Yaakov. At the same time the Torah also refers to the temporary status of the patriarchs in the land of Canaan by saying ארץ מגוריהם אשר גרו שם, (Exodus 6,4) where all of the patriarchs were referred to as only sojourning in that land. The fact is that whereas Avraham had been a first generation immigrant, both Yitzchak’s mother and Yaakov’s mother as well as the mothers of all of his children had been born outside the Holy Land thus making also their children  “strangers,” at least technically.
    According to Midrash Tanchuma 1 on our portion, examination of the occurrence of the word וישב throughout the Torah will reveal that this term is always used when some unhappy event was associated with such “settlement.” The following examples illustrate the point. Exodus 32,6 speaks of וישב העם לאכול ושתו ויקומו לצחק, “the people settled down to eat and to drink and they arose to make sport (worship the golden calf).” On that day three thousand of the people were slain on account of this sin). Genesis 37,25 reports that after throwing Joseph into the pit, וישבו לאכול לחם וישאו עיניהם והנה אורחת ישמעלים באה.....וימכרו את יוסף לישמעלים, “when the brothers had settled down to eat their meal they raised their eyes and here a caravan of Ishmaelites arrived,......and they sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites.”  In Kings I 5,5 we read וישב יהודה וישראל בטח,...ויקם ה' שטן לישראל, “when Yehudah and Israel had settled safely,...G’d made an adversary against Solomon” (11,14) [as a punishment for transgressing certain commands in the Torah, Ed.] In Numbers 25,1 we read וישב ישראל בשטים ויחל העם לזנות, “when the Israelites settled down at a place called Shittim, the people started debasing themselves by whoring” (with the Moabite women which resulted in G’d killing 24,000 of them). In our instance too Yaakov’s “settling” in the land of Canaan had in its wake his traumatic experience of the loss of Joseph. G’d had said (according to the Midrash) “is Yaakov not satisfied with inheriting the world to come that he must now also inherit this terrestrial world. It is not appropriate for the righteous to enjoy the best of both worlds.” According to Tanchuma when Yaakov became aware of the extent of the kings and chiefs listed in the Torah as descendents of from Esau he became worried about not having anything to counter such physical prowess of the Edomites. The matter may be explained in the form of a parable. A caravan of camels was heavily laden with straw. The onlookers could not imagine that there were storage facilities large enough to accommodate all this straw and they were worried that the owners would demand their own (the onlookers’) facilities to accommodate all that excess straw. An old man amongst the onlookers told his compatriots not to worry seeing that it would require only a single match to set fire to the entire mass of straw carried by the camels. Similarly, G’d put Yaakov’s mind at rest telling him that Esau would go up in flames just as straw would go up in flames. This is what the prophet Ovadiah 18 described when he compared the fate of the house of Esau and the fate of the house of Joseph in the future. The “match” in our instance would be Joseph, whose descendants would vanquish the descendants of Esau. 
    
    37,2. אלה תולדות יעקב יוסף, “These are the descendants of Yaakov, Joseph.” It would have seemed appropriate to list all of Yaakov’s sons. and daughters. According to the plain meaning of the text they are all subsumed under the name of Joseph seeing he combined all the good characteristics possessed by his brothers in his own person. He possessed the birthright which normally should have been Reuven’s as we know from Chronicles I 5,1 “when he desecrated the couch of his father, his birthright was given to (the tribe of) Joseph.” He possessed the prophetic qualities of Levi as mentioned by the Torah when he interpreted the dreams of the butler and the baker (Genesis 41,13). He also combined within himself the Royal Powers of Yehudah as the Torah testifies in Genesis 42,6 “Joseph was the one who ruled the land (earth?).” He possessed the intelligence for which Issachar is famed, as we know from Genesis 41,40 “there is none as wise and full of insight such as you.”
     According to a Midrashic approach as found both in Tanchuma and Bereshit Rabbah, Joseph was selected as Yaakov’s prime issue as he was so like his father. This is what the Torah meant when writing  כי בן זקונים הוא לו, that his features resembled those of his father. He also resembled his father in that many experiences which Yaakov endured were more or less duplicated in the life of Joseph. Whereas Yaakov had been pursued by his brother Esau, Joseph was persecuted by his brothers. Just as Yaakov’s mother had been barren for many years, so Joseph’s mother had been barren for many years. Just as Yaakov was born without a foreskin, so Joseph was born without a foreskin. We derive this from the fact that Yaakov was described by the Torah as איש תם, a perfectly formed human being, i.e. one that did not need to be circumcised in order to make him whole. The term תם is only used in connection with circumcised people as G’d told Avraham that in order to become תמים, perfect, whole, he had to circumcise himself (Genesis 17,1). The reason the sages believe that Joseph too was born without a foreskin is because the Torah equates Yaakov and Joseph in writing יעקב יוסף, as if to say that what applied to Yaakov applied to Joseph also. These similarities also showed up in that just as Yaakov’s mother experienced a difficult pregnancy and birth, so did Joseph’s mother experience difficulty when giving birth to Binyamin. Just as Yaakov’s mother gave birth to only two sons so did Joseph’s mother give birth to only two sons. Yaakov and Joseph both married while outside the land of Canaan. The children of both Yaakov and Joseph were born outside the land of Canaan. Both Yaakov and Joseph experienced the company of angels protecting them. Rabbi Yannai (compare Bereshit Rabbah 84,14) claims that Joseph was met by three angels while he searched for his brothers. He bases himself on the word איש, “man,” appearing three separate times in verses 15-16 in our chapter. Just as Yaakov emerged from a dream containing a vision spiritually uplifted, so Joseph emerged similarly uplifted after having certain dreams. Just as the environment of Yaakov (the house of Lavan, and, according to some sources the entire region) experienced G’d’s blessing, as well as the famine coming to an end when he descended to Egypt, so Joseph’s presence both in the house of Potiphar and in Egypt generally proved a blessing for all those around him. Just as Yaakov died in Egypt and his remains were embalmed there only to be buried in the land of Israel eventually, so Joseph died in Egypt, was embalmed there and eventually was reburied in the land of Israel.
    A kabbalistic approach to  the sequence יעקב יוסף in our verse  adds that  that Yaakov was the “cherub” (part of G’d’s entourage on earth) and so was Joseph. This is the mystical meaning of Sukkah 5, אפי רברבי ואפי זוטרי, that Yaakov was “the wing of a larger bird and Joseph the wing of a smaller bird, respectively.”  Both Yaakov and Joseph have been referred to as נער, “lad” on different occasions. We read of Israel: כי נער ישראל ואהבו, for Israel was a “lad,” and He (G’d) loved him (Hoseah 11,1). Of Joseph we read in our verse that he was a נער.
   ויבא יוסף, “Joseph conveyed, etc.” Whenever we encounter the expression מביא דבה, “conveying information reflecting negatively on someone,” the Bible speaks about factual information not about slander. It means that he who conveyed the information backed it up with proof. When the Bible uses the expression הוציא דבה, however, this indicates that the information conveyed was slanderous, was untrue. A classic example of this is found when the Torah speaks of the information conveyed by the spies whom Moses had sent to the land of Canaan (Numbers 13,32. The Torah writes ויוציאו דבת הארץ. “They brought forth an (evil) report of the land.” We have a similar example in Proverbs 10,18 מוציא דבה הוא כסיל, “if someone spreads slander he is a fool.” It is clear that  Solomon means untruths. We also have  a verse in Job 8,10 ומלבם יוציאו מילים, “and they invent words (of a character-assassinating nature) which originate only in their hearts.”
   את דבתם רעה, “evil reports of them.”  Although we know that the expression דבה by itself refers to something of a negative nature, the Torah added the word רעה, “evil,” to underline the exaggerated nature of such evil. Rashi understands the word to teach that Joseph reported every single misdemeanour which he saw the sons of Leah commit. He reported that they were eating living tissue of animals, that they related to the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah with disdain, as inferiors, and suspected them of possibly engaging in illicit sexual relations. As a result, he was punished in three ways.
    Nachmanides writes that if indeed Joseph had stood up for the rights of his half-brothers the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah we would have expected these four brothers to have tried to rescue Joseph from his attackers. Should you argue that they might have been afraid of the sons of Leah, this is hardly likely considering there were  four of them and that Reuven would most likely side with them in any quarrel, and, so of course, would Joseph himself. So there would be six against six. Nachmanides therefore concludes that Joseph badmouthed the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah and that explains why they were hostile towards him. The hostility of the sons of Leah is described in the Torah as the result of the sons of Leah (“the brothers” in verse four) observing that their father loved Joseph the most. As a result of these two factors Joseph was thoroughly hated by all his brothers except Binyamin. 
    The sequence of the first four verses then is best understood as follows: “These are the descendants of Yaakov; Joseph was seventeen years of age at the time these events occurred and he was engaged in tending the sheep with his half-brothers, the  sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, wives of his father. He badmouthed them to their father. When the brothers (sons of Leah) noted that their father loved Joseph best, they hated him and could not speak peacefully about him.” This explains why all the brothers present at the sale of Joseph to the Ishmaelites were in full agreement.
    
    37,3. וישראל אהב את יוסף, “and Israel loved Joseph, etc.”  You will observe that the Torah uses the names Yaakov and Israel interchangeably. In the first verse it calls him Yaakov; in the verse at the end of this passage where Yaakov rends his garments having concluded that Joseph had become the victim of a ferocious beast, it again calls him Yaakov, whereas in our verse here he is called Israel. This proves that the name Israel which G’d had bestowed upon him was not meant to supplant the name he had been given at birth but was to serve as an alternate name for him.
   ועשה לו כתונת פסים, “he made for him a striped coat.” This was a superior garment.. It may have resembled the כתונת תשבץ worn by the High Priest (Exodus 28,4). The brothers were envious of Joseph on account of this garment. This envy aroused by Yaakov making this garment for Joseph caused our sages (Shabbat 10) to go on record that a father should be careful not to discriminate between his children.
    This coat was the first of the various causes which produced the tragedy described by the Torah and whose ramifications ultimately resulted in the enslavement of the bodies of the Jewish people in Egypt. It had still later ramifications in the time of the Romans after the destruction of the second Temple when ten of the most illustrious scholars of that time died a martyr’s death at the hands of the Romans whose Emperor justified himself quoting the penalty of kidnapping provided in the Torah. He argued that the brothers had never been punished for selling their brother. The body is perceived as the outer garment of the soul. The kind of garment one wears is somehow related to the body underneath it just as the body is related to the soul within it. 
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 84,6 the expression פסים (plural) is used because these stripes were as wide as two פסות ידיו, two handbreadths. Another interpretation of the word פסים:  the word is derived from פייס, lot; the brothers drew lots amongst themselves to decide which of the four methods of death the Torah provides to administer to Joseph. This is based on the wording of ויתנכלו להמיתו, “they planned (how) to kill him” (verse 37,18). Alternately, they drew lots who was to bring the news about the torn coat to their father Yaakov. The lot fell on Yehudah and this is why Yehudah said to Yaakov הכר נא ”please identify if this is the coat of your son.”  The expression הכר נא is found again with  Tamar, Yehudah’s daughter-in-law, who said to Yehudah concerning the pawn he had given her הכר נא למי החותמת וגו',  “please identify to whom this signet ring belongs, etc.” (38,25) When Yehudah said to Yaakov: “identify if this is the coat of your son,” Yaakov’s life ended suddenly, and the lives of Yehudah’s sons Er and Onan came to an end at that same moment. [I believe that this Midrash considers the “revival” of Yaakov as having taken place when he heard that Joseph was alive, 45,24, and that the lives of Er and Onan were vicariously revived in the twin sons which Tamar bore for Yehudah 38,28. Ed.] This is the mystical dimension of Jeremiah 32,18 ומשלם עון אבות אל חיק בניהם אחריהם, “but You visit the guilt of the fathers to their children after them.” 
    Still another possible meaning of the word פסים. The word is reminiscent of the four kinds of troubles which befell Joseph as a result of this coat. The letters in the word are an acrostic for the words פוטיפר, סוחרים, ישמעאלים, מדינים.. All the above owned Joseph at one time or another from the moment the brothers sold him. A more mystical meaning of the word פסים: Yaakov revealed the mystical connections between the 22 letters in the Hebrew alphabet to Joseph. In other words, Yaakov “enrobed” his son Joseph with the wisdom contained in the twenty-two letters of the alphabet which he himself had learned at the time he had studied in the academies of Shem and Ever.
    
    37,4.  ולא יכלו דברו לשלום“and they could not speak about him peacefully.” This was actually a positive aspect of their characters. Instead of hiding their hostility and flattering Joseph, they were straightforward in revealing their feelings toward him (Bereshit Rabbah. 84,9). We find this characteristic praised by Solomon in Proverbs 29,5 where he said: גבר מחליק על רעהו רשת פורש על פעמיו, “a man who flatters his neighbour actually spreads a net for his feet.” The prophet actually compliments Avshalom  when he said (Samuel II 13,22)  ולא דבר אבשלום עם אמנון למרע ועד טוב כי שנא אבשלום את אמנון. “and Avshalom did not speak to Amnon either friendly or unfriendly words for Avshalom hated Amnon (who had raped his sister).”
    
    37,7. והנה אנחנו מאלמים אלומים וגו', “and here we were binding sheaves, etc.” They realised in their wisdom that the meaning of the dream was that the sheaves bowing to Joseph’s sheaf meant that he viewed himself as enjoying Royal authority. over them. This feeling of theirs was reinforced by his use of the words נצבה, an expression which is associated with Royalty such as in Kings I 22,48 נצב המלך, ”he acted as king.” It was because they were aware of this interpretation of his dream that they said to Joseph sarcastically: “are you planning to rule over us as a king?” What the brothers were not aware of was the fact that Joseph’s eventual appointment as king would be triggered by the subject of corn harvests (i.e. his prediction of abundance of such harvests and subsequent failure of such harvests).
    Seeing that they hated Joseph already it is quite understandable that they interpreted his nocturnal dreams as boding no good for them instead of seeing the positive element that might be presaged by such dreams. Actually, even their interpretation of Joseph’s dreams was inspired by G’d who caused them to verbalise such thoughts. This is reminiscent of something we read in connection with Gideon (Judges 7,10)  to whom G’d had said that in preparation for his battle against the Midianites and in order to reassure him, he should go down amongst the camp of the Midianites and listen to what they had to say. Gideon did so and overheard a Midianite soldier tell his companion that he had dreamt that there was a commotion; a loaf of barley bread was whirling through the Midianite camp. It came to a tent, struck it, and the tent collapsed and turned upside down and collapsed. To this his companion responded: “this can only mean the sword of the Israelite Gideon son of Yoash. G’d is delivering Midian and the entire camp into his hands.” When Gideon heard the dream told and interpreted, he bowed low. (to G’d in gratitude) This was another instance when G’d inspired someone to interpret and verbalise a dream which subsequently came true. This may be the source of the Talmud saying in Berachot 58 that “all dreams are influenced by the interpretation which is being “given by the mouth,” [i.e. which has been verbalised. Ed.] Here too G’d placed the words in the mouths of the brothers so that eventually Joseph’s dreams would become true.
    You will note that the expression והנה occurs three times in this paragraph. This is reminiscent of the three journeys the brothers were to make to Egypt on account of Joseph’s sheaf of corn. Each time the journey meant that they would humble themselves before Joseph. The first time they went to Egypt because of the famine which prevailed in the land of Canaan. The second time they went to Egypt at the insistence of their father, ostensibly in order to buy some grain (43,2) but perhaps even more so in order to secure the release of their brother Shimon. On that occasion Joseph revealed himself to them. The third time they traveled to Egypt with their father as immigrants; by that time all three dreams of Joseph had been fulfilled. 
   ותשתחוין לאלומתי, “and they bowed down to my sheaf.” The sun, moon and stars which bowed down to Joseph  in his next dream were Yaakov, Bilhah, and his brothers. The expression וישתחו ישראל על ראש המטה, “Israel bowed down (to Joseph) at the head of the bed,” in Genesis 47,31 is the fulfillment of this part of Joseph’s dream. The brothers are reported as prostrating themselves before Joseph already in Genesis 42,6.
    
    37,8. ויוסיפו עוד שנוא אותו על חלומותיו ועל דבריו. “They continued to hate him still more on account of his words and his dreams.” The verse explains that their hatred was fanned by two separate causes. First they hated him for having dreamt the kind of dream that he did dream. In addition they hated him for telling them of his dream and bragging about it. It was like a sinful nation who is reprimanded but believes itself righteous expecting favours from G’d instead (Isaiah 58,2).
    
    37,10. ויגער בו אביו, “his father rebuked him;” Yaakov wanted to nullify the meaning of the dream in the presence of Joseph’s brothers; this is why he demonstrated anger in order to divert their anger from him and said:
   הבא נבא אני ואמך ואחיך, “do you really expect me and your brothers to come and bow down before you?” Seeing that Joseph’s mother was already dead, Yaakov wanted to demonstrate that the other parts of the dream could also not be taken seriously. Nonetheless, Yaakov took the dream far more seriously than he let on and that is why the Torah added: “his father kept careful track of the matter.” He knew that the dream was very significant and awaited its realisation at a future date. According to Bereshit Rabbah 84,12 the Holy Spirit told Yaakov  to remember the matter, i.e. as if the Torah had written שמור את הדבר, “remember the matter well!”
    
    37,11. ויקנאו בו אחיו, “his brothers were jealous of him.”  It is well known that in most instances hatred is the result of jealousy; the hatred which the Torah had spoken of earlier in verse four had been due to the brothers’ awareness that their father Yaakov loved Joseph more than he loved them, as the Torah has spelled out there. Why then did the Torah have to repeat here that the brothers were jealous of Joseph? It is possible that the correct explanation of the original hatred of the brothers towards Joseph was not due to the preferred status Joseph enjoyed in the eyes of their father due to his excelling in virtues, but was due merely to their father showing him more love. There was actually no reason to be envious of a young boy of seventeen years of age who had not demonstrated any qualities superior to those of his brothers. One usually envies one’s peers or one’s superiors. One is not given to envy inferiors. Now, after having heard repeatedly the kind of dreams their brother had experienced, his older brothers realised that there might be more to Joseph than they had thought before. Therefore they now envied him his dreams and hated him because of them. The Torah therefore told us of this additional dimension of the brothers’ jealousy of Joseph. This idea is best illustrated by the change of preposition the Torah chose to describe their new  jealousy. In our verse the Torah chose the preposition בו as distinct from the preposition את or אותו which was used to describe their hatred of him, or the verse in Genesis 26,14 where the Philistines’ jealousy of Yitzchak is described as ויקנאו אותו פלשתים.
    
    37,14. ויבא שכמה, “he came to Shechem.” a place destined for a variety of unhappy events (Tanchuma Vayeshev 2). In Shechem Dinah had been raped; In Shechem they sold Joseph. In Shechem the kingdom of David was divided and the ten tribes elected Jerobam as their king. (Kings I 12,1). After Jerobam had been elected king he built up that city (Kings I 12,25).
    
    37,17. כי שמעתי אומרים, “for I have heard (them) say, etc.” The word אותם is missing in the text.
   נלכה דותינה , “let us go to Dotan.” Our sages (Rashi) suggested that this wording  was meant to alert Joseph to danger. The words: “they moved away from here” were something that Joseph did not need to be told because he already had found out. These words were the clue to the angel’s warning. In other words, when Joseph indicated that he sought a brotherly relationship with them, the angel cautioned him that they were no longer open to such advances. [Joseph did not understand this oblique warning. Ed.] The sages speak of נכלי דתות, “contriving legislation,” instead of נלכה דותינה. If we take this at face value Dotan was not the name of a location. At any rate, Joseph did not “read between the lines” and understood the meaning of his words to be simply that they had moved to a place called Dotan and went in search of that location. He found the brothers in Dotan, something which the Midrash Bereshit Rabbah 84,14 describes as the natural conclusion of the angel’s piece of warning “they have moved from here,” i.e. they have changed their attitude. When the Torah continues that the brothers plotted to kill him by using the word ויתנכלו, this is confirmation of the expression found in the Midrash that they contrived to find a legal opening for disposing of Joseph.
    Some of our sages claim that as soon as Joseph approached close enough to be identified, his brother set dogs upon him. [in this fashion they would not have become guilty of laying a hand on him. Ed.] The dogs, however did not harm Joseph (Nachmanides). As a last resort, when Joseph insisted on going to them instead of realising that the brothers themselves had set the dogs on him, they decided that they had to kill him directly, with their own hands. This is the meaning of verses 19-20, “let us go and kill him.”
    
    37,21. לא נכנו נפש, “let us not commit murder. Reuven found it impossible to agree with the advice, i.e. the solution proposed by his brothers. He intended to save Joseph. Had he said immediately: “we will not kill him,” he would have given away his intention to save Joseph and the fact that he had pity on him. He therefore added the word נפש to convince his brothers that his strategy was not aimed at saving Joseph’s fate but at saving his brothers from committing an unpardonable sin  The prohibition of murdering someone in cold blood is absolute and knows of no exceptions. This is why he added אל תשפכו דם, “do not spill blood.” Had he been concerned only with Joseph’s blood not being spilled he would have said אל תשפכו דמו, “do not spill his blood.” He implied that he shared the brothers’ evaluation of Joseph’s guilt and hated him just as they hated him, but that he was concerned with the basic prohibition of shedding the blood of a human being, נפש.
    
    37,24. ויקחהו, “they took, etc.”  Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 84,15  use the absence of the letter ו behind the letter ח  in ויקחהו, i.e. only one person actually seized Joseph to surmise that the person in question was Shimon. This is why later on (Genesis 42,24) Joseph chose to imprison only Shimon.
   והבור ריק, אין בו מים, “and the pit was empty, it did not contain any water.” Even if it did contain some water it would still qualify for the description “empty;” this is why the additional words “there was no water in it,” mean that there was absolutely no water in it. Our sages in Shabbat 22, however, use these words to deduce that whereas here was no water in the pit, i.e. that Joseph could not drown in it, to mean that there were other dangerous inhabitants in that pit such as vipers, etc.  The reason the sages in the Talmud interpreted the verse in this way is that the verse actually contains two limitations. The first such limitation are the words “and the pit was empty; the second  limitation are the words: “there was no water in it.” Whenever we find two limitations the rule is that there was something compensating for these limitations, i.e. deadly dangers other than water.
    Rabbeinu Tam, one of the Tossaphists, explained that the reason the sages picked examples such as deadly snakes as the inhabitants of that pit Joseph was thrown in may have been derived from the Torah  saying in Deut. 8,15  במדבר הגדול והנורא נחש שרף ועקרב וצמאון אשר אין מים בו, “through the great and awesome wilderness  of snakes, fiery serpent, and scorpion; and thirst where there was no water.” The absence of water in the desert is contrasted there with the presence of deadly snakes.
    Nachmanides writes:  the snakes in the pit were concealed in holes which were not visible to people looking into it. Had the brothers noted these snakes and observed that they did not harm Joseph they would have realised that Joseph enjoyed the special protection of G’d  and that He had performed a miracle on his account. They would not have dared lay a hand on the person whom G’d had so obviously selected for a special role. We observe the presence of such considerations elsewhere in the Bible, such as in Daniel 6,23  where the miraculous escape of Daniel from the den of lions told the king that “G’d had sent an angel and shut the lions’ mouth so that they did not even wound him because merit was found for me before Him.” 
    Bereshit Rabbah 84,16 understands the wording as allegorical. The word “empty” was a simile for Yaakov’s reservoir of spiritual powers being drained through his favourite son being dumped into the pit, whereas the words “there was no water in it,” refer to the absence of the words of Torah which have often been compared to the life-giving properties of water. They base themselves on Isaiah 58,4 “come O thirsty one, go to the source of water!” The brothers were unaware of what would later on be written in the Torah (Deut. 24,7) “If someone be discovered who has sold (kidnapped) a member of his brethren the Children of Israel, and he enslaves him...that kidnapper shall die.” The brothers had thus made themselves guilty of a potentially capital offence.
    
    37,25. וישבו לאכול לחם, “they sat down to eat their meal.”  These words are a reflection of some degree of stoppage, permanence. They arrested their previous activities and emotional turmoil by sitting down to eat. Midrash Tehillim chapter 10 states that G’d’s reaction to the brothers “calmly” sitting down to eat as if nothing had happened was: “Your children will be sold as a result of a meal to be consumed at Shushan,” as we know from Esther 1,3 :”in the third year of the king’s reign, etc.” Haman came and took the Israelites who had felt emancipated away from the feast the king had prepared and at which the Jews had participated. The decree to wipe out the Jews was followed by the King and Haman sitting down to drink. (Esther 3,15)
    
    37,27. לכו ונמכרנו לישמעאלים, “come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites.” He thought in his dreams that he would rule over us and that we would become his slaves; let us sell him into slavery instead.
    
    37,28. ויעברו אנשים מדינים סוחרים, וימשכו, “Midianite men, merchants, passed by and pulled Joseph (out of the pit).” According to the plain meaning of the text the passing Midianites pulled Joseph out of the pit and sold him, not the brothers. According to this interpretation, Joseph saying to the brothers in Genesis 45,4 “I am Joseph  whom you have sold to Egypt,” has  to refer to the fact that the brothers dumped him in the pit as a result of which he was eventually sold to Egypt. This would be supported by the fact that at that time he said מצרימה, i.e. in the direction of Egypt, as opposed to למצרים, which would have meant: “to Egypt.” He referred to a process which eventually brought him to Egypt after he had been traded from master to master. In that event the sin attributed to the brothers by the Romans (who punished Jewish scholars over 1200 years later) would have been an indirect sin at best. They were punished for being the cause which triggered Joseph’s eventually winding up in Egypt as a slave. The Romans felt that leading citizens of the Jewish people should pay for this indirect sale of Joseph by the brothers. They considered it murder seeing that if the Ishmaelites or Midianites had not come along Joseph would have died in that pit. The principle of prominent people being considered guilty of murder even if it was not by laying an actual hand of the victim is reflected in the Bible by the case of David who ordered his commander-in-chief Yoav to place Bat Sheva’s husband Uriah in such an exposed position at the front against the Bney Ammon   that he was almost certain to be killed. He instructed Yoav to ensure that Uriah would be killed by withdrawing the support of his comrades-in-arms from Uriah. As a result, Uriah was  killed. by the Ammonites, and the Bible (the prophet Natan in Samuel II 12,9) accused David outright of having murdered Uriah though he had not laid a hand on him. The only difference between murdering someone with one’s own hands and between contriving his certain death in another fashion is the culpability before a human tribunal. The sin vis-a-vis G’d is the same (compare Kidushin 43)
   בעשרים כסף, “for twenty pieces of silver.” We have been commanded by the Torah (Numbers 18,16) that the redemption of a firstborn son, an Israelite, (as distinct from a Kohen or a Levite) is to be performed in exchange for 5 selaim. The sela is a coin worth 4 “kesseph,” pieces of silver, such as mentioned in our verse here. This is the reason that Onkelos does not translate “twenty selaim of silver” but leaves the wording of the Torah unchanged and writes: עסרים כסף. One of the underlying reasons for the whole procedure of redeeming the firstborn is the need to atone for that sale of Joseph who was Rachel’s firstborn son and who had been wrongly sold for this amount (compare Jerusalem Talmud Shekalim 2,3).
    
    37,32. וישלחו את כתונת הפסים אל אביהם, “they sent the striped coat to their father.” According to the plain meaning of the text the messengers presented the coat to Yaakov. This is why the Torah phrases the handing over as accompanied by such an impersonal sounding statement as: “this is what we have found, please identify if this is the coat of your son?” If the brothers had brought the coat to Yaakov themselves they would have said: “is this Joseph’s coat?” The implication in all this was that if some robbers had killed Joseph, surely they would have retained such a precious garment as the striped coat. Other commentators understand the wording of the Torah here as applying to the brothers themselves. In support of their view they cite the words ויביאו אל אביהם, “they brought (it) to their father.” According to this view, the Torah highlighted the cruelty of the brothers’ conduct vis-a-vis their father.
    
    37,33. כתונת בני, “the coat of my son!” He meant: “this is the coat of my son.”
   חיה רעה אכלתהו,“a wild beast has devoured him.”  According to the plain meaning of the text he meant: “had robbers slain him they would have taken the coat. Therefore it must have been a beast.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 84,10 Yaakov had a flash of insight seeing in his mind’s eye that Joseph would become provoked by the wife of  Potiphar. We may be permitted the question that if G’d granted him such a flash of insight, why did He not reveal to him that Joseph was alive? Our sages answered this by saying that the brothers had all made a solemn agreement that whosoever would reveal what happened to Yaakov would be ostracised. They had included G’d in that agreement, i.e. they did specifically impose silence even on G’d (compare Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer 38). In order to make such a weird sounding statement more plausible, let us consider the following. There were nine brothers present at the time the sale took place (Binyamin and Reuven were absent, Joseph, as the victim was not part of this agreement). In order to make such a solemn oath or agreement legally valid a quorum of ten adult males was required. They had decided to make G’d the tenth member of that quorum (not that they “forbade” G’d to reveal to Yaakov what He saw fit to reveal). If you find this concept difficult to accept, consider, if you will that when Avraham prayed for the cities of Sodom, etc. to be saved if they contained a certain number of righteous individuals, he asked if G’d would spare them if He could find there forty-five such people. Why did he mention the number  45, and not 35, 25, or 15? He began with he number 50 to say that if there could be found a quorum of ten good people in each of the five towns under threat of extinction G’d should spare the town on account of them. In mentioning the number 45, he assumed that if each of these towns would have only nine righteous men G’d would be willing to make up the missing tenth and thus He would complement the required number (Genesis 18,28 according to Rashi). If you were to reject this comparison saying that whereas Avraham wanted to make G’d a partner in order to save a town, in this instance the brothers made G’d their partner in a destructive scheme, remember that their objective was not a nefarious one. Their objective all along had been to preserve the people of Israel and the honour of G’d as they considered how Yaakov would curse all of them if he became aware of what they had done to his favourite son. If the sons and family of Yaakov would perish, who would proclaim the name and glory of G’d in the world? The situation which would then come about is similar to the one mentioned in Joshua 7,9 when Joshua felt that the Israelites were threatened by the defeat they had suffered at the hands of the little town of Ai, and he implored G’d to reverse this defeat. He said: והכיתו את שמנו מן הארץ ומה תעשה לשמך הגדול, “and they will wipe out our name from the land and then what will You do to promote Your great name?” On account of these considerations the brothers had felt justified in including G’d Himself in their scheme. Incidentally, we find that Moses also included G’d and his heavenly tribunal at the time he received the Torah.
    You might ask that seeing the sages (Bereshit Rabbah 84,21) have told us that Yitzchak knew that Joseph was alive but decided not to reveal this to his son Yaakov as he felt that G’d must have had a good reason if He Himself had not revealed it to him, whence did Yitzchak have his information? We must obviously conclude that G’d had told Yitzchak. He also told Binyamin that Joseph was alive. We know this (compare Bereshit Rabbah 71,8 because the gem on Aaron’s breastplate which represented the tribe of Binyamin was the ישפה, which may be read as יש פה, “there is a mouth”). The Midrash implies that though Binyamin was not included in that solemn undertaking of the nine brothers and he could have told his father that Joseph was alive without violating that pact, he decided to keep his mouth shut as he appreciated the motivations which had guided his brothers when making such a pact, and he too did not want to take the chance that his father would curse the brothers.
    
    37,34. ימים רבים, “for many days.” The word “many” means the seven days which are prescribed for mourning next of kin who have died. The fact that the Torah refers to seven days as “many” is no cause for surprise as we find that the Torah calls even three days רבים, “many,” from the halachic interpretation of that word by Torat Kohanim on Leviticus 15,25.
    Bereshit Rabbah 84,20 quoted by Rashi writes that the words “many days” mean “many years,” i.e. for the full twenty-two years that Yaakov and Joseph were apart. Rashi explains how these twenty-two years are arrived at. Joseph was 17 years old when he was sold and he was 39 years old when Yaakov and family moved to Egypt. He was described as 30 years of age when he stood before Pharaoh and interpreted the dreams. This was followed by 7 years of plenty. The brothers traveled to Egypt in the first as well as in the second year of the famine before returning with their families during that same year. These twenty-two years of separation between Yaakov and Joseph corresponded to the twenty-two years Yaakov had been absent from his home when he had to flee from Esau. [The 14 years he spent at the academy of Shem and Ever studying Torah are not counted as that was not the result of his having cheated Esau. Ed.]
    
    37,35. כל בניו, “all his sons, etc.” These are his actual sons. וכל בנותיו refers to Dinah and Serach, the daughter of Asher.
   וימאן להתנחם, “he refused to be comforted.” This was because it is impossible to accept such comfort when the person being mourned is still alive. It is a decree by G’d which enables the survivor to gradually “forget” someone who has died and thus be comforted over his loss (compare Rashi).
   כי ארד אל בני אבל שאולה, “but I will join my son in She-ol still mourning for him.” He meant that he would be buried while still in mourning for his son as he would never get over this loss. According to Tanchuma Vayigash 9, the wordשאולה  is a reference to Gehinom, purgatory. Yaakov thought so as he had been certain that not one his children would die during his lifetime. Now that Joseph had died, he felt that this could only have occurred if he himself was destined for purgatory.
   ויבך אותו אביו, “his father wept for him.” This is a reference to Yitzchak, Yaakov’s father. Yitzchak wept when he observed the anguish of his son Yaakov and was unable to tell him that actually Joseph was alive. The expression “Yitzchak wept for him,” is to tell us that whereas he “wept,” he did not mourn Joseph as you do not mourn the living.
    
    38.1. ויהי בעת ההיא וירד יהודה, “it was at about that time that Yehudah descended.” Actually, the passage about Joseph being brought down to Egypt (39,1) should have been the natural continuation at this point. The Midrash in Bereshit Rabbah 85,2  explains that the reason the Torah inserted this chapter about Yehudah and his marriage was to draw our attention to the fact that Yehudah’s having counseled selling Joseph had become the cause for his “descent,” i.e. for his losing the role of leadership amongst his brothers. When the brothers observed the inconsolable state of mind of their father they blamed Yehudah for being the cause of it telling him that if only he had stopped them and  had suggested that they return Joseph to his father they would have listened to him.”
    A kabbalistic approach: the paragraph describing a levirate marriage was appended to the paragraph describing the sale of Joseph as both paragraphs deal with the subject of גלגול, a form of reincarnation, complete transformation of one’s fate. It is a fact that the sin committed by the brothers was of the type that could be atoned for by nothing less than reincarnation of their souls in different bodies. This is also the mystical dimension of the levirate marriage (widow of a brother who died without having sired children to one of the surviving brothers, compare Deut. 25,5-10). The mystical dimension of the levirate marriage is the same as the mystical dimension of reincarnation of the souls in a new body. The ten martyrs whom the Romans chose to expiate for the sin of the brothers having sold Joseph were none other than reincarnations of the brothers’ souls in different bodies. By dying a martyr’s death the millennia-old sin overhanging them was finally expiated. Er and Onan, the sons of Yehudah who died prematurely for committing a sin, were similarly reincarnated in the bodies of the twin sons Peretz and Zerach whom Tamar bore for Yehudah (verse 29). This is the deeper meaning of the sequence (Numbers 26,19-20) “Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan and the sons of Yehudah were , etc.” All this is alluded to here through the sequence in which the Torah relates these events, something which the intelligent reader will comprehend. As to the problem that there were ten such martyrs at the hands of the Romans whereas only nine of the brothers were actively involved in the sale of Joseph, seeing that Reuven had been absent at the time of the sale and had previously expressed disapproval of the brothers’ treatment of Joseph, we would have to say that the tenth person was Joseph himself who was guilty of providing the brothers with cause to hate him to such a degree that they committed this crime against him. Seeing Joseph had been an inseparable part of the sin he also became part of the method of expiation.
    Another way of answering the problem of why the Romans chose ten martyrs [and why G’d allowed this, Ed.] is  that certainly Joseph was not held responsible in such a fashion but that Reuven was. Reuven was punished in that way not because of his share in the sale of Joseph, something he had had no share in, but he had not been punished yet for his misdemeanour involving the couch of his stepmother Bilhah. We even have an allusion to this in Moses’ blessing for Reuven at the end of his life (Deut. 33,6) ויהי מתיו מספר, “may his population be included in the count,” the count being the ten martyrs who would absolve the ten brothers from their sin in the future.
    
    38,2בת איש כנעני , “the daughter of a Canaanite man of distinction.” According to Onkelos the word כנעני in this instance refers to a merchant, a trader. Yehudah was certainly true to the tradition of his fathers not to marry girls of Canaanite descent. The respective wives of all the brothers may be presumed to have been of Egyptian descent or of Moabite and Ammonite descent respectively, neighbouring peoples who were not from Canaanitic stock. The brothers may also have married descendants of Ishmael or Keturah, Avraham’s second wife who had born him six sons. This is the reason that we are told in 46,10 amongst the list of sons of Shimon that there was someone who is described as שאול בן הכנענית, “Saul the son of a Canaanite woman.” Even when the Torah was so explicit, our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 80,11) still explained that that woman was not a true Canaanite, claiming that the “Canaanite woman” was none other than Dinah who had been raped by a Canaanite and that Shimon had married her and had adopted the son she bore as a result of this rape.
    
    38,5. והיה בכזיב בלדתה אותו, “he was at Keziv when she gave birth to him.” Why did the Torah have to tell us that Yehudah was at a certain place at the time his wife gave birth? According to Rashi this place was called כזיב because Bat Shua, Yehudah’s wife, stopped having any more children after this. 
    According to Nachmanides, Yehudah called his son Shelah, a word connected to שגגה, error, as the place he was born at brought home to Yehudah that he had committed an error. There is a mystical dimension to this verse and the word כזיב alludes to the third of the emanations, the emanation called בינה. This emanation has a great deal to do with the ability of a woman (or man) to have children. In fact this is alluded to already when G’d is described as ויבן, i.e. He provided בינה for the first woman who was formed from part of Adam. Our sages there commented that a woman has an extra portion of such בינה, i.e. she has been providentially endowed with the ability to have children. Yehudah had a prophetic insight which told him that his principal issue would not be any one of these three sons and he therefore prayed invoking the great attribute of G’d known as כוזו [which appears on the back of the parchments of our Mezzuzot Ed.], an attribute involved in matters pertaining to fertility and other genetic influences not subject to a person’s merit, the same attribute Hannah prayed to when she asked G’d to grant her זרע אנשים, not just a child but a child who would become worthy, i.e. an איש in the full sense of the word. (compare Samuel I 1,11) Yehudah’s prayer was accepted as he had twin sons by Tamar (verse 18) one of whom, Peretz, became the ancestor of King David. According to Rashi, the words ותהר לו, “she became pregnant for him,” in the above-mentioned verse are significant in this respect. We do not find this pronoun לו in connection with Bat Shua’s pregnancies or births. This entitles us to assume that Yehudah’s descendants would be known through Peretz and Zerach rather than through his other surviving son Shelah. The word בכזיב may also be read as an acrostic for the words ב-כח כ-וזו,ז-כה י-הודה ב--תאומים, “through the merit of invoking G’d’ attribute כוזו Yehudah merited having the twins born for him by Tamar.”
    
    38,10. וימת גם אותו, “He killed him also.” The word  גם is proof that Er and Onan died for the same sin. Our sages in Yevamot 34 say that it is easy to understand why Onan should have died for this sin seeing he had violated his father’s instructions to marry Tamar and to have children by her (verse 8). He thought that these children would not be accounted as his own but as his deceased brother’s Er, hence he deliberately wasted his semen. The question is why did Er act in such a fashion? Why did he not want children? The Talmud answers that he did not want Tamar to become disfigured through a pregnancy. He wanted to preserve her beauty, i.e. to treat her as a sex object rather than as the mother of his children. This explains why Yehudah had stressed to Onan  (verse 8) “and maintain seed for your brother.” Seeing that Yehudah did not add the word המת, “the deceased,” when instructing Onan to have children with Tamar, Onan realised that when Tamar would have children these would not even be considered as his children but as his late brother’s. In other words, he would not even be compensated for Tamar losing her youthful beauty.
    The meaning of the letter ל in the word לאחיך in verse 8 may be understood as similar to אמרי לי אחי הוא, “say concerning me he is my brother” (Genesis 20,13). The verse teaches us the lesson that if someone deliberately wastes his semen, i.e.  שחת ארצה, this was the sin of the generation which perished during the deluge. We find the word כי השחית כל בשר על הארץ in connection with that generation, i.e. the same word as we find describing Onan’s sin (Nidah 12). The reason the Torah calls the firstborn of Yehudah ער  was because these letters are the same as רע, “evil” in G’d’s eyes [same letters in a different sequence. Ed.] Seeing the Torah mentions the word רע in connection with both Er, Onan, and the people of Sodom (Genesis 13,13), it stands to reason that all of these people were guilty of the sin of letting their semen go to waste deliberately.
    
    38,11. עד יגדל שלה בני, “until my son Shelah becomes of age.” Seeing there was no brother older than Shelah for Tamar to marry, she would have to wait until Shelah was old enough. Had Shelah been of marriageable age already, Yehudah would not have asked Tamar to wait. This verse [the problems caused by Yehudah delaying the levirate marriage of Shelah, Ed.] prompted our sages in Yevamot 39 to say that if a brother evaded performing the levirate union until a younger, under-aged brother had come of age and would perform it in his stead, or if an older brother was overseas and a brother who was present wanted to wait until his older brother returns from overseas and marries this widow, that one does not accept such arguments. The brother who is present and of age must either perform the levirate marriage or release the widow by performing the rite of חליצה, the act of releasing her to marry an outsider, so hat she can get on with her life. In Ruth 1,11  Naomi says to her daughters-in-law: “turn back, my daughters! Why should you go with me? I am too old to be married. Even if I were to be married tonight and I also bore sons, should you wait for them till they grow up?” This suggests that there might be a point in waiting under less extreme circumstances. There are those who hold that Naomi meant that if she had been pregnant at the time she uttered these words she would have encouraged her daughters-in-law to wait till such sons had been old enough to marry. However, people who think along those lines are quite wrong. The Torah in Deut. 25,1 introduces the whole subject of the levirate marriage with the words כי ישבו אחים יחדיו, which the Talmud in Yevamot 17 interprets to mean ”when the brothers concerned are alive at the same time.” In other words, no unborn brother can qualify for observing this legislation for a brother who had died before he was born.
   כי אמר  פן ימות גם הוא, “for he had said: ‘lest he die too.’”  He felt that Tamar had demonstrated a tendency to cause the death of her husbands. There is an opinion in the Talmud according to which when something occurs successively even only twice we already consider this as an established pattern, i.e. חזקה. This is the way Rashi interprets our verse. Nachmanides questions this, writing that if indeed Yehudah’s fears were based on this consideration why would he not tell Tamar his reason and deceive her by making her think that he would give Shelah to her in due course? According to Rashi, Shelah would be forbidden to marry Tamar as she was a potential killer. This is why Nachmanides explains that actually Shelah would have been a suitable third husband for her under the levirate marriage legislation. Yehudah simply did not want Shelah to marry until he had matured more as otherwise he might become guilty of the same sin which had caused the death of his brothers. When Tamar noticed that although Shelah had matured in the interval her father-in-law had still not given him to her in marriage, she  decided to take a different route to secure issue from the family of Yaakov/Yehudah.
    
    38,15. כי כסתה פניה, “for she had covered her face.” According to the plain meaning of the text Yehudah considered the woman as a harlot because she had had covered her face, not wanting to be identified This would enable harlots to have sexual relations even with close relatives as the latter would not shy away from having contact with them.
	A Midrashic approach from Sotah 10: the words refer to the fact that while living under her father-in-law’s roof Tamar had kept her face covered so that he did not know what her face looked like.This is also the reason why Bereshit Rabbah 85,9 writes that a person should make a habit to know his relatives well enough to be able to identify them when looking at them so as to protect himself against what happened to Yehudah with Tamar.
    
    38,16. הבה נא אבא אליך, “if you please, I wish to have relations with you.” If the Torah had applied the rules of grammar here, it should have quoted Yehudah as saying הבי instead of הבה. However, seeing that Yehudah considered the woman a harlot, a woman who demands sexual relations outright in the manner males do, he changed his mode of address and treated her as if she were a male. The Torah preferred to quote Yehudah verbatim instead of observing the rules of grammar. We find a parallel to this in Genesis 19,32 when the daughters of Lot initiate sexual intercourse with their father by first making him drunk. They too acted in a manner which is usually a male prerogative, and this is why the Torah wrote לכה נשקה  instead of לכי נשקה. I have explained the matter there.
    
    38,18. חותמך ופתילך ומטך אשר בידך, “your signet, your wrap, and your staff which is in your hand.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word חותמך refers to a ring used to seal documents. Possibly, Yehudah’s signet ring bore the image of a lion seeing that his father  described him as גור אריה, “a lion cub” in Genesis 49,19. Rashi explains that the word ופתילך means “your wrap,” a garment with which he covered himself. Concerning this Nachmanides disagrees, saying that it is not logical that Yehudah would give a harlot a garment of his without which he would remain naked. Moreover, how is it possible that the Torah would describe a שמלה as a פתיל? Besides, why would this garment be described by Tamar as הפתילים i.e. as garments in the plural in verse 25? If one were to say that the word פתיל refers to the ציצית, the fringes, how can we assume that Yehudah would treat the  fringes in such a desultory manner, i.e. giving the part of the garment which lends it some sanctity to a harlot? Nachmanides therefore concludes that פתיל is a small cloth such as a kerchief used to wear around the neck or part of the head. It is still a common practice in the Orient that distinguished people wear such a piece of attire. It is called פתיל  as it is short like a שושיפא, short cloak. (Compare Onkelos on Deut. 22,17 where שמלה, bed-sheet, is translated as שושיפא.) 
   ומטך, “and your staff.” She referred to the staff that princes and dignitaries are in the habit of carrying. It is similar to the word שבט, which is mentioned by Yaakov as a hallmark of the authority of the dynasty of Yehudah when Yaakov blessed him before his death (Genesis 49,10). 
    Some commentators view the three items which Tamar demanded as a pledge from Yehudah as allusions to the three financial obligations a husband assumes vis-a-vis his wife as outlined in Exodus 21,10. They are named  there as שאר, כסות עונה, the entitlement to food, clothing, and marital rights. The signet ring was symbolic of her marital rights, her claim on Yehudah. She alluded to the stamp of the sacred covenant which every male Jew wears on his sexual organ ever since he has been circumcised. The staff is symbolic of food, sustenance, as we know from Leviticus 26,26 בשברי לכם מטה לחם, “when I break for you the staff of bread.” פתילך, of course, is symbolic of the wife’s right to be provided with clothing by her husband.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 85,9, (slightly different wording) by returning these three pledges to Yehudah, Tamar’s offspring did indeed merit to secure for itself (at different times in history) all these three items. Concerning Zerubavel, the leader of the Jews returning from exile in Babylon, we read in Chagai 2,23: ”I will take you, My servant Zerubavel son of Shaltiel- declares the Lord,- and make you as a signet for I have chosen you.” As to the פתיל, Tamar, as the mother of  Peretz, became the ancestor of Betzalel, architect of the Tabernacle of whom it is written in Exodus 39,3 וקצץ פתילים, “he cut threads.” The word מטך was an allusion to King David of whom Samuel I 17,40 recorded that ויקח מקלו בידו, “he took his staff in his hand.” 
    
    38,24. הוציאוה ותשרף, “take her outside to be burned.”  All the onlookers accepted Yehudah’s verdict without argument. This teaches that Yehudah was the local judge of that community. It was the custom in that place that any woman found committing adultery would be burned. Bereshit Rabbah 85,10 quoted by Rashi  38,24 claims that Tamar was the daughter of Shem (the son of Noach whom we know as a Priest for the Supreme G’d from the time of Avraham). Seeing that the Torah provides the death penalty by burning for the daughters of Priests, (Leviticus 21,1) she was sentenced to be burned.
    
    38,25. היא מוצאת, “when she was taken out,” to be burned. We learn from this verse that a person should rather allow himself to be burned than to cause a fellow man to blanch from public embarrassment. Tamar reasoned to herself: “if he will admit his part in my pregnancy, all well and good; If not, I will rather allow myself to be burned in the furnace than to shame him in public.” Although the word מוצאת, has been spelled with the letter א, (whereas if it meant “being burned,” it should have been spelled without that letter) one may interpret it  homiletically as being derived from הצתה, subjecting something to fire. Incidentally, the first letters in the words of the verse ו-יאמר י-הודה ה-וציאוה - ו- תשרף when read backwards yield the acrostic י-ה-ו-ה, the Ineffable Name of G’d. This suggests that at the time Tamar was concerned with saving Yehudah’s “face,” G’d was busy saving her life by invoking the attribute of Mercy.
   שלחה אל חמיה לאמור, “she sent to her father-in-law to convey, etc.” She meant for her messengers to tell Yehudah in her name: “for the man to whom these items belong I am pregnant, etc.,” the messengers themselves did not know what she had in her hand. She did this in order to protect Yehudah’s reputation in the event he chose to ignore her. When she realised that this indirect message was ineffective, she thought that possibly Yehudah had forgotten the encounter with her. At that point she confronted Yehudah face to face (in private) adding the words הכר נא, “please identify.” This is why the Torah mentions the items in question individually at this point. She was still determined not to reveal him as the father of her unborn child if he chose to deny his involvement in her pregnancy.
    The Jerusalem Targum on the words היא מוצאת, claims that Samael had hidden  the three items which she could have used to clear her name. The author mentions a prayer of Tamar in which she expressed the hope that in return for having preferred a fiery death in order to protect Yehudah’s public image, G’d would  arrange for these items to be found so that three persons’ lives would be saved thereby, (hers and that of her two unborn sons). G’d gave the angel Gavriel a hint and he returned these items to Tamar and she threw them at the feet of the judges. This is the meaning of the words הכר נא למי החותמת וגו', “please identify the owner of the signet ring, etc.”
    
    38,26. צדקה ממני, “she is more righteous than I.” When the messengers presented Yehudah with the signet ring, etc., he immediately owned up and said: צדקה, “she is righteous in what she says;” ממני, “she is pregnant from me.” This is also the way Onkelos translates these words.
    Nachmanides understands the word ממנו as a comparative, meaning “she is more righteous than I.” He meant “whereas when I had sexual intercourse with her I had unworthy motives, she had had worthy motives wanting me to perform the rite of the levirate marriage with her.” This is what he had in mind when he added “because I did not give her to my son Shelah.” Shelah, after all, was the person who was next in line to perform that rite. Yehudah was the next closest relative to perform this rite of the levirate marriage and to keep alive the names of his late departed sons Er and Onan, in the event Shelah would refuse to marry Tamar.
    According to a Midrashic approach found in Makkot 23  after Yehudah had said צדקה, “she is righteous,” a heavenly voice was heard adding the word ממני, “from Me;” i.e. G’d informed the judges and Tamar that He had guided matters in such a way that Tamar would become pregnant by Yehudah. In that connection the Talmud goes on to say that we know of only three instances where the Holy spirit took an active part in judicial proceedings of a terrestrial court to assure a certain outcome. One was the court founded by Shem; the second was the court presided over by the prophet Samuel; the third was the court presided over by King Solomon. In the case of the court founded by Shem and known as “his court” hundreds of years later, the Holy Spirit intervened clearing Tamar of all guilt. The Holy Spirit again intervened in the court of Samuel as we know from Samuel I 12,5 “G’d is witness, and His anointed is witness, to your admission this day that you found nothing in my possession.” [Samuel had challenged the people to list any wrong he had committed against anyone of them or whose property he had made use of by citing his authority as ruling judge. Ed.] In that paragraph the answer should have been in the plural, i.e. the people should have been quoted as saying: “we are witness.” The fact that the author of the Book of Samuel refers to the singular is proof that it was G’d answering on behalf of the people. The third time the Holy Spirit interfered in the deliberations by a terrestrial court was when Solomon heard the case of two women each of whom claimed the surviving baby as her own (Kings I 3,26). At that time the Book of Kings has the mother of one of the babies call out: “give the surviving baby to her, do not kill it, for she is its mother.” The words “she is its mother,“ were added by the Heavenly Voice, whereas the baby’s true mother only said the words “give the surviving baby to her and do not kill it.”
   ולא יסף עוד לדעתה, “and he did not have further sexual intercourse with her.” Having fulfilled the commandment of ensuring that the souls of Er and Onan would be reincarnated in Tamar’s children, Yehudah refrained from treating her as his wife, even though technically, i.e. from a halachic point of view he could have had marital relations with her. The reasoning of the commentator (Samuel the elder in Sotah 10) who understood the words ולא יסף to mean “he did not stop,” is that seeing Yehudah’s union with Tamar had been approved by heaven there was no point in discontinuing his marital relations with her.
    
    38,30. ויקרא שמו זרח, “he called his name Zerach.” The name Zerach (shines) symbolised the sun, whereas the name Peretz (interruption) symbolised the moon. (the sun shines uninterruptedly, daily, whereas the moon is ineffective towards the end of the month and at its beginning). The kingdom of David stemmed from Peretz whose dynasty symbolised the moon and its ups and downs. We know that the moon’s orbit is completed every 29 days. This is why you will find that there were 29 righteous people (descended from him) listed in the Bible from the time of Peretz until the last King of the Davidic dynasty, Tzidkiyahu. They are: Peretz, Chetzron, Ram, Aminadav, Nachshon, Salmon, Boaz, Oved, Yishai and David. They were followed by Shlomoh, Rechavam, Aviyah, Assa, Yehoshaphat, Yehoram, Achazyah, Yoash, Amatzyah, Uzziah, Yotam, Achaz,  Chiskiyah, Menashe, Ammon, Yoshiyahu, Yehoachaz, Yehoyakim, Yehoyachim, Tzidkiyah. These comprise a total of 29 men corresponding to the days in the lunar orbit; the lunar “sun” sets after such a period of time. The dynasty of David underwent a similar decline after Tzidkiyah and this is why the Temple was destroyed during the lifetime of Tzidkiyah who was the twenty-ninth scion counting from Peretz. [The reason we do not count from Yehudah who was promised Royalty by his father may be that Peretz was Royalty already, his mother having been the daughter of King Malki Tzedek, identical with Shem. If you find it strange that our author lists Menashe as a righteous king when the Book of Kings described him as the worst heretic ever, the reason may be that he became a penitent and G’d restored him to his  throne as reported in Chronicles, II chapter 33 something not mentioned in the Book of Kings II chapter 21. [See my book “The Just lives by his faith” for a possible reason for this omission Ed.]
    However, in Shemot Rabbah 15,26 this calculation is described differently, and the month is given as having thirty days during the first half of which the moon is progressively becoming more powerful, whereas after that it declines visibly. According to the author of that list the first 15 days of the month are characterised by the leaders of the Jewish people from Avraham to Solomon, whereas the last 15 days symbolise the decline of the Kingdom of Yehudah after the division of the country between Rechavam and Jerobam. This is based on Exodus 12,1. G’d is supposed to have told the Jewish people already prior to their departure from Egypt that the kingdom would not last for more than thirty generations, hence the words: החודש הזה לכם, ”this month (moon) is for you, etc.” The Midrash lists verses in the Bible to back up the contention that the early ancestors of the Jewish people such as Avraham and Yitzchak are already part of these 30 generations. It quotes a verse in which Avraham is described as “shining,” such as Isaiah 41, 2. It similarly is at  pains to prove the same for Yitzchak and Yaakov. Starting with Yehudah, there is no need for such proofs anymore. The author of the Midrash, aware that most of the Kings of Yehudah actually worshipped idols, does not describe them as an unending string of righteous people but lumps them together as part of the decline of the Davidic dynasty, in spite of the exceptions such as Chiskiyah and Yoshiyah to name but two. According to this Midrash, the prayers of the patriarchs on behalf of their errant children helped to persuade G’d to continue to let that Kingdom exist beyond  the time it had a legal right to exist. [This Midrash continues for several pages  and I have decided to condense it in the interest of brevity. One of the more important points of the comparison between the orbit of the moon and the thirty generations of ascending and descending Jewish political power is the fact that King Tzidkiyah had his eyes gouged out by 
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. His subsequent blindness is taken by the Midrash as symbolic of the light of the Jewish “moon” having been extinguished.
    A kabbalistic approach: Our verse speaks of two births, two new human beings. There is a profound mystical dimension in this, something of great impact on the dynasty of the house of David. I will reveal to you a small part of that mystical dimension and I ask you to concentrate on what I am about to reveal. We know that the name אלו-הים, with which the Torah describes G’d during the report of the creation of the universe describes Him as the king of the universe. This name is identified with the concept  תשובה, another name for the emanation בינה. [In plain English, the attribute with which G’d created the universe is that which is active in the emanation בינה, the third emanation counting from the highest emanation, i.e. כתר, down. Ed.] We acknowledge this attribute especially on Rosh Hashanah, the “birthday” of the universe, (creation of man) and the days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur when we conclude the third of the blessings in the עמידה prayer by saying המלך הקדוש, “the Holy King,” or המלך המשפט, “the King who dispenses justice,” instead of הא-ל הקדוש, “the Holy G’d,” or מלך אוהב צדקה ומשפט, “the King who loves righteousness and justice.” There is no King without a people or man that He can be King over.
    When the Torah reports G’d’s directive (Genesis 1,3) as יהי אור ויהי אור, “let there be light and there was light,” this light came into existence by means of the power of the Kingdom of Heaven and Earth which is also known as אלו-הים. The repetition of the word אור in that  directive and the report that it had been carried out, suggests that there were two kinds of light. You do not find the subject of the directive repeated when the Torah reports what G’d created on the other days. In the Torah’s report of the directives G’d issued concerning the other days you only find the expression ויהי כן to indicate that the universe had responded to G’d’s directive.
    You should realise that though the Torah appears to speak of two kinds of light, the meaning is not that there were actually two entirely different kinds of light. What is meant is that this light embodied two sources of power, of energy. One of these forces is essentially male, the other essentially female. The creation of the original light, however, was the product of a single source of energy, one which combines within it both male and female elements. This original light later on enabled the sun, the moon, and the stars to be derived from it and to be concretised. [The original light was independent of any physical matter, sunlight is not. It requires the sun, i.e. a physical body, in order  to dispense it. Ed.]. I have explained this in my commentary on Genesis 1,14. The sun was endowed with the male properties of the original light, whereas the moon was endowed with the female properties of the original light.
    Having absorbed this knowledge, you will understand what occurred in the case of Yehudah, Tamar, and these two children born to Tamar and Yehudah respectively. By means of these two individuals, Peretz and Zerach, we can gain a better understanding of the whole process of creation. This is what the sages had in mind in Berachot 55 when they said: מלכותא דארע כעין מלכותא דרקיע, “the kingdom on earth is essentially similar to the kingdom in the celestial regions.” Yehudah’s name יהודה, gratitude, as we know from Leah’s feelings of gratitude to G’d meant  that by having born more children for Yaakov than any of his wives would he would be appreciative of this. (compare  Genesis 29,35). Ed.] Seeing that Yehudah was the fourth of the twelve sons who were to make up the tribes of Israel, G’d’s Holy Name is part of his name. His tribe became the leading tribe in Israel and the Kingdom of Israel was ruled over by a king from his tribe, i.e. David and his descendants. It was therefore appropriate that Tamar, herself descended from Royalty, should be married to him. The name Tamar reflects the fact that the original light contained both male and female properties, seeing that תמר, a date or date-palm, contains both male and female elements, or rather that the name for both a female palm and a male palm is the same. The לולב, palm branch, is indicative of the male element in the palm, whereas the fruit, the product of the female palm tree goes by the same name, i.e. תמר. It is male on the outside whereas its גרעין, its pit, is female. [it is split, similar in appearance to a vagina, as explained by Naftali Wessely] This is something unique, not found in any other kind of tree. It was therefore appropriate that Peretz and Zerach be mothered by Tamar. Zerach corresponded to the element sun, the male element, the sun which shines without interruption, whereas Peretz corresponded to the element  moon, the female element, a light which is uneven, sometimes stronger sometimes waning completely such as the light of the moon. It was therefore almost a historical must that the dynasty of King David be the product of Peretz rather than Zerach, seeing that he, Peretz--as indicated by his name already- represented the type of light we get from the moon, i.e. light which fluctuates constantly in intensity as does the light of the moon.
    When you will examine the verse intelligently you will find that just as the sun is always aligned with the moon just like twins, so Zerach and Peretz were aligned in the womb of their mother, i.e. they were twins. This concept of their being twins was carried so far that even at birth each of them could be taken for the firstborn depending on whether you consider the emergence of the hand or the emergence of the head as determining which one is the firstborn of the two. The Torah describes Zerach as the firstborn seeing that his hand emerged first from Tamar’s womb. It says “for he emerged first.” On the other hand, the Torah continues with ויהי כמשיב ידו, “it was as he was about to pull back his hand (inside the womb).” You will note that the Torah did not say that he had actually completed the act of pulling back his hand, i.e. וישב ידו. Peretz became the firstborn by reason of forcing his way out of the birth-canal of his mother past his twin brother Zerach.  This is why the Torah writes in our verse ואחר יצא אחיו אשר על ידו השני, “after that, his brother, the one who had the red string tied to his hand, emerged.” In other words, when we consider the emergence from the womb of the entire baby, פטר רחם, as the dominant criterion, Peretz was the firstborn even though Zerach had first put his hand out of his mother’s womb. The Torah determined that for halachic purposes emergence of a whole baby from the mother’s birth canal first determines who is the true firstborn  (Bechorot 46). This is why when the Torah revealed the names of these two twins it first gives us the name of Peretz. You will find an interesting verse in Psalms 89,28 אף אני בכור אתנהו עליון למלכי ארץ, “I will also appoint him firstborn, highest of the kings of the earth.” G’d is on record that He considers David, who biologically was the youngest of his brothers, as a firstborn. Seeing that the kingdom of the house of David is derived from Peretz, and Peretz in turn has been likened to the moon, the sages formulated the words דוד מלך ישראל חי וקיים, “David King of Israel is alive and endures,” when we recite the monthly benedictions welcoming the arrival of the renewal of the light of the moon. 
    When we look at the plain meaning of that statement it means simply that the moon is equated with David, (in name), seeing David is descended from Peretz who has been compared to the moon. Furthermore, seeing that the moon has been described in the Torah as the “small luminary” (Genesis 1,16), we find that the adjective “the small one” has also been applied to David (compare Samuel I 17,14).  When we say the words חי וקיים, in the recital of קידוש לבנה, the sanctification of the new moon, the thought we entertain is that the moon has become visible again this month. 
    On a more mystical level, these words are a reference to the latent power of the moon which is also known as דוד מלך ישראל, in that the word ישראל is a reference to כנסת ישראל, the mystical entity called Israel in the celestial regions. This is why this entity is described as חי וקיים, alive and well, enduring forever. Daniel 7,9 alludes to this when he said עד די כרסון רמיו, “until the thrones were set up.” There were two such thrones. In Chagigah 14 the sages have revealed to us how they understood this verse in Daniel. “Some hold that one of these thrones was reserved for G’d and the other for David. A second opinion holds that one of these thrones would be used by G’d when He employed the attribute of Justice, whereas he would use the other throne when employing the attribute of Charity. A third opinion, that of Rabbi Eleazar ben Azaryah, contends that one of the ‘thrones’ was for sitting on, whereas the other served as a footrest.” It appears in that folio as if the sages of the first view disagreed with the view expressed by those who hold that one throne was reserved for David. Actually, the sages do not disagree with the basic concepts underlying all this. We know this as they derive their opinion from the verse ובקשו את ה' אלו-היהם ואת דוד מלכם, “and they will seek the Lord their G’d and David their king.” The words “and David their King” are a reference to this concept of כנסת ישראל. Concerning the moral/spiritual power represented by כנסת ישראל, our sages expounded (Zohar Terumah 175) that legally speaking the Israelites were not slated for exile from their land ever. The decree to exile them was not decided until they had rejected both the Kingdom of Heaven (G’d) and the Kingdom of David. We base this on Samuel II 20,1 “we have no portion in David nor in any inheritance of the son of Yishai. Every man to their tents!” [a proclamation by Sheva ben Bichri, a dissident and heretic, arousing the people to oppose David.] 
    It is important to realise that  the words “David” and the words “the son of Yishai” are not a repetition referring to one and the same person as those commentators who concentrate on the plain meaning of the text would have us believe. The meaning of the verse is that Sheva ben Bichri and his supporters declared their severance of allegiance to both the kingdom of heaven and the celestial aspect of the kingdom on earth as represented  by David in his capacity as the son of Yishai. These people served idols instead. This is why he said “each one to his god!” [the sages inverted the letters in the word לאהליו, “to their tents,” to read “to their gods,” i.e. לאלהיו. The verses reporting the birth of Zerach mention the word יד, hand, four times, i.e. ויתן יד, ותקשור על ידו שני, ויהי כמשיב ידו, אשר על ידו השני. These four expressions parallel  the four times  עכן בן זרח, [identical with Achan ben Karmi in Joshua chapter 7. Ed.] stretched out his hand, i.e. committed a trespass against loot captured by the Jewish people in their wars  since their departure from Egypt. He hid and retained such loot from the battle against Amalek, against Sichon and Og, from the battle against the Canaanites and from the capture of Jericho [which was not preceded by a battle in the usual sense of the word. Ed.] (compare Bereshit Rabbah 85,14).
    
    39,1. ויוסף הורד מצרים, “meanwhile Joseph had been brought down to Egypt.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 86,4 comment on this that “the son of a maid-servant (Midianites descendad from Hagar) sells a free man whereas the slave (Potiphar) buys him,” i.e. a reversal of the norm. Our verse confirms the truth of what Solomon said in Kohelet 10,7: “I have observed  slaves riding on horses.”
    The person described as שר הטבחים was the man who was appointed to execute all those prisoners who had received a death sentence. He was a physically strong specimen and a cruel person such as Nebuzaradan who occupied that position in the army of Nebuchadnezzar as we know from Jeremiah 39,13: “he (Nebuchadnezzar) despatched Nebuzaradan the chief executioner, etc.” We also find  that it was he who is credited with exiling the remnant of the Jewish people (Kings II 25,11). We find in Daniel 2,14 that “Aryoch the chief executioner had set out to put to death the wise men of Babylon.”
    There is a Tanchuma Vayeshev 3 on the words “and Joseph had been brought down to Egypt,” which relates a story involving Antoninus, governor of Palestine under the Romans around 200 A.D. When said governor arrived in Caesaria he summoned Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi. The latter took with him his son Rabbi Shimon as well as the great Rabbi Chiya (his nephew). When they arrived there Rabbi Shimon saw an exceptionally tall and handsome Roman soldier and he commented to Rabbi Chiyah on the remarkable physical prowess of the descendants of Esau (referring to them as “the fatted calves”). Thereupon Rabbi Chiyah took Rabbi Shimon to the market-place and showed him gorgeous figs and grapes all of which were infested with flies, etc. Rabbi Chiyah asked Rabbi Shimon to tell him whether he considered these flies as superior to the Roman soldiers who were so impressive in their outward appearance. When Rabbi Shimon returned to his father, he related to him his conversation with Rabbi Chiyah concerning the relative importance of the Roman legionnaires and the flies. Thereupon Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi said to his son: “the Babylonian (Rabbi Chiyah) said something of substance when he compared the legionnaires to the flies. The legionnaires of the Roman Emperor are worth nothing whereas the flies are creatures of the Lord, are like soldiers of the Lord performing tasks assigned to them by their Creator.” This is the meaning of Isaiah 7,18: “On that day the Lord shall whistle to the flies at the end of the water channels of Egypt and to the bees in the land of Assyria; and they shall all come and alight in the rugged wadis.” It is also written in Exodus 23,28: “and I shall dispatch the hornet ahead of you.” During the plagues of insects and frogs these creatures were also commanded by G’d to carry out His directives. You should remember that at the time when G’d wanted to enact the decree of Genesis 15,13 where He told Avram: “you shall surely know that your descendants will be strangers in a land which is not theirs,” that He used the most insignificant little creatures to do His bidding. When Joseph was sold and brought down to Egypt to be followed by his brothers and his father, the IOU described in Genesis 15,13 began to be paid. This is why Joseph’s descent is described in such terms as “he was brought down.” 
    
    39,3. כי ה' אתו, “for G’d was with him.” Actually, the Torah should have written כי אלוקים אתו, “for G’d (in His capacity as the Force who established an orderly universe) was with him.” However, seeing that Joseph’s master was an Egyptian and did not know of a G’d in heaven known as Hashem, his master would have attributed the extraordinary success of Joseph to a superior form of sorcery and magic. After all, Egypt was the epitome of these magic arts, the Egyptians had written the textbook for them. Potiphar eventually became aware that Joseph’s success could not be due to such magic so that he came to realise a new dimension of the G’d in heaven, one that overrides the attribute Elohim. This is why the Torah described G’d’s assistance to Joseph in terms of the supernatural rather than in terms of the natural. According to Bereshit Rabbah 86,5 G’d even let Potiphar have a dream in which he confirmed His assistance. Some say that a pillar of cloud hovered over Joseph to show that he was under G’d’s direct guidance. Examples cited by the Midrash of Joseph’s extraordinary abilities are: when Potiphar demanded that he boil water, the water came to a boil immediately. When he commanded the water to be cooled so that it would be lukewarm, it would become lukewarm immediately. Had G’d not demonstrated His dimension as Hashem to Potiphar, he would have said: “big deal! do you Joseph want to teach us additional magic? It is like carrying coal to Newcastle.” For these reasons the Torah had to testify: וירא אדוניו כי ה' אתו, “his master realised that a special dimension of G’d was active on Joseph’s behalf.”
    
    39,4. וישרת אותו, “he became his personal valet.” He performed such tasks promptly and with extreme regard for cleanliness. 
   ויפקידהו על ביתו, “he appointed him to be in charge of his household.” He was the supervisor of the entire household. We find such a position in Kings I 18,3 when Achav appointed such a supervisor.
   וכל אשר יש לו נתן בידו, “and he entrusted all his belongings to the care of Joseph.” He appointed him as manager of the household budget. We find something similar in Isaiah 22,15: “go in to see that steward, that Shevna, in charge of the palace.” 
    
    39,5. ויברך ה' את בית המצרי בגלל יוסף, “G’d blessed the household of the Egyptian on account of Joseph. Here the Torah draws a comparison with the house of Oved Edom Hagitti whose house was host to the Holy Ark and whom G’d blessed for the sake of the Holy Ark (Samuel II 6,11). The blessing extended both to money and other objects.
   בבית, “in the house.” Both his money and his various utensils increased.
   ובשדה, “and in the field.” Potiphar’s crops, etc., all prospered unnaturally. Up until this point Joseph, though in charge, was required to present the accounts to Potiphar. From that point on he did not even have to give an accounting of his activities. It says ויעזוב את כל אשר לו  ביד יוסף, “he left everything he had in the hand (under the care) of Joseph. The Midrash Seder Olam understands the words בבית ובשדה, as meaning that during the six winter months Potiphar’s affairs prospered enormously indoors, whereas during the six summer months they prospered in the field. This tells you that the length of time Joseph spent in Potiphar’s employ was one year. Subsequently he spent twelve years in jail. He had been away from his father for thirteen years when he was called in to Pharaoh. Actually, he had been meant to spend eleven years in the service of Potiphar, corresponding to the number of eleven sheaves he had dreamt about in his first dream. Some say that these eleven years corresponded to the eleven stars in Joseph’s second dream. At any rate, he had two years added to that sentence on account of the two words והזכרתני, והוצאתני (40,14) which he said to the Chief of the butlers, asking him to intercede on his behalf. These two words were counted against Joseph just as the fact that he boasted about the dream he had dreamt.
    
    39,6. ולא ידע אתו מאומה, “and he did not share any knowledge with him,” the only matters concerning which Joseph bothered to consult his master Potiphar was the menu to be served at meal-time, as the Torah said: “except for the bread he would eat.” The word לחם also included his wife; we know that wives are sometimes referred to as לחם, from Exodus 2,2 קראן לו ויאכל לחם, “call him so that he can take a wife.” We also find the word אכל, “ate,” in that sense in Proverbs 30,2 אכלה ומחתה פיה, “she ate and wiped her mouth.” The verse speaks about the harlot indulging in her trade and acting as if she had done no wrong. We encounter the same meaning of that word again in verse nine: “except for you inasmuch as you are his wife.”
   ויהי יוסף יפה תואר ויפה מראה, “Joseph was of  handsome form and handsome appearance.” The Torah revealed the reason Potiphar’s wife was so attracted to him. (Tanchuma)
    
    39,7. ויהי אחר הדברים האלה, “it was after these events, etc.”  The Torah told us of the virtuous nature of Joseph who in spite of experiencing one promotion after another within a short space of town rejected the advances made by his master’s wife, advances which must have appeared very flattering to him. Unlike others in a similar position, Joseph did not exploit the trust of his employer by deceiving him. According to Tanchuma Vayeshev 8 as soon as Joseph had been promoted to his present high position he began to indulge in food and drink and in paying excessive attention to his outward appearance, carefully coiffing his hair, etc. He went as far as saying “thank the Lord who has made me forget my father’s house.” Upon hearing this, G’d said: “your father is in mourning for you and you live it up! Your mistress will try and seduce you and cause you distress.”
    
    39,8. וימאן, ויאמר אל אשת אדוניו הן אדוני, “he refused, -and he said to the wife of his master: ‘here my master, etc.”  At the beginning of their conversation, Joseph said to Mrs Potiphar: הן אדוני, “my master is present;” he meant: “what  do you want with me, seeng you already have a husband?” The reason that Tanchuma interprets Joseph’s words in that fashion is that the tone-sign shalshelet over the word וימאן suggests that Joseph’s refusal contained an element of something forbidden. It is not unusual for the tone-signs on the words to reveal matters not spelled out but which nevertheless we are to read between the lines. This is not unlike to what is called in English “body-language.” The manner in which a person walks, for instance, indicates whether he looks forward to his destination or whether he drags his feet because he dreads what is expected of him at the end of his walk. The Midrash felt that the tone-sign revealed that Joseph’s refusal was hesitant.
    Midrash Tanchuma Vayeshev 8 also claims that the words הן אדוני, are a reference to his father Yaakov’s features which sudddenly appeared before Joseph’s mind’s eye, reminding him what moral obligations he owed to the wishes of G’d, his “Master.” His father  phrased his admonition thus: “your brothers’ names will be engraved on the gemstones of the High Priest’s Ephod (shoulder epaulettes). Do you want to risk that your name will be omitted from that list? Do you prefer to tend to whores for the rest of your life?” 
   ותאמר שכבה עמי, “she said: lie with me!” She spoke vulgarly as do the whores, similar to what has been described in Proverbs 7,10: “and here a woman came toward him dressed in harlot’s attire and of determined heart.” Words such as reported here by the Torah are typical of an adulterous woman. When a chaste woman desires to express similar sentiments she uses refined language as did Ruth when she said to Boaz: “spread your robe over your handmaid;” (Ruth 3,9).
   ויאמר אל אשת אדוניו, “he said to the wife of his master, etc.” The Torah could have simply written: “he said to her.” However, the Torah wanted to let us know that Joseph explained to Mrs. Potiphar that seeing she was his master’s wife he was duty bound to accept instructions from her; however, in this instance his duty towards G’d took precedence over his duty to obey her commands.
    
    39.9.איך אעשה הרעה הגדולה הזאת וחטאתי לאלוקים , “and how could I commit such a great wrong and sin against the Lord?”  He explained that indulging in sex with his master’s wife would be wrong on two counts. Not only would it be an act of betrayal against his employer but it would also be a grievous offense against G’d. This is similar to the wording used by the High Priest Eli when he rebuked his sons in Samuel I 2,25: “If a man sins against a man, the Lord may pardon him [after he has served the penalty decreed by a human tribunal, Ed.]; but if a man sins against G’d who can obtain pardon for him?“
    
    39,10. ולא שמע אליה לשכב אצלה, “and he did not listen to her request even to (merely) lie beside her.” The plain meaning of the text is that Joseph refused to have any bodily contact with Mrs. Potiphar even if it did not involve intercourse itself. 
   להיות עמו, “to be intimate with her.” To have sexual intercourse. We have found elsewhere in the Bible that the word להיות may mean sexual intercourse, such as in Ruth 1,12 where Naomi speaks about “being in the company of a man,” i.e. to have intimate relations with him which would result in her becoming pregnant.” The Hebrew word used there for having sexual relations is  גם הייתי הלילה לאיש.
    A Midrashic approach to this verse is found in Tanchuma Vayeshev 8. She said to him: “why do you not listen to me? No one is going to see us.” He replied to her: “we have been forbidden to have sexual relations with you people even when you are not married, how much more so are we forbidden to have such relations with you once you are married to someone?” The best way to illustrate this argument is by means of a parable. A Gentile approached a Jew telling him that he had some delectable dish which he wanted him to taste. When the Jew inquired what precisely this dish consisted of, the Gentile told him that it was the meat from a pig. The Jew replied: “you must really be very foolish. You know that if one of you slaughters an animal we are only not allowed to eat it because it has not been slaughtered by a Jew, how could you imagine that I would eat meat from an animal which I may not eat even if a Jew had slaughtered it?”
    The words ולא שמע אליה לשכב אצלה, להיות עמה, which appear repetitive, are viewed by the Midrash as referring to life in the present world, and as a result of committing the former sin, life in the hereafter, i.e. in Gehinom, (hell).
    We are told in that same Midrash that there are three categories of people who may be trusted implicitly: 1) A private householder who sets aside his tithes conscientiously. Such a person is not suspected of shortchanging the Priest by withholding his Terumah (a form of tithe given to the Priests). There is no greater demonstration of a person’s trustworthiness than that we believe him  in other matters based on his observing commandments whose performance cannot be checked. Such people enjoy the greatest trust by their peers. 2) Next lower on the rungs of the ladder of trustworthiness is a bachelor who resides in a quarter inhabited by harlots and does not succumb to the temptation which surrounds him. 3) A poor man who has been entrusted with the safekeeping of valuables for others and has demonstrated that he has kept faith with those who gave him the objects to be kept for them. 
    Joseph excelled them all while he was in Egypt, a country of which the prophet (Ezekiel 23,20) writes that “the flesh of the people there could be compared to the flesh of donkeys.” Seeing that Joseph  was seventeen years old at the time he was sold to Egypt, and was subjected daily to sexual temptation by his master’s wife without yielding to such alluring prospects, this meant that henceforth he could never be suspected of any sexual misdemeanour.
    We are told in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 39 that there were three prominent people who demonstrated control over their sexual urges when faced with temptation which was hard to resist. They are Joseph, Boaz, and Palti ben Layish. Our sages in Sanhedrin 19 contrast the active libido of Joseph, a teenager, with the relatively dormant one of Boaz, an aged man. They say that whereas Joseph’s feat was indeed major, by comparison to Boaz’s constraint, it was still only a modest accomplishment. Whereas the temptation Joseph faced was by day, the temptation Boaz faced when Ruth came to him in the barn was at night. Joseph might have been afraid of being observed, a possible consideration enabling him to withstand the urgings of Mrs. Potiphar. Similarly what was  considered an act of great restraint by Boaz paled into insignificance when compared to the restraint Palti ben Layish imposed upon himself. (He had been given Michal (David’s wife) as a legal wife (Samuel I 25,44) by King Saul, and could have claimed her, but did not ever touch her or even share the same house with her. Palti had been aware that a marriage ceremony is invalid when the woman in question is still the wife of another man (David, who had not divorced Michal). King Saul had forced his daughter into marrying Palti. Seeing Palti was afraid of King Saul, he pretended to accept Michal as his wife although he had no intention of sleeping with her. In fact, after Saul’s death (Samuel II 3,14) David sent word to Ish Boshet, Saul’s son, demanding that his wife Michal be restored to him. Ish Boshet agreed, and a weeping Palti accompanied her up to a place called Bachurim. He wept because he was afraid David would not believe that he had not touched Michal. [At any rate, the thrust of the story in the Talmud is that every feat of sexual restraint must be evaluated on its own. There are features in each of these stories which made the deed especially great; on the other hand each of these situations also contained features which helped the person subject to the temptation to successfully resist it. Ed]
    
    39,12. ויעזוב בגדו אצלה, “he left his garment with her.”  This is another example of Joseph’s chastity; he did not want to struggle for his garment with her and thereby involve himself in physical contact with her. He respected her dignity in not demonstrating his superior male power.
   וינס החוצה, “he fled outside.” He left the house in order that she should give up hope to entrap him, so that she would cease her efforts in this regard. Or, he fled outside in order to regain his emotional equilibrium. He had been aroused by the encounter with Mrs. Potiphar.
    According to a Midrash the meaning of the words וינס, ויצא החוצה, is G’d said to him: ”today you fled, there will come a day when the sea will flee before your coffin.” This is the meaning of Exodus Psalms 114,3 “the sea saw (it) and fled.” What did the sea see? It saw the coffin containing the body of Joseph.
    
    39,14.ראו! הביא לנו איש עברי!  “see here! he has brought to us a Hebrew man to make sport with us.” Mrs. Potiphar did not name the subject of “he brought,” i.e. her husband. The reason she did not mention her husband by name is related to a feminine tactic not to directly embarrass their husbands. The reason she described Joseph as איש עברי, “a Hebrew man,” was because both Joseph and his forefathers were considered as “newcomers,” even in the land of Canaan seeing they had immigrated from beyond the river Euphrates.
   לצחק בנו, “to make sport with us.” The term is one used for sexual license such as in Proverbs 10,23: “just as to a fool carnality is like a sport, etc.” 
   בא אלי לשכב עמי, “he came to me in order to have sexual intercourse with me.” She inflated her ego, claiming that Joseph had initiated the request to have sex with her, whereas she had initiated the request to be intimate with Joseph. According to Midrash Tanchuma Vayeshev 6, the above words are an illustration of why Solomon warned in Kohelet 7,26: “and I have discovered that a woman whose heart is snares and nets is worse than death.” Rabbi Yehudah son of Shalom added: “there is no worse cause of sin than woman; whereas we find that three thousand Jewish males were slain for having worshipped the golden calf, (Exodus 32,28), twenty-four thousand Jewish males were killed due to the seduction by the Mobaite and Midianite women reported in Numbers 28,9”. What is the meaning of the words אסורים ידיה  “her hands are tied?” If G’d had not tied woman’s hands she would accost man in the marketplace demanding that he have carnal relations with her. Kohelet continues by saying that “he who is pleasing to G’d will escape the machinations of such a woman whereas the sinner will be trapped by her.” The “man pleasing to G’d” is a reference to Joseph who escaped the wife of Potiphar, where the “sinner” is a reference to Zimri, prince of the tribe of Shimon, who slept with Cosbi the Midianite during the encounter described in Numbers.
     When G’d created Chavah, (first woman) He had said to Himself: “which part of Adam shall I use to make into woman? If I use the head she will be of haughty  spirit. If I use Adam’s eyes as raw material she will possess insatiable curiosity. If I create her from part of Adam’s mouth she will babble interminably. If I construct her out of part of Adam’s ear, she will turn out to be extremely inquisitive. If I create her out of Adam’s hands, she may turn out to be a thief, whereas if I construct her from part of Adam’s legs, she will constantly roam outside her house. What did G’d do? He formed Chavah from  the rib, a place well hidden from Adam’s exterior so that she would be chaste and remain primarily indoors. In spite of the fact that G’d took care not to construct Chavah from one of the organs which would made her prone to the afore-mentioned character weaknesses, we find that she possessed these weaknesses after all. She is described as haughty in Isaiah 3 16, “because the daughters of Zion are so vain and walk with their heads thrown back, with roving eyes, and with mincing gait, etc.” Although G’d did not use part of Adam’s eyes as raw material from which to form Chavah we still find that she was insatiably curious as the prophet records her as possessing “roving eyes.” We also find that the Torah writes (Genesis 3,6) “the woman saw that the tree was good to eat  and alluring for the eyes.” Even though G’d did not utilise any  of Adam’s hands to create woman she still became a thief as the Torah writes (Genesis 30,15) “Rachel stole the teraphim.” Even though G’d did not use any part of Adam’s ears in order to make Chavah, she became unduly curious as we know from Sarah who is reported as listening to the conversation between Avraham and the angels “at the entrance to the tent” in Genesis 18,10. Even though G’d also did not use any part of Adam’s legs or feet to make Chavah, she still developed the tendency to roam outside her home as we know from Dinah, the daughter of Yaakov and Leah of whom the Torah reports that “she went out to look around amongst the girls of the country”’ (Genesis 34,1). Dinah’s mother Leah has also been described as leaving her home needlessly when the Torah  writes (Genesis 30,15) “Leah went out, etc.” We know that Leah was babbling when the Torah describes her as accusing her sister Rachel of taking her husband away from her  (Genesis 30,15), an accusation which was quite unwarranted. All this happened although G’d had not made Chavah from any part of Adam’s mouth.
    
    
    39,20. ויתנהו אל בית הסוהר, “and he put him in jail.” This is a kind of underground prison, a dungeon, a place where the mentally ill are kept nowadays (author’s time). These prisons have a small hole on top through which the prisoners are brought in and a little daylight is seen. The expression  סוהר is similar to the word צוהר, which is used in Genesis 6,15 to describe the source of light in Noah’s ark. The exchange of the letters ס and צ respectively is not unique. The Torah next mentions that this was an extraordinary dungeon, reserved for the King’s highly placed servants if they had incurred his displeasure. This is why the Torah writes: “the place where the king’s prisoners would be kept locked up.” There were two jails within the same compound, the one reserved for the king’s prisoners being the “deluxe” accommodation. The main distinction between the two appears to have been the amount of daylight the prisoners enjoyed. The reason the Torah adds: “he (Joseph) remained there in the jail,” is in order to place these words next to the words ויהי ה' את יוסף, “G’d remained at Joseph’s side.” This teaches that even within the prison G’d’s שכינה, benevolent presence, remained with Joseph.(based on Mechilta Bo, 14).
    It is quite possible that these words were meant to allude to happenings in the future, and that the oppression which Joseph underwent in that dungeon foreshadowed the exile of the Jewish people which has also been compared to a בור, a pit, a dungeon. This may have been the origin of the prayer in which we ask יעלה ויבא, “may He arise and arrive,” a request voiced in our prayers on days when we are especially conscious of the absence of the Temple service and the benefits it had conferred upon the Jewish people. It is a reference to the ascent of the Shechinah. Anyone who finds himself imprisoned in a dungeon needs to literally “arise” in order to get out of there. Just as the Shechinah did not forsake Joseph when he was in jail, so the Shechinah will not forsake the Jewish people just because they are in exile. Just as the Torah wrote concerning Joseph (Psalms 105,18)  ברזל באה נפשו, “an iron collar was placed around his neck,” it is also written concerning Israel in exile (Psalms 107,10) יושבי חשך וצלמות אסירי עני וברזל, “some lived in deepest darkness, bound in cruel irons.” Just as we read concerning Joseph ויט אליו חסד, “He endowed him with  kindness,” (verse 21) so we find concerning Israel in exile that the prophet says (Isaiah 54,10) וחסדי מאתך לא ימוש, “but My kindness will not depart from you.” Concerning Joseph the Torah writes (21)  ויתן חנו בעיני שר בית הסוהר, “He put his favour in the eyes of the prison warden.” We find a corresponding statement in connection with Israel in exile when the psalmist writes (Psalms 106,46) ויתן אותם לרחמים לפני כל שוביהם, “He made all their captors kindly disposed toward them.” Just as Joseph eventually was released from prison and rose to unprecedented power and prominence, so the Jewish  people will be redeemed from their exile as is written in Daniel 12,4 “as for you Daniel, obscure the matters and close the book and seal it until the time of the end; let many muse and let knowledge increase.”
    
    40,1. ויהי אחר הדברים האלה, “it was after these events, (words), etc.” After the cursed woman had caused the subject of Joseph and his supposed misdemeanours to become the talk of the town, G’d wanted that subject to take a back seat. He therefore contrived to have the Chief of the butlers and the Chief of the bakers put in jail so that their fate would become the talk of the town, and in order that both these prisoners would have to turn to Joseph whose esteem in the eyes of his contemporaries would rise as a result of his ability to interpret the dreams  of these two prisoners correctly.
   חטאו שר המשקה  מלך מצרים והאופה, “The chief butler of the king of Egypt and the baker sinned.” The Torah does not specify their sins, but our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 88,2 state that the Chief butler was guilty of allowing a fly to fall into the cup of Pharaoh, whereas the baker was guilty of a pebble which was found inside one of the rolls served to Pharaoh This is why Pharaoh was angry at both of them. The pebble in the roll was a clear case of negligence on the part of the baker, and this is why he was hanged. The fly which fell into the cup could not be accounted as negligence on the part of the butler as it fell into the cup after the butler had mixed the wine. It was an accident.
   לאדוניהם למך מצרים, “against their master, the King of Egypt.” Actually, the Torah should have added the word לפרעה, before the words למלך מצרים. In the next verse the Torah mentions Pharaoh as being angry without saying that “Pharaoh” and the “King of Egypt” were one and the same person. We may explain this apparent inconsistency in the syntax of the Torah  as the Torah giving us a hint of what would be in store for the King of Egypt at the hands of the Israelites at a future time. This is why the Torah made a distinction between the Kingdom of Egypt as such and between the person of Pharaoh as an individual in his own right. You will find that the Torah makes a similar distinction at the time the Israelites were engaged in crossing the sea of reeds with Pharaoh in hot pursuit. In Exodus 14,5 the Torah writes ויגד למלך מצרים כי ברח העם ויהפך לבב פרעה, “the King of Egypt was told that the people had fled, and Pharaoh’s heart was completely changed, etc.,” whereas the Torah should  have  written ויגד לפרעה מלך מצרים, “Pharaoh the King of Egypt was told, etc.”  The reason the Torah separated these two “titles,” was to hint that the individual Pharaoh would be deprived of his title “King of Egypt” at a future time. On the other hand, when the Torah describes Pharaoh’s obstinacy such as in Exodus 14,8 we read ויחזק ה' את לב פרעה מלך מצרים, “G’d strengthened the heart of Pharaoh the King of Egypt.” At that point in time, the Torah was intent on demonstrating that Pharaoh, though himself a powerful man as well as in charge of a powerful country, Egypt, was no match for G’d who proved that He was many times more powerful than the combined might of both Pharaoh and the Egyptian Empire. Solomon alluded to this in Proverbs 21,1 פלגי-מים לב מלך ביד ה', “the king’s heart is in the Lord’s hands like channels of water.” [According to Rabbi Moshe Alshich, kings do not enjoy the freedom of choice enjoyed by private citizens as they are G’d’s representatives on earth, not unlike angels who do not enjoy any freedom of choice for that very reason. Hence the words פלגי מים are a reference to “channels” within which water run; the waters must not leave the channels assigned to them. Ed.]
    
    40,2.  ויקצוף פרעה על שני סריסיו, “Pharaoh was angry at his two courtiers.” G’d contrived to make Pharaoh angry at his servants in order to rescue the righteous Joseph from the dungeon. We see that history repeated itself in Shushan when G’d contrived to make Achashverosh angry at Haman in order to save Mordechai and the Jewish people. (Bereshit Rabbah 88,2) [I suppose the point of the Midrash is the superfluous word שני, “two,” before the word סריסיו. Ed.] 
    
    40,3. מקום אשר יוסף אסור שם, “the place where Joseph was kept imprisoned.” All of these “coincidences” were designed to bring about the descent to Egypt by Yaakov and his family in accordance with the prediction in Genesis 15,13 “for your descendant will be a stranger, etc.” [without overt interference with the free choice of either party. Ed.]
    
    40,4. ויהיו ימים במשמר, ”they remained in custody for a year.” The word ימים meaning “year” appears in Leviticus 25,29 “its period of redemption is a full year.”
    
    40,7. וישאל את סריסי פרעה אשר אתו במשמר בית אדוניו לאמר, He asked the courtiers of Pharaoh who were with him in the custody of the house of  his master to tell, etc.” What was the need for the Torah to write this cumbersome introduction?  Did we not know that these courtiers were in jail together with Joseph? All the Torah had to write was that Joseph asked the courtiers why they were so glum. It is possible to understand the wording of the Torah here in light of what had been written before in verse four that Joseph was with these courtiers in the same jail and that he who was in jail with them performed personal valet service for them; these services were rendered to these prisoners only because they were of such an elevated stature. Now that the boot was on the other foot, the Torah wanted to mention that they were with him, i.e. that they depended upon him to enlighten them. The Torah wrote: “the courtiers of Pharaoh who were with him,” to draw our attention to the fact that they were now secondary to Joseph instead of Joseph being secondary to them.
    Furthermore, the Torah wanted to explain why Joseph had the audacity to mix into the private affairs of such highly placed personages as the Chief of the butlers, etc. The Torah illustrates the point that when lowly prisoners, slaves, foreigners such as Joseph and highly placed personages such as these two courtiers find themselves in similar circumstances, i.e. in a dungeon, considerations such as their former status vanish and there is established a form of equality based on a common fate. This is what gave Joseph the courage to comment on the glum expressions of the Chief of the butlers and the Chief of the bakers. Joseph was concerned with their well-being although they were wicked people serving a wicked King.
    
    40,8. הלא לאלו-הים פתרונים, ”are not the interpretations a matter for G’d?”  Joseph meant that future events foreshadowed by dreams are something known only to G’d who is the One who sends the dream to the person whom He wants to warn through a dream. He is the only One who can reveal the future, make peace and initiate evil (Isaiah 45,7). Joseph wanted to reassure the two courtiers that they would neither profit nor suffer any harm by revealing their dreams to him, seeing it was G’d who would determine their future.
    
    40,9. בחלומי, והנה גפן לפני , “in my dream- behold there was a grapevine in front of me.” It behooves a person to be extremely careful when he begins to relate a dream he has dreamt. You note that the Chief of the butlers prefaced telling his dream with the words: “in my dream.” The word בחלומי is an expression of “recovering from a sickness and an expression denoting good health.” The expression is related to Isaiah 38,16  ותחלימני והחייני, “You have restored me to health and You have revived me.” Following the opening remark of the butler it is not surprising that he was saved from the dungeon and restored to his position. The Chief of the bakers made the mistake of  saying אף, before commencing to relate his dream. The word אף, of course, refers to anger. As a result  he was sentenced to death and was hanged. Bereshit Rabbah 88,5 writes that “four people began their comments with the word אף, and all of them perished. They were: the original serpent, the Chief of the bakers, the congregation of Korach, and Haman.” We have mentioned this already in connection with our commentary on Genesis 3,1 on the words אף כי אמר אלו-הים. 
    
    40,10. ובגפן שלשה שריגים, “and there were three tendrils on the grapevine.” The expression שריגים is equivalent to the word זמורות. We find it again in Joel 1,7 הלבינו שריגיה, “their tendrils turned white.”
   והיא כפורחת, “and it appeared as if it was blossoming.” The meaning is that as soon as it budded its blossoms opened up. This is equivalent to the expression סמדר, compare Song of Songs 7,13. He noticed that the clusters had immediately ripened into grapes. The thrust of the images in the dream was that G’d would hasten to bring about whatever the dream presaged. He pressed the juice of the grapes, extracted the wine and placed it in the cup of Pharaoh. Seeing that the butler had observed in his dream a whole sequence of natural developments condensed into a very small time frame, Joseph was astute enough to realise that the number three referred to three days within which the fate of the butler would change. This is why he did not suggest that it referred to three weeks or three months or even three years. 
    The word שריגים is also one which occurs in Mishnaic Hebrew  meaning שרגא,”light.” Similarly, the words שלשה סלי חורי, “three wicker baskets” mentioned as a feature in the baker’s dream   also refer to a time frame of three days even though according to  the plain meaning of the text the word חורי is similar to חררה, a large griddle cake, something which might have prompted Joseph to think in terms of a longer time frame such as three months or three years. The word חורי, also means “whitish,” i.e. that the baker saw in his dream three large white breads in the baskets.  We have a verse in Exodus 33,23 וראית את אחורי, normally translated as G’d saying to Moses: “you will see My rear,’” which (according to the Zohar?) may mean that G’d would appear to Moses in a very bright light, almost white. The word חורי then is related to אור. We find it in this sense in Nechemyah 5,7 את החורים ואת הסגנים. Nechemyah appears  to compare prominent, important people, to light. The insignificant people who have nothing distinguished about them are compared to darkness. 
    Moreover, the numerical value of the words שלשת הסלים is equivalent to שלשת ימים הם, “they represent three days.” (1175 each).  Another reason that may account for Joseph interpreting both the three tendrils and the three baskets of white bread as signifying three days rather than three months or three years, is  that he considered that the three  grapevines and tendrils were equal to one another as were the three baskets. Three months or three years are never of identical length each. Only three days may be described as three units of time which are practically identical one to another. Hence Joseph concluded that the time frame to which the dream referred had to be days.
    A Midrashic approach based on Chulin 92. The word גפן, grapevine is a reference to the people of Israel, Psalms 80,9  mentions גפן ממצרים תסיע, “You (G’d) have picked up a vine from Egypt,” an obvious reference to the Jewish people. The שלשת שריגים are a reference to the three festivals a year during which the Jewish people make their pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem. The words והיא כפורחת, refer to the time when  it is the turn to the Jewish people to blossom and spread out in all directions as do the buds which break out in blossoms. We find references to such development by the Jewish people in Exodus 1,6: “and the children of Israel were fruitful and there were swarms of them.” This means that the nation budded, broke out in blossoms. Isaiah, speaking about the time of redemption, says (Isaiah 63,3) “their life-blood (נצחם=wine) bespattered My garments.”  This is a prologue to G’d redeeming Israel. The words הבשילו אשכלותיה ענבים, “its clusters of grapes were ripe,” mean that the time is ripe for Israel’s redemption, i.e. for Egypt to drink the cup of retribution. The word כוס, cup, occurs four times in this brief passage and refers to the four exiles Israel would experience. The fact that our enemies will have to drink four cups of retribution is alluded to in four separate verses in the Books of the Prophets and in the Hagiography. Compare: Jeremiah 25,15; Jeremiah 51,7; Psalms 75,9; Psalms 11,6. The Talmud in Chulin 92 also explains the verse ובגפן שלשב שריגים, saying that it refers to three miracles the Israelites experienced in the desert, the traveling well of water, the manna, and the protective shield (cloud) of G’d which enveloped the whole camp of the Israelites. The words והיא כפורחת עלתה נצה are understood by the Talmud there as a reference to the first ripe fruit offered to G’d by the Israelites whereas the words הבשילו אשכלותיה are understood as an allusion to the drink-offerings (of wine) presented on the altar with most sacrifices.
    
    40,14.כי אם זכרתני אתך , “if only you would remember me with you, etc.” Joseph made two requests of the Chief of the butlers. 1) That he personally should remember who had foretold him his good fortune. 2) He should bring Joseph’s plight to the attention of Pharaoh. It is because of these two separate requests that the Torah reported at the very end of our Parshah that 1) the Chief of the butlers did “not remember Joseph”, and 2) that “he forgot him (mentioning him to Pharaoh).”
    We must not commit the error of believing that Joseph placed his faith in the Chief of the butlers. He most certainly placed his faith exclusively in G’d. He only thought that G’d might employ the Chief of the butlers as a tool to bring about his release from the dungeon. He had some reason to believe this seeing that the dream the Chief of the butler had dreamt in jail in which Joseph was imprisoned appeared to him as part of a miraculous chain of circumstances.
    How do we reconcile this with the comment of Bereshit Rabbah 89,3 that Joseph had two years added to the time he had to stay in jail because he said the above-cited two words to the Chief of the butlers (as we pointed out in our commentary on 39,5) that he was punished for pleading with the Chief of the butlers to become the instrument of orchestrating his release? It was not fitting for someone of Joseph’s calibre to be on the lookout for  an instrument that G’d should appoint  to bring about  changes in his fate. He should have been content to trust that G’d would be able to find such opportunities when He deemed the time right for this. G’d does not need Joseph or anyone else to prompt Him in such matters. Joseph’s conduct was accounted a sin only because he was on such a high moral level, and G’d is especially strict in His dealings with people who have attained such a level (Baba Kama 50). To illustrate how someone else behaved in similar circumstances, compare the situation of the prophet Elijah in Kings I 17,6. The prophet was hiding in an inhospitable part of the country and had no access to food. He was told by G’d to drink from the waters of the river Krit (there could not have been much water due to the drought) and G’d told him that He would summon the raven to bring him food. He followed G’d’s instructions. The instrument of keeping him alive, i.e. providing him with food, was the raven. It is also possible that the food the ravens brought Elijah came from the palace of Yehoshaphat, King of Yehudah (compare Vayikra Rabbah 19). In either event the provision G’d made for Elijah was of a miraculous nature. Elijah did not involve himself in bringing about means of sustaining himself in a natural way. At any rate, Joseph did not think of the butler as the source of his release from jail but as an instrument to be used by G’d to that end. He should not even have done this and this is why he was punished.
    
    40,20. יום הולדת את פרעה, “Pharaoh’s’ birthday.” On that day a son was born for the king who was also named Pharaoh. It was a custom to make a feast on the anniversary of one’s birth.
   וישא את ראש שר המשקים ואת ראש שר האופים בתוך עבדיו, “and he counted the Chief of the butlers and the Chief of the bakers amongst his servants.” The Torah enumerates the names of these two courtiers as amongst the servants of the King. The expression וישא is related to the expression כי תשא in Exodus 30,12 where it means “you will count.” Seeing that the Torah mentions these courtiers as included in the courtiers of Pharaoh, the Torah wanted to inform us about their respective fates  telling us that Pharaoh took the opportunity of that feast to publicise the final disposition of the cases which had been pending against both the Chief of the butlers and the Chief of the bakers. The former was acquitted and restored to his position whereas the latter was found guilty and hung. This apparently historically insignificant event contains an important lesson for all of us. It teaches that man must constantly be alert to the fact that all his activities are apt to be judged in light of the system of reward and punishment which the fate of mankind both collectively and individually is based on, and that everyone will have to render an account of his activities as well as of the omissions he has been guilty of before the One Who created this universe. The thrust of this paragraph is to tell us that it is proper to seek out the goodwill of the ruler and to be careful not to incur his wrath. This is also why Solomon warns in Proverbs 16,14 חמת מלך מלאכי מותת,  “the king’s wrath is a messenger of death,” and in 19,12 he says נהם ככפיר זעף מלך וכטל על עשב רצונו, “the rage of a king is like the roaring of a lion; but his favour like dew on the grass.” We also find a verse in Proverbs 16,15 באור פני מלך חיים ורצונו כעב מלקוש, “in the light of the king’s face there is life; his favour is like a cloud in the spring rain.” Solomon compared the king’s goodwill to the dew which is so essential in making things grow, whereas anger and wrath are harbingers of destruction. In all his comments Solomon wants us to apply the logic that if falling out of favour of a terrestrial king is a disater of no small dimensions, how much more must we be on our guard so that we will not fall out of favour in the eyes of the Lord our G’d. This is why good sense alone should suffice to cause us to conduct ourselves in a manner which is bound to please the Lord. The prophet Amos ( 3,8) phrases it thus: “when the lion roars, who will not become afraid?” On the other hand, Hoseah 14,6 assures us that “ I will be like dew for Israel, it will blossom forth like a lily and strike roots like (the poplar in) Lebanon.”
    
    
    
    
   ויהי מקץ
    
    
    
   בטח אל ה' בכל לבך ואל בינתך אל תשען, “Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not rely on your own insights” (Proverbs 3,5). In this verse King Solomon warns regarding the importance of displaying faith in the Lord. The reason Solomon does so is because faith in the Lord is such a central pillar of Torah and the observance of G’d’s commandments. Solomon means that if a person has been endowed by G’d with intelligence, wealth, physical strength and all the other attributes which are observed amongst successful people, he should not put his trust in any of these attributes. He should put his trust exclusively in G’d. This is what the prophet taught us in Isaiah 44,25 when he said: משיב חכמים אחור ודעתם יסכל, “who turns sages back, and makes nonsense of their knowledge.” All of man’s machinations, his planning, even his deeds amount to nothing unless G’d decrees that they should succeed. If man amassed a great deal of wealth he has no reason to be smug about it and to attribute it to his sagacity. This is precisely what Solomon said in Kohelet 9,11: “the race is not won by the swift, nor the battle by the strong, nor does bread come to the wise, riches to the intelligent, nor favour to the learned; but time and death will happen to them all.” He also said  in Proverbs 16,1: “A man may plan with his heart; but the answer of the tongue comes from the Lord.” If even his speech is not (entirely) under his control, how much less can he be in control of matters involving external factors? He therefore has no reason to place his trust in his own insights and other attributes. He must not rely on the efficacy of his diligence, etc., but only on G’d. This is what David meant when he said in Psalms 62,6: “Truly my soul waits quietly for G’d; my deliverance comes from Him.” David contrasted G’d’s input in whatever success he experienced with that of his own effort.
    It is a well known fact (based on the wording in Chovat Halevavot by Bachyah ibn Joseph Pekudah) that man’s confidence is subject to eight stages of developments. At birth, he places all his trust into the breast of his mother who supplies his nourishment. This corresponds to Psalms 22,10 “You have made me secure at my mother’s breast.”  As he grows a little older he still relies on his mother to feed him only food which is wholesome, tasty,  and nutritious. Concerning this stage in man’s development  the psalmist says (Psalms 131,2) “but I have taught myself to be contented like a weaned child with its mother.” What David meant was that his trust in G’d could now be compared to the trust he displayed in his mother during the early years of his childhood. A third stage in man developing reliance on an outside force occurs when he learns to trust his father. The fourth stage is reached when he begins to become self-reliant, trusting his body and his mind, learning how to fend for himself and to earn his livelihood. At that stage in his development he relies less and less on his father. and he relies instead on his own machinations. As a fifth stage in his developing maturity he begins to rely on G’d and to and put his faith in Him. He develops this faith in G’d as a result of having experienced that his own machinations are not as reliable as he had thought. By that time in his life he has learned the shortcomings inherent in all creatures and the fact that they cannot be relied on. At that point in his life he learns that trusting in himself is a form of vanity. He will realise that -to quote only one single example- all his efforts as a farmer are doomed unless rain materialises at the proper time, a factor which is controlled exclusively by G’d. This teaches him dependence on G’d’s goodwill. If he is a mariner, he learns that he who controls the winds controls his fate. The sixth stage in man’s developing maturity is reached when he realises that he is dependent on G’d even in matters not involving external forces such as rain or wind, etc., i.e. when man learns that he overestimated the assessment of his capabilities. He may realise that whereas his own faculties enabled him to wrest a meagre livelihood from the earth thanks to backbreaking labour, he is in need of G’d’s help in order to secure a better and less physically exhausting kind of livelihood. The seventh stage of his progressively better appreciation of G’d’s role in his survival and success is reached when he realises that G’d has a part to play in all his activities. The eighth and final stage in his development is reached when he realises that only G’d’s input determines his success or failure. He must learn to be happy with whatever G’d has decided should be his fate. He must give G’d credit for his health-or otherwise; he must give G’d all the credit for his wealth- or otherwise. He must appreciate that if G’d saw fit to subject him to trials and tribulations in his life on earth, that G’d had a benevolent purpose in all this, that He has his best interests at heart. G’d is equally active in protecting someone’s freedom or keeping him in jail. Seeing that G’d’s superior wisdom decrees if man is to undergo afflictions of one sort or another, it behooves man to accept such afflictions willingly. He is not to look for “natural” ways to escape such predicaments. If he does so, this demonstrates that his faith in G’d is not absolute but that part of his being is still convinced that he can escape what is decreed for him.
    It appears to me that when we keep in mind these comments of the author of חובת הלבבות, we can better appreciate why Solomon wrote in Proverbs 3,5: בטח אל ה' בכל לבך, “trust towards G’d with all your heart,” instead of writing בטח בה' בכל לבך, “trust in G’d with all your heart.” He wanted to alert us that a person who truly puts his faith in G’d is someone whose thoughts are oriented only towards G’d. Another example of such a construction is found in Psalms 25,15 עיני תמיד אל ה', “my eyes are ever toward G’d.” We have already mentioned that Elijah was a prime example of someone who did not try and survive by looking for logical means to do so, but that he took refuge in a place where there was no possible chance to find food and that he relied on G’d to provide it for him in His own way. This is the highest level of trust in G’d.  By asking the Chief of the butlers to intercede on his behalf, righteous Joseph demonstrated that he had not attained the level of trust in G’d which an Elijah demonstrated in his life. As a result Joseph was punished by having to stay in jail two years longer than had been decreed originally.
    
    41,1. ויהי מקץ שנתים ימים פרעה חולם והנה עומד על-היאור, “It was at the end of two years and Pharaoh was dreaming that he was standing above the river (Nile).” The words שנתים ימים mean two years (not two days). These years were counted from the time Joseph interpreted the dreams of Pharaoh’s two courtiers who were imprisoned with him. On this occasion Pharaoh had a dream. Our sages said that Joseph’s stay in jail had been extended as we mentioned in our commentary on 39,5. This was due to the two words והזכרתני והוצאתני which Joseph permitted himself to say to the Chief of the butlers. We pointed out that these words did not mean that he did not trust in G’d but that he wanted to exploit his relationship to the Chief of the butlers to make him the instrument of G’d for his freedom.
    Seeing that the Torah speaks of שנתים, “two years,” what was the need to add the words ימים, “days?” When the Torah wanted to tell us that there had been two years of famine it wrote כי זה שנתים הרעב, “for these last two years which have been famine,” (Genesis 45,6), it did not bother to add the words ימים. The point the Torah wanted us to know here by adding the word ימים is that it was precisely two years to the day after Joseph had interpreted the dreams in jail that Pharaoh dreamt his dream of the cows and the ears of corn.
    According to a Midrashic approach in Tanchuma Miketz 1 the wording of the Torah here may teach us the following: The words מקץ שנתים ימים are a reminder of Job 28,3: “He sets bounds for darkness, to every limit man probes, to rocks in deepest darkness.” Everything G’d decrees is finite, has a limit. Even the rains emerge after a time-frame has been assigned for them. G’d determines the time frame and the quantity for rain on earth at the beginning of the year. If the Jewish people keep G’d’s laws these rains descend to make the plantings of the Jewish farmer grow by descending upon these fields and orchards in the appropriate quantities at the appropriate time of year. If the Jewish people fail to observe G’d’s commandments, He does not withhold such rains; rather such rains will descend in areas and at times when they do not fulfill the purpose of making the Jewish farmer bring in a good harvest. This is what was implied in the verse in Job 28,3  which we have quoted., i.e. that G’d had set a time limit to the “darkness” the Jewish people experienced when enslaved in Egypt. This is why the Torah in Exodus 12,41 spoke of  a קץ, “an end” when it reported ויהי מקץ שלשים שנה וארבע מאות שנה, ויהי בעצם היום הזה יצאו כל צבאות ה' מארץ מצרים, “it was at the end of 430 years, on exactly that day that all the hosts of G’d departed from Egypt.” Just as the day of the departure of the Jewish people had been predetermined by G’d, so Joseph’s release from prison had been predetermined by G’d.
    The Torah writes ופרעה חולם, “and Pharaoh was dreaming,” instead of writing ופרעה מלך מצרים חולם, “and Pharaoh the King of Egypt was dreaming.” This was an allusion to the future, i.e. that  the King of Egypt would be brought down by water, that his fate would be linked to the river Nile. This river was to be the beginning of the ultimate demise of the Egyptian Empire as the foremost Empire of its period at the time of the Exodus of the Israelites. This is the reason why throughout this Parshah Pharaoh is never accorded his title as “the King of Egypt.” The failure of the Torah to mention the name “Pharaoh King of Egypt,” is a compliment to Joseph. The only time Pharaoh’s title is mentioned is when Joseph is described as standing in front of this ruler in 41,26 as in that verse mention of Pharaoh’s title further enhances the phenomenal rise to power by Joseph. It underscores that Joseph’s extraordinary attributes were responsible for Pharaoh retaining his position of power. Had it not been for Joseph and the part he played in strengthening the political power of Pharaoh during the years of famine, his decline would have set in much sooner.
    The entire land of Egypt, nay even the whole earth, would have been a loser had it not been for the advice proffered by Joseph how to cope with the impending seven years of drought. You should appreciate that dreams are caused by one or several of three factors. 1) because of the food a person consumed prior to going to sleep. 2) because of certain thoughts which he entertained before dropping off to sleep. 3) in order to reinforce and provide encouragement to a person’s emotional balance.
   The food a person consumed produces a sense of haughtiness and results in some kind of vapour rising to a person’s brain. Dreams which are engendered through this phenomenon are to be totally disregarded; they do not contain any message to the person who dreams them. When a dream is the continuation, albeit in his subconscious, of thoughts he had entertained on an ongoing basis prior to dropping off to sleep, such dreams are the type which were dreamt by Nebuchadnezzar as mentioned by Daniel 2,29 when he said to the King that his thoughts came to him while he was contemplating the future. Seeing he had done so, G’d used this as the appropriate time to reveal some of the future to the King in his dream. Finally, the third cause of a dream, the cause we have termed חזוק הנפש. This is the kind of dream to which it always pays to pay attention as it is a reflection of the dreamer’s personality. Dreams which are the result of a person’s imagination draw images for him during his sleep of matters which had already been the subject of his thinking and planning during his waking hours, matters which had already coalesced in his planning and thinking. During sleep, when a person’s emotions are not interfering with his thought-processes, the factors which prompted him to pursue a certain course of action while he was fully awake are reinforced and engraved in his imagination. Such dreams are not the result of wishful thinking, but are in the nature of a minor prophetic vision. This is what the sages had in mind when they said (Berachot 57) that a dream is 1/60th prophecy. These kinds of prophecies are granted to young children and feeble minded persons (Baba Batra 12) precisely because their minds have not yet been filled with all kinds of images during their waking hours which would have left an impression on their minds even while they were asleep and as a result of which it would be impossible to tell whether such dreams are inspirational or a continuation of what they thought while awake. Dreams of such a nature are granted both to the righteous and to the wicked; they are not due to the dreamer having been immersed in thoughts of such a nature previously; they  are not self-induced. G’d wanted to let Pharaoh have such a dream in order to frustrate his advisors and professional dream-interpreters in order to elevate Joseph to the position of viceroy of Egypt, i.e. King, except in name.
  והנה עומד על היאור, “and here he was standing above the river Nile.” The expression נהר and יאור may be used interchangeably as they mean the same thing. We find this confirmed by Onkelos who translates the word נהרא. The common denominator between both words is אורה, “light.” We find that even the word גשמים “rains” is referred to in terms of אור, “light,” as for instance in Job 36,32 על כפים כסה אור, “Lightning fills His hands,” and Job 37,11 יפיץ ענן אורו, “He also loads the clouds with moisture.” The reason for this interchangeability is the fact that the rivers are composed of rain water and rain water in turn is due to the influence of the luminaries. It is perfectly in order to call the effect by a name similar to its cause just as children are named after the fathers, their causes.
   The river in question was called נילוס, Nile, as it rose and provided irrigation for the land which is not being irrigated by rains as Egypt does not enjoy rainfall on a regular basis. What is the reason Pharaoh is described as dreaming that he was standing על היאור, “above the river,” whereas the Torah could have been expected to describe him as standing “on the banks of the river,” as indeed the cows themselves are described as standing on the banks of the river in verse three? In fact, when Pharaoh repeats his dream to Joseph in verse sixteen, he describes himself as standing on the banks of the river not above it. We may deduce from the objective report of the dream in the Torah, that the Torah wanted to portray to us the haughty character of Pharaoh who viewed himself as master of the river, as “standing above it.” When relating his dream to Joseph, he was discreet enough not to make his arrogance so obvious. This is why he changed both this and some other detail of what he had actually dreamt and what he claimed to have dreamt. The Torah was at pains to inform us that the claim that Pharaoh considered the Nile in terms of לי יאורי ואני עשיתיני, “the river Nile is mine and I have made it,” (Ezekiel 29,3) was not a figment of the prophet’s imagination but was reflected even in the dream of a benevolent Pharaoh such as the one with whom we are confronted here. Thus Pharaoh’s  confusion at the premonition that the dream portended some disaster may have also been the reason why he soft-pedalled the matter of his standing above the river in his dream.
   
   41,2.והנה מן היאור עולות שבע פרות , “and here seven cows were climbing out of the river.” Egypt’s economic base was the river Nile; it provided the key to its food supply. Isaiah 19,7 already commented on this when he said: “bed-rock will be exposed by the river Nile (as a result of drought and its failure to overflow), everything sown by the Nile will wither and blow away, etc.” Isaiah continues: “the fishermen shall lament and all who cast lines shall mourn. The flax workers too shall be dismayed. Her foundation (Egypt’s) shall be crushed, etc.”
  ותרעינה באחו, “they grazed on a meadow.” The letter ב in the word באחו, is a prefix and not part of the noun. It is analogous to Proverbs 9,5  לכו לחמו בלחמי ושתו ביין מסכתי, “come and eat my bread, drink the wine which I have mixed.” There too the letter ב in both the words בלחמי and ביין are prefixes, the respective nouns being לחם, יין. Here too the noun is אחו, a type of grass (rushes). The meaning of the line then is: “they (the cows) were feeding on a certain type of grass known as “אחו.” Job 8,11 speaks of ישגא אחו בלי מים, “can rushes grow without water?” It is quite plausible that rushes grow along the banks of the river Nile; we know this from Yocheved hiding Moses in such rushes.
   
   41,7. וייקץ פרעה והנה חלום, “Pharaoh awoke, and here it had been a dream.” Actually, the Torah should have written והנה חלומות, “and here it had been dreams,” seeing that Pharaoh  had awoken twice, each time after a different dream. The reason that the Torah wrote חלום, “dream” (sing.) was because Pharaoh himself felt that the two phenomena he had dreamt about were part of one and the same dream. However, he did not understand the message.
   
   41,8. ותפעם רוחו, “his spirit was agitated.” The use of the word פעם, “bell,” suggests that in his mind alarm bells were ringing. When we encounter a similar reaction to a dream by Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel 2,1 the text there describes the King’s reaction as ותתפעם רוחו, as if two bells rang in his mind.” The reason is that there it was clear that the king had had two separate dreams, each one of which had alarmed him. In that story the king’s agitation was caused also by his failure to recall precisely what it was he had been dreaming (Daniel 2,5) This too reinforced his agitation, hence ותתפעם רוחו instead of ותפעם רוחו. According to the story in Daniel as understood by Tanchuma Miketz 2, the Kings’s agitation was severe as he had forgotten both the dream and its interpretation. The King threatened to execute his interpreters if they failed to give him satisfactory interpretations and helped him recall the substance of the dream, whereas he promised to reward them generously if they came up with an acceptable explanation (Daniel 2,4-9). Naturally, his interpreters could not do so, but they made the mistake of saying that “no man on earth can do so.”
   According to our sages in above mentioned Tanchuma, these Chaldaens told the King that as long as the Holy Temple in Jerusalem (which Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed) had been standing, a person could go to a prophet or to a Priest and enquire from G’d by means of the Urim Vetumim, the breastplate on the breast of the High Priest, that a mystery be revealed to him. This was no longer so, however. The Midrash finds an allusion to the Chaldaens having said this to Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel 2,10-11 when they said: לא איתי אנש, “no man has ever come” (to enquire such a thing). These unnecessary words indicated that at one time one could come to some place to make such enquiries. There is a play on words in the text of Daniel according to which the word ואחרן may be read as ואהרן, seeing that the letters אחה'ע are interchangeable. According to this  the word אחרן in Daniel 2,11 is an allusion to Aaron the first High Priest who wore the breastplate with the Urim Vetumim. As already stated the king was very angry at being thwarted in his efforts to have the dream and its meaning recalled, until he was told that there was a Jewish exile who was able to comply with his request. When Daniel told the king what he had dreamt and what it meant, (Daniel 2,29-45) according to the version in Tanchuma, (not mentioned in the Book of Daniel), the king wanted to know when the predictions of his dream would materialise and Daniel told him after having consulted with Chananyah, Mishael and Azaryah. They prayed to G’d so as not to be executed, and they too counted amongst the wise men of the Kingdom.
  ואין פותר אותם לפרעה, “there was no one who could interpret them to Pharaoh.” According to a Midrash,  Pharaoh had dreamt both the dream and the interpretation but had forgotten the interpretation. The professional dream interpreters in his kingdom suggested that the seven cows and seven ears of corn referred to seven daughters Pharaoh would sire and subsequently bury. We have reason to wonder why these great wise men of Egypt were unable to come up with a better or even the true interpretation of Pharaoh’s dream. An unprejudiced layman would be able to see at a glance that the subject matter of the dream(s) was seven years of abundance followed by seven years of starvation. Clearly, the cows symbolised the ploughing, seeing that the Egyptians used the cows to pull the ploughs, whereas the ears of corn clearly symbolised the harvest that would materialise as a result of the ploughing. We have a verse in Proverbs 14,4 that  “a bountiful harvest is due to the strength of the ox.” The failure of Pharaoh’s advisors was all part of G’d’s plan to arrange for Joseph to be elevated to high status. This is why G’d used this opportunity to “turn sages back and make nonsense of their wisdom” (Isaiah 44,25). In Isaiah 19,11 the same prophet recalled this event when he said: “utter fools are the nobles of Tanis; the sagest of Pharaoh’s advisers have made absurd predictions.” The prophet made the point that only through G’d’s intervention could these normally sagacious individuals fail so utterly in recognising what was before their eyes. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 89,7 used this incident to explain the meaning of Proverbs 14,6: “a scoffer seeks wisdom in vain; but knowledge comes easily to him who is understanding.” The scoffer referred to by Solomon is Pharaoh, whereas the easily acquired knowledge is a reference to Joseph.
   
   41,14. וירצהו מן הבור, “and they rushed him from the dungeon.” Tanchuma Miketz 3 applies to this the words of  Rabbi Joshua ben Levi “out of a narrowly confined space into a spacious  area; from darkness into bright light; from the  disgrace suffered by the righteous to princedom.” All of this has been described by Solomon in Proverbs 30,32: with the words “if you have suffered disgrace you will be elevated.” We find that Chananyah, Mishael and Azaryah were similarly elevated after first having suffered disgrace (compare Daniel 3,21-30 where these men are described as being thrown into a fiery furnace only to be saved from the fire miraculously. Subsequently they were elevated to high office). We find that Mordechai, after he had worn sackcloth and ashes to get the Jewish people to become penitents and to head off the evil decree of Haman  (Esther 4,1 and 8,15), was subsequently elevated to be the Persian king’s first minister. Even Daniel, who was out of favour with King Darius, was thrown into a den of lions (Daniel 6,18) before being saved and subsequently raised to great influence at the court of said King. He had revealed the impending downfall of the Babylonian Empire to the Persians when he was able to decipher the meaning of the famous “writing on the wall” to King Belshazzar (Daniel 5,16). Joseph’s sudden elevation was similar and is described in Kohelet 4,14 as “from the prison house he emerged to reign,” and in the words of our sages in Shemot Rabbah 1,9, the words ועלה מן הארץ, which Pharaoh said worrying about a sudden rise to power by the Israelites (Exodus 1,10) were also inspired by the recollection of how a Jewish slave had suddenly risen to power in Egypt.”
   
   41,15. ואני שמעתי עליך לאמור תשמע חלום לפתור אותו, “I have heard it said about you that you only have to hear a dream and you already are able to interpret it.” The word שמע, normally translated as “hear,” really means “to hear and understand.” Already in Deut. 6,6 where Moses said “Hear O Israel the Lord our G’d  the Lord is One,” the true meaning of the word שמע is not just “hear!,” but “hear and understand!” Pharaoh meant that Joseph had the intelligence and wisdom to interpret a dream. We find the same expression when Belshazzar said in Daniel 5,16 ואנה שמעת עליך די תוכל, “but  I have heard about you that you are able to provide interpretation known to me.”
   
   41,16. בלעדי, “this is beyond me!” Joseph replied that the powers of wisdom and understanding were outside of him, personally. The meaning of בלעדי is: “not part of me.”
  אלו-הים יענה את שלום פרעה, “the Lord will put Pharaoh’s mind at rest.” Joseph attributed all intelligence and wisdom to G’d. He possessed those powers. He would help Pharaoh to emerge serene from what troubled him at that moment. He mentioned the attribute אלו-הים, as it is this attribute which is active when revealing the meaning of dream. The  attribute אלוקים is represented by the final letter ה in the tetragram i.e. י-ה-ו-ה.  Daniel (2,36) made a similar statement when he said ופשרה נאמר קדם מלכא. He too alluded to the letter ה at the end of the tetragram. He meant that the knowledge to reveal the meaning of dreams reposes in the last two letters of that Holy Name. This is the reason that Daniel added (Daniel 2,22) הוא גלא עמיקתא ומסתרחא, ”for He reveals the deep and the mysterious.” By needlessly repeating the word  הוא in that verse he referred to the two letters ה and ו in the tetragram which referred to the One and Only, i.e. א=אחד, which are the source of these mysteries. Just as Joseph had said בלעדי to indicate that though he might verbalise such interpretations the source of that knowledge did not reside within him, so Daniel similarly made this clear when he said to Nebuchadnezzar (Daniel 2,30) ואנה לא בחכמה די איתי בי מכל חייא וגו'. “As for me (this secret was revealed to me) not because I possess more wisdom than any living being, etc.”
   Personally, I believe that the essence of Pharaoh’s dream was centered in the number seven which recurs so many times. It is a fact that both Pharaoh and all his wicked contemporaries believed in the existence of the universe having preceded G’d. They denied such a thing as G’d supervising the fate of the universe and the fate of man or anything that occurred in the terrestrial part of the universe. They attribute all abnormal occurrences in the terrestrial part of the universe to mere chance, at best dictated by a combination of horoscopic influences presided over by the seven fixed stars (planets), which themselves are not subject to influence by man’s deeds. Pharaoh and the likes of him were thoroughly attached to the forces of nature as even his name already suggests. [The name פרעה consists primarily of the letters עפר, i.e. the raw material man is made of. (Rabbi Chavell)]
   Seeing that Pharaoh was so closely involved in the raw materials our terrestrial universe is made of G’d showed him two of the major elements of that combination of four elements which make up the raw material of our universe. They are water and dust, (earth). Seven cows emerged from the element water, whereas the seven ears of corn grew out of the element dust, earth. These two elements hold the key to satiety or hunger as the case maybe, subject to G’d’s benevolent supervision of what goes on in our world. Our Rosh Hashanah (Mussaph) prayers concentrate on the fact that on that day G’d determines which country is to suffer famine and which will have plentiful food. This subject, i.e. that decisions pertaining to the earth’s food supply are made in heaven was something revolutionary for Pharaoh. The man who had thought that the seven fixed stars determine what happens in our territorial world was taught in  a dream that there is a Power which supervises and directs these seven planets at will if need be. (we have discussed this in greater detail in our commentary on Genesis 1,2) He was taught that G’d may increase or decrease the apparent power of these planets relative to the system of reward and punishment which forms the basis of G’d exercising His supervision of the universe.
   The reason that Pharaoh had to be taught all this was that up until that point he had thought of the river Nile as his personal property, as we quoted from Ezekiel 29, 3 “the river is mine and I have made it.” The fact that the events in his dream originated in the river are an example of what our sages term מגיד מראשית אחרית, “that G’d allows us a preview of things to come.” In this instance the preview granted to us in this dream of Pharaoh was the eventual collapse of Egypt as a world power after Pharaoh and his army were drowned in the sea a week after having suffered the death of all their firstborn. The Egyptians had been give ample warning to change their concept of the terrestrial universe and the place therein of its Creator. The ten plagues had been designed to wean the Pharaoh of his time of his pagan beliefs. His failure to do so resulted in his downfall.
   The fact that his downfall was caused by water, the element which he thought was under his control, was a clarion call for other nations to recognise the attribute of G’d we call י-ה-ו-ה, i.e. the attribute which G’d uses to demonstrate that He is totally free, not bound by so-called “laws of nature.” The Pharaoh at the time of the Exodus, while acknowledging the אלו-הים attribute of G’d, had exclaimed:  מי ה' אשר אשמע בקולו, “who is this new attribute of G’d that I should have to listen to His voice?” (Exodus 5,2)
   Joseph,  well aware of Pharaoh’s faulty pagan beliefs, first told him that the power to reveal the meanings of dreams did not reside within him but was reserved for the superior power of G’d. By that he meant that there was a power which superseded that of the seven planets whom Pharaoh had thought of as independent forces each supreme in governing different parts of the universe. By saying בלעדי אלוקים, he drew attention to the discriminatory nature in which G’d supervises His universe. By saying that this Power אלוקים was going to put Pharaoh’s mind at ease, he introduced him to G’d the benevolent who deals with people on an individual basis. Pharaoh’s relief would come from G’d not via any of the seven planets. It therefore behooves man 
not to turn to  the stars, the horoscopes, etc., in order to divine his destiny but to turn to his Creator. This is what he meant when he said: “G’d will set Pharaoh’s mind at rest.” This approach to matters concealed from us is illustrated by Job 5,8 when Eliphaz said: ואל אלו-הים אשית דברתי, “and I will direct what I have to say to the Lord.” This is also what prompted Hoseah, quoting G’d, to say (Hoseah 2,23-24) “on that day I will respond; I will respond to the sky, and it shall respond to the earth; and the earth shall respond with new grain and wine and oil.” This verse teaches that just as it is not up to the earth to initiate any response to man’s request and efforts unless it had first been so instructed by G’d, so it would be foolish to direct one’s prayers and efforts to intermediaries. The reason Joseph always uses G’d’s attribute אלו-הים when referring to G’d is that he wanted to underline that what purports to be “natural,” i.e. laws of nature which man thinks he can depend on, is so only as long as the Lord who has created these forces, i.e. אלו-הים continues to direct these forces to operate normally. Seeing that the dream of Pharaoh forecast interference by G’d in these “natural” forces of the earth to produce crops, Joseph added את האלוקים עושה הראה לפרעה, “what G’d is about to do, (i.e. changes in established patterns of nature) He has revealed to Pharaoh.” Afterwards Joseph added that not only had G’d given Pharaoh advance warning of what was about to occur, but He had even provided him with a time frame of when to expect these changes, i.e. beginning immediately. [I believe the author went out of his way to justify the use of the word אלוקים when in reality anything denoting G’d’s interference in the laws of nature is usually credited to His attribute י-ה-ו-ה; in this instance, the fact that Pharaoh did not even acknowledge the existence of  Creator who had preceded the creation of this universe had to be acquainted with that fact before he could absorb any lesson about the attribute Hashem. Ed.]
    When Joseph added כי נכון הדבר מעם האלוקים לעשותו, “for the matter is already ready before G’d and He will proceed forthwith to carry it out,” (verse 32) he again attributed anything that would occur to G’d and not to anything man could do. At the same time he wanted to convince Pharaoh that man is not a robot and acts under compulsion, that everything in his life has not been decreed from above. The words בלעדי אלוקים, contain within them an allusion to the limit of G’d’s power, i.e. the freedom of choice He as accorded to man, something over which G’d has no control. If you will examine Joseph’s word carefully you will find that they parallel the Torah’s report of the story of creation. That report began with the words בראשית ברא אלוקים, ”at the beginning, G’d created, etc.” and ended with the words (Genesis 2,3) אשר ברא אלוקים לעשות, “which G’d had created as an ongoing process.” Joseph commenced with telling Pharaoh that first and foremost there would be an activity by G’d, i.e. את האלוקים עושה, and he concluded with the words האלוקים לעשות exactly like in Genesis 2,3.
    You will find that the number seven appears three times each in connection with both the cows and the ears of corn. Once it appears in the Torah’s report of Pharaoh’s dream, once in the dream as related by Pharaoh, and the third time when Joseph refers to this number when he interprets the dream. When you multiply the number 14 (seven cows plus seven ears of corn) you get the number 14. When you multiply this number by three you get 42.  [an allusion to the numerical value of one of the names of G’d, the first 42 letters in the Book of Genesis until the letter ב in ובוהו Ed.] None of the numbers “seven” mentioned in our passage went to waste. Everyone of them became historically relevant as pointed out by Ezekiel 29, 10-11: “Assuredly I will deal with you and your channels, and I will reduce the land of Egypt to utter ruin and  desolation; from Migdol to Syene all the way to the border with Nubia. No foot of man shall traverse it; it shall remain uninhabited for forty years.” The first two of these forty years occurred during the time of Joseph before Yaakov came to Egypt. The remaining forty years of the prophecy Pharaoh dreamt  occurred later on in Egyptian history.
    
    41,18. בריאת בשר ויפות מראה, “of healthy flesh and handsome appearance.” When these cows were mentioned in verse two they were described as יפות מראה ובריאות בשר. This is only one of the minor changes in language that we encounter between the objective report of the dream by the Torah and by the more subjective manner in which Pharaoh tells Joseph of the impressions he formed while dreaming. We have already drawn attention to the fact that the Torah described Pharaoh as dreaming that he stood above the river Nile, whereas when he relates his dream he described himself as standing on the banks of the river. This is why according to Tanchuma Miketz 3 Joseph actually corrected Pharaoh saying to him: “you did not see בריאות בשר ויפות תואר, but you saw יפות מראה ובריאות בשר. According to the Midrash, Joseph similarly corrected Pharaoh’s account of what the ears of corn had looked like in his dream. Upon hearing Joseph’s version of his dream, Pharaoh was dumbfounded and was forced to admit that אחרי הודיע אלו-הים  אותך את כל זאת, “after G’d has informed you of all this, etc.” (verse 39). He meant that Joseph himself must have been in his dream how else could he have had such detailed knowledge of it. When Yaakov blessed Joseph on his deathbed (Genesis 49,22), he referred to this incident when he said; בן פרת יוסף בן פרת עלי עין, (freely translated) “Joseph had ample knowledge of the cows, he set his eye on it.” [He meant that Joseph’s rise to power had been occasioned through his intimate knowledge of the meaning of the cows in Pharaoh’s dream. Ed.] 
    
    41,32. ועל השנות החלום אל פרעה פעמים, “as for the repetition of the dream to Pharaoh twice,” etc. The unusual fact that two dreams were repeated twice in a single night, although they were only one dream.
   כי נכון הדבר מעם האלוקים וממהר אלוקים לעשותו, “(it means) that the matter is ready and prepared from G’d’s part and that He will carry it out promptly.” Ibn Ezra interprets the meaning of the word השנות as the repeating of two symbols in the dream, i.e. both cows and ears of corn as a sign that the events foreshadowed would occur soon. Rabbeinu Chananel, focusing on the word פעמים, “twice,” wrote that the meaning of that word is that the message of the dream of the cows and the message of the dream of the ears of corn is the same; however the reason the message has been repeated is that the word נכון is a reference to the period of plenty, whereas the words וממהר האלוקים לעשותו “and G’d will hasten to do it,” refer to the famine that is to follow the years of plenty immediately.
    
    41,33. ועתה ירא פרעה איש נבון וחכם, “and now, let Pharaoh seek out a discerning and wise man.” Joseph meant that there was now a need for a discerning and wise man to be appointed as being in charge of the land of Egypt, i.e. וישיתהו על ארץ מצרים, “who would have authority over all the people in Egypt.” He employed the term נבון as an attribute of someone who is discerning enough to establish a fair rationing system, a system which allowed for the sizes of the different families. Such a man, after having provided for the needs of the local population first, could export the surplus to other paying customers. He added the word חכם, “wise,” as an additional attribute of such an economic  czar to describe someone who knew how to prevent the stored surpluses of the next seven years from rotting or otherwise becoming unfit to eat. Joseph’s suggestions were designed to promote his own appointment to this position. According to Nachmanides, Joseph displayed the truism of Solomon’s statement (Kohelet 2,14) that החכם עיניו בראשו, “the wise man has eyes in his head.”
    
    41,34. יעשה פרעה, “let Pharaoh proceed, etc.” to appoint a single ruler over these various civil servants,” i.e. the officials whom Pharaoh would appoint. Clearly, the שליט, would have to appoint officials as he could not possibly perform all this work by himself. 
   וחמש את ארץ מצרים, “let him set aside one fifth of all (the grain) growing during the seven years of plenty.” The economic czar was to confiscate 20% of every farmer’s harvest. An alternate meaning of the word וחמש could be “let this economic czar urge the people to gather, etc.” The word then would resemble the word חמושים עלו בני ישראל, in Exodus 13,18 meaning: “in a pioneering spirit.”
    
    41,35. ויקבצו את כל אוכל, “and let them gather in all the food, etc.” the words “all the food,” refer to the 20% of the crops to be taxed by Pharaoh. The  words “all the food,” mean that 20% of each type of harvest such  as wheat, rye, corn and barley  were to be taxed and collected to be stored.
   ויצברו בר, “and they will amass grain.” The expression צבר used here by the Torah refers to underground storage. We find a comparison between עפר, earth, dust, in Job 27,16 אם יצבר כעפר כסף, “if  he were to pile up silver like dust.” Joseph suggested to Pharaoh to  store grain both above ground in grain elevators as well as  below ground. The expression צבירה includes both kinds of storage. We find the expression occurring when the Egyptians piled up the frogs into great heaps in Exodus 8,10.
   תחת יד פרעה “under Pharaoh’s control.” under Pharaoh’s control and in storage-houses owned by him.
     אוכל בערים, “food in the cities.” Produce grown near certain cities should be stored within these cities.
   ושמרו, “and they are to guard and protect” the grain is to be brought into these storage houses in a condition which makes it fit to store for an extended period.
    
    41,36. והיה האוכל לפקדון, “the food shall serve as a reserve.” The word פקדון is used here in the same sense as elsewhere when someone is given something to guard on behalf of a third party. The food stored was to be stored on behalf of the farmers who grew it. The objective was to forestall that the land would perish as had the seven undernourished cows in Pharaoh’s dream.
    
    41,37.  ובעיני כל עבדיו וייטב הדבר בעיני פרעה, “the matter (advice) was viewed favourably by Pharaoh and by all his servants.” Pharaoh’s servants realised that Joseph’s advice to Pharaoh was sound and that the Royal Palace, the wealthy classes as well as the poor in Egypt  stood to gain from following Joseph’s advice. This is why they concurred and expressed their approval of the plan Joseph had outlined.
    
    41,38. הנמצא כזה איש אשר רוח אלו-הים בו, “can we find a man so filled with the spirit of G’d?”  We find something very similar in Daniel 4,6 after Daniel had interpreted the dream of Nebuchadnezzar.
    
    41,39. אחרי הודיע אלו-הים אותך את כל זאת, “after the Lord has informed you of all this.” Pharaoh referred to Joseph’s wisdom rather than to his knowledge as a prophet in predicting the onset of the seven good years, etc. He added: “seeing that you advised me to appoint a discerning and wise man it stands to reason  that seeing there is none more discerning and wise than yourself,  etc., you will be this person.” Pharaoh and his advisors were so impressed that they acted as if Joseph’s prediction had already come true. This explains the word הודיע in the past tense. [after all until it had come true how did they know that Joseph’s information had been divinely inspired? Ed.]
    
    41,40. ועל פיך ישק כל עמי, “and by your command my whole nation will be sustained.”  
     רק הכסא, “only by the throne, etc.” Pharaoh meant by this that he would be the titular head of state, i.e. that the people would call him “King.” We find in  Kings I 1,37 ויגדל את כסאו, “may he make his (Solomon’s) ‘throne’ greater than that of his father.” This too is a reference to Solomon’s reputation as a great king being established.
    
    41,41. ראה נתתי אותך על כל ארץ מצרים, “here I have appointed you over the whole of the land of Egypt.”  We find a parallel expression also in Daniel 2,48 אדין מלכא לדניאל רבי ומתנן רברבן שגיאן יהב ליה והשליטה על כל מדינת בבל. “The king then elevated Daniel and gave him many gifts, and made him the governor of the whole province of Babylon.”
    
    41,42. ויסר פרעה את טבעתו, “Pharaoh removed his ring, etc.” He handed Joseph his signet ring with which he appointed ministers or relieved them of their authority. The בגדי שש, “linen garments,” of which the verse tells us were worn by kings in Egypt. The רביד הזהב, the “golden chain” mentioned in this verse is called מניכא דדהבה  by Onkelos, i.e. a golden badge of office.
    
    41,43. ויקראו לפניו "אברך". They called out before him Avrech!” The meaning of the word אברך is the same as הברך, “the knee.” The letters א and ה are part of the group אחה'ע letters which are interchangeable. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 90,3 claim that the word is a composite of the two words אב ורך, “a father-figure though young in years.” There are other examples of the word רך meaning young in years, such as Samuel II 3,39 ואנכי היום רך ומשוח מלך, “and although young in years I have today been anointed king.”  Other words which are composites of two words are: פרחה, which is composed of פרי חח; the word עבטיט is a composite of עב טיט.
    Some commentators understand the word אברך as being composed of the two words אב ואדון, (a translation from the Aramaic) This is based on Baba Batra 4 in which King Herod is described  as לא ריכא ולא בר ריכא, “neither a king nor the son of a king.” This was because Herod was born a slave rising to the position of king. The translation of Genesis 25,27 יודע ציד by Onkelos as “a shrewd man,” נחשירכן, i.e. נחש רכן is an example of two words being combined into one. Most hunters are relying on shrewdness to lure their prey. While the more accurate versions of the Targum have the word נחשידכן, based on Baba Batra 139  (compare ערוך), in this instance we are dealing with גברא שדכא, a person who is inactive, without regular occupation. We encounter the word having such a meaning in Joshua 11,23 והארץ שקטה ממלחמה, “the land had rest from war,” which is rendered as וארעא שדוכת מלמעבד קרבא by the Targum.
    
    41,44. אני פרעה, “I am Pharaoh.”  He meant: “I alone am not subject to your authority.” Basically, this was a repetition of the previous statement רק הכסא אגדל ממך, “I will be greater than you only by reason of my occupying the throne.” According to Onkelos Joseph’s authority embraced all aspects of people’s lives in Egypt, so that no one was even allowed to bear arms unless he had Joseph’s approval.
    
    41,45. צפנת פענח, “the one who reveals secrets.” This word does not appear a second time in Scripture. We do, however, encounter this word in the נשמת prayer recited on Sabbath mornings where the expression is המפענח נעלמים, [the subject being G’d, not man. Ed.] This gives us reason to believe that the King (Pharaoh) was familiar with the language spoken in nearby Canaan. When Batya, a daughter of a later Pharaoh, named Moses  משה, paraphrasing the Hebrew words כי מן המים משיתיהו “for I have pulled him from the water,” (Exodus 2,10) this also indicates that she was familiar with the language spoken by the Hebrews.
   בת פוטי פרע כהן און, “a daughter of Poti-Phera, the Priest of On.” According to Bereshit Rabbah 86,3 this man was identical with Joseph’s former master Potiphar. The reason he was suddenly called פוטי-פרע was that he was פטם פרים ועגלים לעבודה זרה, “fattening oxen and calves in order that they be offered as sacrificial animals in pagan rites.” He had become castrated (without surgical incision) as a penalty for wanting to use Joseph for homosexual practices. The Midrash may have had in mind that although originally Potiphar was a powerful minister at Pharaoh’s court, he was embarrassed after becoming sexually impotent and decided to join a fraternity of the Priesthood. At that time his name was changed to פוטי פרע (two words). The word און describes the deity which this fraternity of Priests worshipped. We find something analogous in connection with יתרו, Yethro,  whom the Torah refers to as כהן מדין “a Priest of Midian.” (Exodus 3,1) There too the word כהן means “clergy,” seeing he too (at that time) was fattening calves in preparation for slaughtering them to pagan deities (Sanhedrin 82). 
    We are told in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 38 that Ossnat, Joseph’s wife, was the daughter of Dinah who had been raped by Shechem the son of Chamor. Yaakov had expelled her from his home and had arranged for her to live amongst some bushes. This is why she was called אסנת, from the word סנה, “bush”. When arranging for her to live near that bush Yaakov attached a note around her neck on which was written: “anyone who attaches himself to you thereby will become part of Yaakov’s family.” When Joseph saw this note he went and hid it. This is why when his father asked him who the lads were whom he had brought with him to be blessed, (Genesis 48,9) he said: “they are my sons whom the Lord gave me in this place.” He showed his father the note and what had been written thereon. 
   בת פוטי פרע, she was described as “daughter of Potiphar”  because she had been raised in Potiphar’s house. She was so named in accordance with Sanhedrin 19 that anyone who raises an orphan in his home is deemed to have given birth to that person.”
    
    41,47. ותעש הארץ. “the earth produced.” This is a reference to the crops the earth produced during the seven years of plenty The root עשה is often associated with crops as we find in Leviticus 25,21 וצויתי את ברכתי לכם ...ועשת את התבואה, “and I will direct My blessing toward you and it (the earth) will produce the crop sufficient for three years.”
   לקמצים, “by the handfuls.”  The word‘s meaning is similar to לגמצים, i.e. ”digging a pit.” The letter ק is interchangeable with the letter ג. when the letters גיכ'ק are involved. Another example is ויציקו את ארון האלו-הים, “and they set down the Ark of G’d.” the word ויציקו is equivalent to ויציגו. as we know it from Genesis 43,9  והצגתיו לפניך ”I will make him stand upright in your presence (bring him back safely).”
   ויתן אכל בערים, “he placed food supplies in the cities.”  The fact that previously the Torah had spoken of כל אכל, and here it speaks merely of אכל, shows that in the previous verse the word כל  did not refer to quantity but to variety, i.e. “all types of food, not only grain.”
   אכל שדה העיר אשר סביבותיה נתן בתוכה, “the food of the field around each city he placed within it.” Joseph’s procedure as reported here caused our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 90,5) to state that when local food supplies are stored locally, such food supply will keep as the earth of that neighbourhood acts as a preservative for what it has produced.
    
    41,49. עד כי חדל לספור, “until he stopped counting.” There came a point when instead of measuring the grain by the usual methods, i.e. employing the standard measure eypha, they simply counted the locations where grain had been stored.
    
    41,50. בטרם תבא שנת הרעב, “before the year of famine had set in.” This verse prompted our sages (Taanit 11) to decree that it is forbidden for man and wife to engage in marital relations during a year of famine. The only exception to this rule are couples who have not yet been able to produce any children. Joseph named his sons by commemorating events in his life.
    
    41,51. כי נשני אלו-הים את כל עמלי ואת כל בית אבי, “for G’d has enabled me to forget all my problems including those which I have suffered in my father’s house.” This verse prompted our sages (Baba Batra 12) to conclude that the house in which a woman grew up is called בי נשא, “a house inducing forgetfulness.” The origin of this psychological fact is the verse in Genesis 2,24 “for that purpose (to get married) man leaves the house of his father and his mother and cleaves to his wife.” [As long as Joseph had not founded a family he was still deeply attached to his father’s house. Ed.] What holds true for the emotional reaction of a man when he gets married is equally true of the wife once she is married.
    
    41,54. ויהי רעב בכל הארצות, “there was a famine in all the countries.” This verse contrasts the conditions in the countries surrounding Egypt with those in Egypt itself where, thanks to Joseph’s foresight, the famine was not felt by the inhabitants of the country. This is why the verse concludes with the words: “but in all of the land of Egypt there was bread (food).”
    
    41,55. ותרעב כל ארץ מצרים, “The whole land of Egypt was famished, etc.” This verse speaks of the second year of the famine. It teaches that G’d had proclaimed that Egypt should suffer the pangs of hunger. We have a similar incidence in Kings II 8,1 כי קרא ה'  לרעב, “for G’d has decreed famine.” Another verse in which the expression קרא is used in connection with famine is found in Psalms 105,16 קרא רעב על הארץ כל מטה לחם שבר, “He called down a famine on the land; destroyed every staff of bread.” As a result the  famine was being felt by the people, 
   ויקרא העם אל פרעה ללחם, “the people called out to Pharaoh for food.” It is in the nature of people to cry out to those in whose power it is to satisfy their needs. We find a verse in Psalms 107,5 רעבים גם צמאים נפשם בהם תתעטף, “the hungry and thirsty, their spirit failed”. On the other hand: ויצעקו אל ה' בצר להם, “they cried out to G’d (after) they were in distress, etc.”
   לכו אל יוסף, “go to Joseph.” Pharaoh told his clamouring people that Joseph had assumed all the functions of government in Pharaoh’s place. Pharaoh portrayed himself as only the titular head of government. He used this to support his instructions that they must follow Joseph’s instructions.
    Tanchuma Miketz 7 describes what happened in the following words: when Pharaoh sent his petitioners to Joseph and they pleaded with him for bread, Joseph told them to come back after they had circumcised themselves. Thereupon the people returned to Pharaoh and cried in front of him telling him that Joseph had refused to supply them with food until they had circumcised themselves.  Pharaoh said to them: “why were you foolish enough not to have stored food for yourselves during the last seven years?” Thereupon the people told him that everything they had stored had rotted away. Pharaoh asked them if not some of yesterday’s bread was left over? They told Pharaoh that even bread they put in their bread baskets on the previous day had turned bad. Thereupon Pharaoh told them to go back to Joseph and to carry out all his instructions. This is the meaning of the verse (Proverbs 11,26) מונע בר יקבוהו לאום וברכה לראש משביר, “he who withholds grain they will curse (Pharaoh), whereas he who sells it will enjoy a blessing.” The reference is to Joseph who was the seller of grain in Egypt. This is what Yaakov had in mind when he said to his son Joseph (Genesis 49,26) “the blessings of your father surpassed the blessings of my parents.“ Moses alluded to this in Deut. 33,15  תבואתה לראש יוסף ולקדקד נזיר אחיו, “may this blessing come to rest on the head of Joseph, etc.,” i.e. that the reason Joseph enjoys these additional blessings is that he was the supplier of grain to a whole people.
    
    41,56. והרעב היה על פני כל הארץ, “and the famine embraced the entire land.” This is a reference to the wealthy people who were struck by the famine no less than the poor. The reason the wealthy people are referred to as פני הארץ, is because all the people turn to the wealthy in time of need. We have proof from here that the first people who felt the famine were the wealthy (the spoiled ones).
   את כל אשר בהם, “all that was in them.” This is a reference to all the kinds of stored grain contained. Onkelos also translates the verse to mean  אוצריה רי בהון עיבורא, “the storage chambers which contained  grain.”
   וישבור למצרים, “he sold grain to Egypt.” He sold to them (the people).
   ויחזק הרעב בארץ מצרים, “the famine remained strong in the land of Egypt.” The people, though eating, were not feeling sated. We read of a similar phenomenon in Kings I 18,2 “the famine remained strong in Shomron.”
    
    41,57. כי חזק הרעב בכל הארץ, “for the famine was severe all over the earth.” The Torah refers to the part of the earth under Pharaoh’s control.
    
    42,1. וירא יעקב, “Yaakov saw.” This is not something that Yaakov saw with his eyes but something he saw in his heart; proof that this this the meaning of the word וירא in this instance is  that he described what he had “seen” as הנה שמעתי, “here I have heard,” instead of saying: הנה ראיתי, “here I have seen.”
   כי יש שבר במצרים, “that there is grain for sale in Egypt.” The word שבר usually refers to something for sale as we know from Deut. 2,6 אוכל תשברו מאתם, “purchase food provisions from  them.” It is noteworthy that Yaakov neither mentioned the word “food,” nor the word “grain,” The reason he referred to grain by saying שבר is because that word includes both “trading or selling” as well as “‘grain.” He continued using this word when he told his sons in Genesis 43,2: שובו שברו לנו מעט אוכל, “go back and secure for us some food (by buying grain).” In our verse (2) he said: שברו לנו משם, without the word אוכל. When Yaakov described the journey to Egypt he asked his sons to undertake as רדו שמה, “descend there,” instead of לכו שמה, “go there,” he also foreshadowed that any journey to Egypt would be but a prelude to the family’s eventual exile in Egypt. The number of years the Jewish people would be enslaved in Egypt corresponded to the numerical value of the letters in the word רדו, i.e. 210 years. When he used the expression ושברו משם, he meant that he foresaw both food supply as well as enslavement or exile as emanating from Egypt.
   ונחיה ולא נמות, “so we may live and not die.”  He meant that even if in the more distant future his descendants would face great problems in Egypt, they would not succumb to them and die. They would survive thanks to the very grain they were going to purchase now. Our sages (Sotah 9) referred to this phenomenon when they said concerning Deut. 32,23 חצי אכלה בם “My arrows I will use up against them.” They said that half the Jews in exile may be exterminated by their Gentile enemies while the other half will survive. The meaning of the verse is that whereas G’d’s arrows will become exhausted the Jews will not all perish.
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 91,6 had still another interpretation for the word שבר. They saw it as if it had been spelled with the dot on the left side of the letter ש, so that we would read it as סבר, “hope.” If we accept this interpretation we could read the verse as: “Yaakov saw in his mind’s eye that there was hope in Egypt for his descendants.” Although the ”hope” referred to the exalted position of Joseph in Egypt, Yaakov had lost the power to have clear visions ever since he had been parted from Joseph, so that this was only a very nebulous kind of vision.
   למה תתראו, “why do you make yourselves conspicuous?”  The meaning may be: ”why do you want to risk weakening yourselves by hunger? If this is the correct meaning the word is related to Proverbs 11,25 גם הוא יורא, “he will also be irrigated. This is the way Rashi understands the word תתראו. Rabbeinu Chananel understand the word as an admonition by Yaakov to his sons “why are you confrontational with each other?” He quotes support from Kings II 14,8 לכה נתראה פנים, “let us confront each other!”  Verse 11 in the same chapter of Kings also confirms the meaning of this word as being to confront each other when we read ויתראו פנים הוא ואמציה מלך יהודה, ”he and King Amatziah of Yehudah confronted each other.”
    Nachmanides  understands the word as: “why are you looking at each other in this place instead of journeying to Egypt and getting supplies?” They should have traveled as soon as they were in danger of exhausting their food supplies as soon as they heard that there were supplies to be bought in Egypt. Tanchuma Miketz 8 suggests that Yaakov challenged the brothers’ physical strength and their courage suggesting they had nothing to fear by traveling to Egypt. This is why he added the words “we will live and not die.”
    
    42,3. וירדו אחי יוסף עשרה, “ten of Joseph’s brothers descended.” The Torah should have written: “ten sons of Yaakov descended.” The reason that the Torah refers to them as “Joseph’s brothers” indicates that they had repented the fact that they had sold him and had meanwhile resolved to relate to him as their brother and to buy his freedom at whatever cost. (Tanchuma Miketz 8).
    An alternative reason why the Torah describes the ten sons of Yaakov as ten brothers of Joseph may be that the Torah wanted to inform us of their good intention to pray for Joseph’s welfare by forming a quorum of 10 worshipers. We know that the minimum number of adult males required to form a holy congregation is 10. This is why the Torah  refers to ונקדשתי בתוך בני ישראל, “I will be sanctified amongst the children of Israel” (Leviticus 22,32).
    Nachmanides writes that the brothers are described as such to alert us to the fact that at this point Joseph’s first dream, which involved 10 people binding sheaves was in the process of becoming true. In that dream Binyamin (only 11 years old) was not included as binding sheaves. As soon as the brothers paid their respects to the ruler of Egypt this dream  had been fulfilled. (verse 6). The second dream in which eleven stars bowed down to Joseph could not be fulfilled until Binyamin too came to Egypt with his brothers as well as his father Yaakov.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 91,6 the wording of the Torah in which the ten brothers of Joseph are described as traveling to Egypt  is based on the fact that Joseph had issued instructions to his officials that the names of the persons coming to Egypt to buy grain as well as the names of such person’s father as well as his home town be recorded  in a central register. He would scan the list of names every evening. As soon as the names of his brothers appeared on one of these lists, Joseph closed all the grain distributing points bar one to force his brothers to make their purchases at that point. He supplied his officials with the names of  his brothers and waited for them to arrive at that distribution point in order to arrest them upon arrival. When three days passed and none of Joseph’s brothers was reported as having made any purchases, Joseph  took men from Pharaoh’s palace guard to search for his brothers in the market-place. They were located in the red light district. When questioned by the palace guards why they had spent so much time in that location  they told the guards that a handsome brother of theirs who had been missing for a long time might have been sold into prostitution and that they had come to buy his freedom.
    
    42,7. ויתנכר אליהם, “and he pretended to be a stranger who did not know them.” Joseph recognised his brothers as soon as he set eyes upon them. He was afraid that they might recognise him also. This is why he pretended to not to know who they were. We find something parallel when the wife of King Jerobam who sought help from the prophet Achyah Hashiloni (who was blind to boot) for her sick son pretended to be someone else at the instruction of her husband (Kings I 14,2-6). Achiyah challenged her, calling her by her true name the moment she entered his room. The expression used by the prophet Jeremiah to describe this charade was also the same as here, i.e. מתנכר.
    It is possible that Joseph did not change his features in order to deceive his brothers but merely spoke to them in a tone and language which made it unlikely that they would associate his person with being remotely similar to their brother. Once the brothers had told him where they came from, Joseph became convinced they were indeed his brothers. This accounts for the Torah writing once more: ויכר יוסף את אחיו (verse 8). (compare commentary by Nachmanides)
    According to Tanchuma Miketz 8 the words ויתנכר להם mean that as far as the brothers were concerned he was a pagan seeing that he used his goblet to consult it as if it possessed magic powers. He said to them that the goblet had informed him that they were spies. They replied that they were upright people, had never been spies, but that they had merely complied with their father’s instructions not to enter Egypt by the same gate. Thereupon Joseph demanded to know what business they had had in the red light district? They answered that they had lost something precious and had hoped to locate the lost object in that area during the last three days. Thereupon Joseph told them that his goblet told him that two of their number had once destroyed an entire city by the name of Shechem. When they heard this they became frightened and told Joseph that they were actually twelve brothers. Thereupon Joseph demanded to know the whereabouts of the other two brothers. They told him that one of their number had disappeared and that the youngest one was at home with his father. Upon hearing this, Joseph told them that if they would bring the youngest brother to see him he would accept their claim that they were not spies.
    
    42,13. שנים עשר עבדיך אחים אנחנו, “we, your servants, are actually twelve brothers.” Originally they had said that they were twelve men all the sons of a single father (verse 11). They had done so in order to explain why they were traveling together and keeping company all the time. They also explained that their traveling together reduced the chance of their being robbed of their food purchases.
   כנים אנחנו, “we are upright (honest).” The term is applied to righteous men who are descendants of righteous men. They invited Joseph to confirm this through independent inquiries he could make about them and their father. Joseph said to them: “you entered by twelve different gates only to be all together now. This suggests to me that you must be spies and have now come together to report to each other what you have found out.” Joseph indicated that their behaviour was typical of spies. Thereupon they enlarged on their family background in order to convince this ruler of Egypt that they had nothing to hide. Thereupon Joseph took them at their word saying that bringing down Binyamin to Egypt would provide proof to him if indeed they had spoken truthfully. The brothers had no response to this.
   חי פרעה, “by the life of Pharaoh!”  We must not assume that Joseph invoked Pharaoh’s name to swear a vain oath, one that he would not honour. We will demonstrate that when Joseph used the language of an oath he always kept it. In this instance, he wanted to know what the brothers would have done if they had found the brother of whom they had said that he had disappeared. They answered that they would have bought his freedom using all the money at their disposal if need be. When Joseph countered that this was all well and good if the owner of their missing brother were willing to sell him. However, supposing that the owner would not be prepared to do that, what would they do then? They answered that their purpose in coming to Egypt was to settle the matter either one way or another. Either they would be killed in the process or they would have to kill to release their long lost brother. Upon hearing this Joseph exclaimed: “by the life of Pharaoh I was right! You are spies!” The words “by the life of Pharaoh” meant “I will certainly not release you now that you have admitted that you are prepared to kill in order to gain your objective.” Joseph kept his word by not allowing Shimon to return to Canaan at this stage. When the brothers said: “we are twelve, all the sons of one man,” they meant that all twelve of them including their father were alive. The Torah only shows that they were not aware of the truth of their statement that all twelve brothers were alive.
    
    42,18. ביום השלישי זאת עשו “on the third day ‘do this!’” According to Bereshit Rabbah 91,9 the verse in Hoseah 6,2  יחיינו מיומים ביום השלישי יקימנו ונחיה לפניו, “In two days He will make us whole again; on the third day He will raise us up and we shall live in His presence,” are a reference to what happened to the brothers during the three days described in our verse. G’d does not subject the righteous to trials lasting more than three days. The merit of the fathers Yaakov, Yitzchak, and Avraham was instrumental in Joseph changing his mind. The third day was significant already ever since the day Avraham espied the mountain on which he prepared Yitzchak as a sacrifice (Genesis 22,4), and it became important again in Exodus 19,16 as the day G’d revealed Himself to the Jewish people at Mount Sinai. This implies that the merit of their Torah learning also assisted the brothers when they confronted Joseph.
    
    42,19. שבר רעבון בתיכם, “the provisions to still the hunger of your families.” This verse contains the veiled lesson that man must not use food and drink in order to indulge himself and his palate but merely in order to maintain the health of his body. Solomon phrases this principle thus in Proverbs 13,25: “the righteous eats to sustain his life-force.” This is the reason that Joseph used the term שבר רעבון when speaking of the provisions he let them purchase. The limitation (rationing) was particularly appropriate at a time of famine when there is not enough food available to gorge oneself. The principal manifestation of a person’s יראת ה', fear of the Lord, is the manner in which he makes minimal use of the creature comforts available to him in this world. This is the reason that Joseph commenced this sentence with the words את האלו-הים אני ירא, “I am a G’d-fearing person.”
    
    42,20. ויעשו כן, “they did so.” This teaches that all the brothers willingly submitted to Joseph’s decision and said to him: “we are all at your disposal; take the one from amongst us whom you choose.”
    
    42,21. אבל אשמים אנחנו על אחינו, “but we are guilty concerning our brother, etc.” It is the customary thing for righteous people to acknowledge mistakes they have made and to acknowledge G’d’s justice when they feel they are being punished for some sin. This is the meaning of Leviticus 5,19  אשם הוא, אשום אשם לה', “it is a guilt offering; he has become guilty before the Lord.” [The Torah discusses a guilt-offering brought by a person who became aware of his error but had not been accused by man to have committed such an error. Ed.] By contrast, it is the norm for wicked people to deny that they committed any sins at all. This is the meaning of Zecharyah 11,5: “whose buyers will slaughter them with impunity.” They will not admit having committed a sin.
   אשר ראינו צרת נפשו בהתחננו אלינו, ”when we saw his soul in distress and he pleaded with us.” This verse seems to support the opinion of those who hold that it was not the brothers who actually sold Joseph. For if the brothers had been guilty of that crime they should have expressed their remorse for having sold him rather than for having remained deaf to his pleas. Their guilt had been to have thrown him into a pit and to have abandoned him to his fate. No doubt Joseph had pleaded with them not to throw him into the pit.
   על כן באה עלינו הצרה הזאת, “this is why this anguish has come upon us.” They meant: “we deserved this anguish as retribution for the anguish we caused Joseph.” The expression כן, describing the correctness of something also occurs in Numbers 27,7 when G’d told Moses that the daughters of Tzelofchod had been correct in their claim to share in the land of Canaan as the heirs of their father.
    
    42,22.הלא אמרתי לכם לאמור אל תחטאו בילד! ולא שמעתם, “did I not tell you saying: “do not incur a sin in the way you treat the child!- But you did not listen.”  Reuven meant that he had told the brothers at the time not to do anything to him seeing he was still a child, and his mistakes etc., were due to his youthful immaturity.  
   וגם דמו, “and also his blood.” The cruelty you displayed at the time when you threw him into the pit is now being requited. Although you did not kill him with your own hands you are now being punished as if you had done so. G’d considers your deed as if you had spilled your brother’s blood. Perhaps he died before attaining maturity and due to his spoiled upbringing he was not able to cope with the physical demands of serfdom (based on Nachmanides).
    
    42,24.ויקח מאתם את שמעון,  “he took from amongst them Shimon.” He kept Shimon in jail longer than the other brothers in order to keep him apart from Levi. He remembered that when it came to killing the males of the town of Shechem, Shimon and Levi had acted as a team. Yaakov referred to the matter on his deathbed when he said (Genesis 49,5-6) “Shimon and Levi are brothers (comrades), violence is their stock-in trade.”
    When the Torah writes in 42, 27: “The one opened his sack,” the words “the one” are a reference to Levi the other half of that team of brothers. Seeing the brothers had not been prepared to select one of their number who should remain behind as a hostage that they would return with Binyamin, Joseph had to make the selection himself. From this incident our sages derived an important ruling, i.e. that when Gentiles demand from Israelites that they hand over one of their number without specifying which person they are to hand over, that the Israelites must not make such a selection but must rather all face death than to condemn someone in their midst. (If however, the Gentiles selected a particular individual from amongst the Israelites and they threaten to kill all the Israelites unless that individual is handed over, the Israelites (in order to save their lives) must hand over the individual demanded from them) (Jerusalem Talmud Terumot 5,4).
    There is a well known example in Samuel II 20, 1-22  when Sheva ben Bichri, a rebel against the regime of King David, happened to be trapped amongst other Jews and David had given orders to liquidate this Sheva ben Bichri as a dangerous rebel. His commander-in-chief Yoav and his brother Avishai had surrounded the town in which Sheva ben Bichri found himself. A woman in that town saved the other townsfolk by persuading them to hand over the rebel and thus to save the inhabitants of the town from becoming victims of Yoav’s army. [this was during the period of Avshalom’s uprising against his father. Ed.]
    
    42,25. וימלאו את כליהם בר, “they filled their containers with grain.” They did not measure the quantity.
   ולהשיב את כספיהם איש אל שקו, “and to put back each man’s money into his sack.” so that the brothers would be unaware of this. This is why when one of them discovered his money in verse 28 they all became frightened. By contrast, when their money was replaced after their second trip to Egypt, Joseph informed them of that fact. As to the צידה, which the Torah says Joseph gave the brothers  to be eaten on the journey, this was an act of kindness. He wanted to convince the brothers that he had no hostile intentions towards them provided they could prove that they had spoken the truth. He gave them these extra provisions in order to enable them to bring their youngest brother to Egypt.
    
    42,28. מה זאת עשה אלו-הים לנו, “What is this that G’d had done to us?” They felt that G’d had repaid them for their deception of their father by now making them the victim of deception.
    
    42,37. את שני בני תמית, “you may kill two of my sons, etc.”  Reuven had four sons. According to the plain meaning of the text he meant to say that his father could kill two of his sons for one of Yaakov’s sons whom he would fail to bring back safely. According to Bereshit Rabbah 91,9 Yaakov told him that he was a foolish firstborn seeing that he assumed that his sons were only his sons and not also the sons of their grandfather.
    
    42,38. לא ירד בני עמכם, “my son will not go down (there) with you.” Yaakov did not say a word in response to Reuven’s offer of his sons as a guarantee. He had no confidence in Reuven seeing that he had previously sinned against his father in the matter with Bilhah’s couch. He did, however, have confidence in Yehudah, seeing Yehudah was the strongest  and had displayed mastery over the other brothers (Chronicles I 5,2). Yehudah’s argument presented Yaakov with two choices. According to Bereshit Rabbah 91,10 Yehudah told his brothers not to argue with their aged father but to wait until their shortage of food would make a trip to Egypt an absolute necessity. When that point was reached he told his father that whereas it was not certain Binyamin would not be arrested in Egypt, it was certain that if they did not travel to Egypt they would all perish from the famine. It was better therefore to have at least a chance of all of them surviving by fulfilling Joseph’s conditions.
    
    43,9. אנכי אערבנו מידי תבקשנו...וחטאתי לך כל הימים, “I will guarantee him, from me you can demand him;....or I will have sinned against you for all the days.” He meant that as long as he would live on earth he would consider himself as having sinned against his father. Solomon describes someone who steals from his parents as being a thief (although he stands to inherit his parents’ property) compare Proverbs 25,24. Such a person is described there as a sinner against his parents.
    
    43,10. כי לולא התמהמהנו, “for if we had not delayed, etc.”  According to Rabbeinu Chananel the brothers made do with eating as little as possible until their father would raise the subject of a return trip to Egypt. The sons of Yaakov were very sensitive in their respect for the feelings of their  father and did not brow beat him with their arguments, preferring to wait until Yaakov made the first move. Once Yaakov had shown willingness to let Binyamin travel, he also suggested five ways to help that trip become successful. First, he prepared a gift for the ruler of such a mighty country. Secondly, he told his sons to return the money which they had found in their sacks. It could have been an oversight on the part of a manager in Joseph’s household. Thirdly, he insisted that the money be returned for reasons of establishing their integrity as G’d-fearing people even if Joseph had never missed that money. Fourth,  he authorised the brothers to take Binyamin with them. Fifth and last, he prayed that the Almighty would grant the brothers mercy when they would face the ruler of Egypt.
    
    43,14. ושלח לכם את אחיכם אחר ואת בנימין, “and so that he may release to you your other brother as well as Binyamin.”  The reason that Yaakov did not mention Shimon by name may have been that he was out of favour with his father ever since the killing of the males in Shechem. Otherwise he would have said “so that he will release your brother Shimon.”
    Bereshit Rabbah 92,3 understands the word אחיכם, “your brother” as a reference to Joseph, whereas the word אחר, is understood as a reference to Shimon. When Yaakov offered the prayer he also had in mind Joseph in case the latter was still alive.
   וא-ל שדי יתן לכם רחמים לפני האיש, “and may the Almighty grant you mercy before the man.” We have learned in Sanhedrin 44 that one should make a practice of praying before one finds oneself in distress. We know this from the fact that Yaakov prayed for the safety of Binyamin before the latter had faced any difficulty. According to Tanchuma Miketz 10 the reason Yaakov invoked the attribute of Shaddai when he blessed his sons here was that Yaakov reminded himself of the many afflictions he had already experienced, commencing even before he was born when his twin brother quarreled with him inside his mother’s womb. Subsequently he had had to flee for his life on account of Esau; then he had experienced 20 years of frustrations at his uncle Lavan, etc. When he had finally left Lavan, Esau set out to kill him. Later on his daughter Dinah had been raped. Shortly thereafter his beloved wife Rachel died as a young woman and he was not even able to give her the funeral which befitted her status. Thereafter he suffered the disappearance of Joseph, to be followed by Shimon’s internment in Egypt. Now he was faced with the potential loss of Binyamin. One could truly apply to him the verse in Job 3,26: “I had no repose, no quiet, no rest, and trouble came.” He therefore hinted in his prayer שדי, “that it was enough” already. He meant that the One who had said די,”enough” to the evolutionary activities of the universe during the six days of creation, should now similarly proclaim די, “enough!” to his own problems.
    Our sages in Berachot 64 interpret Psalms 20,2: “May the Lord answer you in time of trouble, the name of Yaakov’s G’d  keep you safe;” as a reference to this attribute Shaddai. This was the reason that David mentioned only the G’d of Yaakov in that hymn and not that of Avraham and Yitzchak. We learn from here that one should always get hold of the thickest part of a beam when trying to move it.
    Rabbi Joshua son of Levi interpreted the use of the attribute Shaddai here as an allusion to future exile, comparing it to Psalms 106,46  ויתן אותם לרחמים לפני כל שוביהם, “He made all their captors kindly disposed toward them.” [in both verses the attribute רחמים, mercy, is also mentioned. Ed.]
    The words לפני האיש, are a veiled reference to G’d who is described in Exodus 15,3 as איש מלחמה, “a man (Master) of war.” He interprets the words: “and may He release to you your other brother,” as a reference to the ten tribes who were exiled before the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin. When Yaakov completed his prayer with the words וכאשר שכלתי שכלתי, “if I am to be bereaved, so I have been bereaved,” he referred to the respective destruction of both the first and the second Temple. At the same time he implied that after the destruction of the second Temple there would not occur another destruction of a Temple. 
    In Bereshit Rabbah 92,3 we read as follows: “Another approach to the words  “may the man grant his mercy, etc.” “The man” is G’d; Yaakov meant that this attribute of Mercy, one of G’d’s attributes, should stand by his sons in the forthcoming encounter. A prophet, even when praying for relief in a current crisis never fails to also address future crises the Jewish people may be faced with, and he orients himself so that his words cover both situations. In this instance Yaakov prayed that the benevolent Presence of G’d, שכינה, accompany the Jewish people also when they would be in exile. The word רחמים, refers to G’d’s attribute of Mercy. It is possible that the proof that the word האיש was also a reference to G’d is the fact that grammatically speaking it could not apply to Joseph. Yaakov had already said: שובו אל האיש, “return to the man”. Why would Yaakov use the same word twice to describe Joseph? All he had to say here was ויתן לך רחמים לפניו, referring to Joseph with the pronoun ending ו. Seeing that the words of a prophet are based on a careful evaluation of the meaning of the words he employs, it was necessary to interpret that the word האיש in our verse is not a mindless repetition of something Yaakov had already said. If Yaakov did not choose to refer to the attribute Shaddai he had mentioned previously as לפניו using the suffix ו, this is because he wanted to allude to the additional attribute of G’d  האישin the sense it has been used in Exodus when G’d was the Master warrior against the Egyptians. In Midrash Shir Hashirim we are taught in the name of ben Nezira that when G’d is referred to there as אשכל, that this is a combination of איש כל, “someone who combines within himself every quality, every attribute,” i.e. G’d. 
    43,15. ויקחו האנשים את המנחה הזאת, “the men took this gift.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the description of the brothers here as “men” rather than as “the brothers,” is to indicate the eagerness and determination with which they set out on their journey. Moreover, the term אנשים here as opposed to אחים reflected their great anxiety and their making sure that they would not be taken for brothers when they would arrive in Egypt. They even disguised themselves to forestall such an impression by those whom they would encounter.
    A kabbalistic approach: The expression אנשים here is an allusion to the ten sages who died a martyr’s death at the hands of the Romans in expiation for the sin of Joseph’s ten brothers who had sold him. This allusion commences with this verse and it is the reason why the term אנשים as applying to the brothers occurs ten times throughout the course of this story. I shall come back to this aspect of the story.
    
    43,16. וטבוח טבח, “and have meat slaughtered.” Joseph commanded Menashe his eldest son to do the slaughtering seeing that the sons of Yaakov were careful not to eat meat which had not been slaughtered in accordance with Jewish law.
   והכן, and prepare it.” This is either a reference to the removal of forbidden fat parts of the animal (חלב), or that he invited the brothers on the Sabbath eve to be his guests on the Sabbath. The word הכן is used in such a context in Exodus 16,5 where the Israelites are instructed to make preparation on Sabbath eve for consuming the manna which fell on that day on the Sabbath. Bereshit Rabbah 92,4 also states that the word הכן is invariably used with preparations for the Sabbath The use of the word הכן here would prove that Joseph observed the Sabbath prior to it having been legislated for the Jewish people.
   בצהרים, “at noon.” This is the time when ministers and highly placed officials eat their principal meal. They waited until that hour as they were preoccupied with various aspects of their service to the public. Solomon referred to people who eat early in the morning when he wrote in Kohelet 10,16: "Woe to you, O land, whose king acts as an adolescent, and whose ministers dine in the morning.” At the same time, Solomon praises the ones who eat their meal at noon (compare verse 17 in the above chapter of Kohelet).
    
    43,18. על דבר הכסף השב באמתחותינו, “on account of the money he had put back into our feeding bags.” They reasoned that it certainly was not the norm that the people who came to Egypt to buy grain would all be entertained overnight at the palace of the ruler. They would find their lodgings in different parts of the city, at various inns, etc. They assumed therefore that Joseph’s gesture in inviting them served only as an excuse to attack  them. They were afraid of a trumped up charge, and this is also the way Onkelos translates the words ולהתנפל עלינו not as a physical assault but as עלילת דברים, “false accusations.” 
   ולקחת אותנו לעבדים ואת חמורינו, “and to keep us as slaves as well as our donkeys.” At first glance the brothers’ concern about their donkeys appears disproportionate to their fear of becoming slaves. In this instance, not only did they worry about being deprived of their donkeys, animals which represented a lifeline, but they were even more concerned about these animals not carrying grain back to their families in Canaan. Their concern over their donkeys then was only a veiled form of their real worry about their families starving to death if they did not return. We find something similar in Exodus 17,3 when the Jewish people accused Moses of having taken them into the desert להמית אותי ואת בני ואת מקני בצמא, ”to kill me, my children and my cattle by thirst.” Normal people would not worry about their cattle in such a context seeing their own and their children’s lives were in jeopardy. But the Israelites mentioned the cattle (beasts of burden) as in their trek through the desert these animals were a lifeline for them. 
    43,29. אלו-הים יחנך בני, “may G’d be gracious to you my son.” The expression is similar to the one used by Yaakov when he referred to his children as the ones whom חנן אלו-הים “G’d was gracious enough to grant him.” (Genesis 33,5).
    
    43,30. כי נכמרו רחמיו, “for his compassion had been stirred.” This is a common feeling between people who share the same father and mother. [seeing Binyamin was the only one of the brothers who was a full brother to Joseph, his feelings were more tender towards him. Ed.]
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 94,5 the words כי נכמרו רחמיו אל אחיו allude to the following conversation between Joseph and Binyamin. Joseph asked: “do you have a full brother, one that has both the same father and mother as you?” Binyamin answered that he used to have such a brother but that he did not know what had become of him. When Joseph probed further, asking him if he had any children, Binyamin replied that indeed he had ten sons. To Joseph’s inquiry after the names of his sons, Binyamin told him the names. Joseph wanted to know the meaning of these names. Binyamin explained that they all represented his grief over his missing brother. The name Bela, for instance, represented the fact that apparently his missing brother had been “swallowed” up amongst the other nations so that his identity no longer could be determined. (The Midrash continues to elaborate on similar meanings of all of Binyamin’s sons.) Having heard all this, Joseph was so close to weeping that he had to leave the room in order not to give himself away.
    
    43,33. הבכור כבכורתו, “the firstborn in accordance with his birthright.” Joseph would strike his goblet and pronounce: ”Reuven, Shimon, Levi, Yehudah, Issachar and Zevulun are all sons of one mother.” He proceeded to seat them in the order of their birth. He repeated the same procedure with the other sons also. When he came to Binyamin, he said: “this one does not have a mother; I do not have a mother either.” He therefore immediately placed Binyamin next to himself.
    
   ויתמהו האנשים איש אל רעהו, “the men were looking at each other in astonishment.” The previous passage was taken from Bereshit Rabbah 92,5. At this point, the brothers began to wonder about the hidden properties of Joseph’s goblet. The problem with this interpretation of the words: “they were astonished,” is that if indeed the goblet possessed magic properties, Egypt was the country in which the magic arts had been perfected and the brothers should not have had any special reason to wonder about this. It appears that there was an element of vocal communication involved here, something other than the known varieties of Egyptian magic. Whereas normally, the people practicing the art of sorcery, magic, could hear only by means of living creatures which themselves possess a mouth, i.e. an organ by means of which they emit sounds which may be interpreted as words, in this instance an inert object such as Joseph’s goblet appeared to communicate such words to its owner. Our sages who are on record as saying that even the ears of corn proclaim their song of praise to G’d, have described the times the ears of corn as doing  this as being when the wind blows, i.e. when there are sound vibrations, some of which the ears of corn exploit in order to communicate their feeling to G’d. (compare Rashi on Rosh Hashanah 8 where these ears of corn are described as singing their song during the month of Nissan). At any rate, experts are able to discern more than just sounds when the wind blows through the corn fields. Joseph’s brothers (mistakenly) believed that the sound of Joseph striking the goblet translated to him into words, into an intelligent message. It was something they had never heard of.
    
    43,34. חמש ידות, “five times as great,” How did Joseph arrive at this amount? He gave Binyamin his share, plus the share of his wife Ossnat and his two sons making a total of five shares. 
   וישתו וישכרו עמו, “they drank and became drunk together with him.” This was the first time the brothers had drunk intoxicating drinks since the day they had sold Joseph some twenty years previously. Joseph too had not touched intoxicating drink since that day. This is alluded to in Genesis 49,26 where Yaakov described Joseph as נזיר אחיו, “a Nazirite with his brothers.”
    
    44.1. כאשר יוכלון שאת, “as much as they were able to carry.” According to Nachmanides this means that Joseph provided them with far more grain that they were entitled to for the amount of money they had brought with them.
   ושים כסף איש בפי אמתחתו, “and place each one’s money at the top of his feeding bag.” This time their money was replaced with their knowledge, as opposed to the first time. Had Joseph not advised the brothers that he was returning their money (at least the money they brought as substitution) they would have a valid excuse once the goblet would be discovered in Binyamin’s sack. Now that Joseph had proven that he dealt with the brothers in an above-board manner, they would not be able to claim that he had once before deceived them by planting something in their luggage. They were also aware that Joseph had loaded their beasts to the utmost capacity. Joseph might have argued that even this time the money which he put in their sacks was a gift from G’d, an argument that could not be used as applying to his goblet.
    If we were to assume that now too the money the brothers found in their sacks had been placed there without their knowledge, he might have argued that whereas the money was again a treasure their G’d had granted them, the same could not apply to his personal goblet. They would not be able to argue (successfully) with someone stronger than they. Remember that Egypt was a country in which there occurred many disturbances (compare Amos 3,9). In order to avoid becoming victims of muggers etc., the travelers who came to Egypt to buy grain entrusted their beasts, their sacks as well as their money, to the officials who would measure out the grain for their rations. The official would measure out grain for them in accordance with the amount of money they had deposited with him. The buyers would accept what was given to them without double-checking and thereby displaying distrust in the Egyptian government (based on Kohelet 8,4). The brothers therefore had good reason not to appear suspicious and to double-check what Joseph’s officials had done when filling their sacks.
    
    44,3-4. והאנשים שולחו, המה וחמוריהם. הם יצאו את העיר. “The men had been discharged, they and their donkeys. They had left the city.” In this verse you also find a number of allusions to how  G’d’s principle of retribution corresponds to the nature of the sin committed. In this instance, the brothers’ sin was the sale of Joseph. The retribution is linked to the sale of grain to the brothers. I have already explained in connection with Genesis 11,9 that every time the Holy Name of G’d (י-ה-ו-ה) appears in the Torah in a reverse order of the letters of that name, it is a reference to the attribute of Justice at work. In this instance the first letters of the words המה וחמוריהם הם יצאו comprise that name spelled backwards. As a result of this the brothers had to retrace their steps.
   לא הרחיקו, “they had not traveled far.” Joseph intercepted them promptly so that they would not lose too much time in retracing their steps.
    
    44,5. הלא זה אשר ישתה אדוני בו, “is this not what my master drinks out of?” He meant: “is not this goblet which you have stolen the one from which my master is in the habit of drinking?” The reason Joseph had used his goblet as the item he accused Binyamin of having stolen was that by stealing such an item from the palace of the ruler the crime is viewed as also a direct insult aimed at that ruler. The penalty would unquestionably be death.
   והוא נחש ינחש בו “and it is this he uses to divine things!” You should have considered that Joseph will ask other diviners to tell him what happened to his goblet. Joseph’s servant said this in order to explain why of all possible thieves who had come to Egypt from afar he had decided to pursue just the brothers. He claimed to have received this information from other people who practiced the art of divining.
    
    44,7-8. למה ידבר אדוני כדברים האלה, וגו'...הן כסף אשר מצאנו בפי אמתחותננו השיבונו אליך ואיך נגנוב?, “why does my lord speak such words? ..Here the money we found in the mouth of our feeding bags we returned; how is it possible to think we would steal, etc.” Our sages used this argument as one of ten classic pieces of logic (קל וחומר) which are spelled out in the Torah. The argument is: “if we returned even what we found, how could we be suspected of stealing outright?” (Bereshit Rabbah 92,7)
    
    44,10. גם עתה כדבריכם כן הוא, “also now I accept your words.” He meant that according to Egyptian law all of the brothers were considered guilty if one of them had stolen. However, he would not apply the full severity of the law and would be content with punishing only the person in whose sack the goblet would be found.
   
    44,12. בגדול החל, “he began by searching the sack of the oldest.” He did this in order that they should not realise the goblet had been a plant.
   וימצא הגביע באמתחת בנימין, “the goblet was discovered in the feeding bag of Binyamin.” His other brothers began to shame him by calling him “thief,” and other disparaging names, referring to his mother who had stolen the teraphim of her father Lavan (Genesis 31,19). They also struck him on his shoulders. Seeing that Binyamin had been unjustly suspected by his brothers of being a thief he was compensated by G’d in that the Holy Temple was erected on his tribal territory. This is what Moses meant in his blessing of Binyamin (Deut. 33,12) when he said ובין כתיפיו ישכון that G’d’s Presence would reside between “the shoulders of Binyamin.” He also became the ancestor of Mordechai, who had torn his garments in lament for the fate that threatened the Jewish people at the hands of Haman (Esther 4,1). The brothers deserved to have to rend their garments (verse 13) seeing they had caused their father to rend his garments (Genesis 37,34) when he mourned the presumed death of Joseph. Everything that befell the brothers was in the nature of the punishment fitting the crime.
    Menashe, Joseph’s firstborn, acted as his father’s emissary in all these matters as the Torah describes him as “in charge of Joseph’s palace” (verse 1) and Targum Yonatan writes that Menashe was the individual the Torah referred to. Seeing that Menashe allowed himself to become part of this deception and caused the brothers to rend their clothing in frustration, his tribal territory was rent, i.e. was divided, part of it being on the East Bank of the river Jordan.
    
    44,14. ויפלו לפניו ארצה, “they fell to the ground before him (Joseph).” All ten brothers fell to the ground plus Binyamin. This was the realisation of Joseph’s dream in which eleven stars bowed down to him (37,9).
    
    44,16.מה נאמר לאדוני  “what can we say to my lord?” this was a reference to the first sums of money which had been returned to them. מה נדבר; “how can we speak?” this was a reference to the goblet. ומה נצטדק “and how can we justify ourselves?” What argument can we possibly use? האלו-הים מצא את עון עבדיך, “G’d has found out the guilt of your servants.” They said: “we know that we are innocent of this charge; but, we are guilty of a different crime and the accuser has now leveled his accusations against us before the throne of G’d.” (based on Bereshit Rabbah 92,9). As a result of these considerations: הננו עבדים לאדוני גם אנחנו גם אשר נמצא הגביע בידו, “we are prepared to be slaves of my lord, both we and the one in whose hand the goblet has been found.”
    
    44,17. חלילה לי מעשות זאת, “far be it from me to do such a thing!” “Seeing that I am the judge of the whole country I could not possibly act in such an illegal (violent) manner against  you.” Apparently, Joseph interpreted the Egyptian statute which decreed collective guilt when a member of a group was found guilty of stealing as applying only when all the members of that group had been aware of and had approved such a theft. When the stolen object was found in the possession of one person and there was no evidence that he had acted as part of the group, only he would be held responsible and would be executed. This is why the brothers said: “we will all be slaves.” This was equivalent to their saying: “we punish ourselves to be slaves to my lord.” The words גם אנחנו, “we also,” mean: “also we who are innocent of the charge.” To this statement Joseph replied that it was out of the question that he should accept their offer.
   האיש אשר נמצא הגביע בידו, “the man in whose hand the goblet has been found,” he is guilty of the death penalty; this is the meaning of the extra word הוא in this part of the verse. However, “I do not want  to kill him; “
   הוא יהיה לי עבד, ואתם, “he will become my slave; as for you” who are innocent,
   עלו לשלום אל אביכם,” go on home to your father.”
    A kabbalistic approach to this dialogue: The fact that this Parshah concludes with the words עלו לשלום אל אביכם, “go on up to your father in peace,” is a reference to the ten martyrs (of whom we have spoken repeatedly) who were tortured to death by the Romans supposedly because the brothers had never paid the penalty prescribed by Jewish law for kidnapping. The words “in peace to your father” refer to “your father in heaven.” Joseph meant that once the brothers had been cleansed of their sin against Joseph they could once more face the G’d in heaven upon their deaths and take their place in the hereafter.
    You are acquainted with the fact that the entire Joseph tragedy began when his father Yaakov made a coloured coat for him which Joseph wore as a sign of distinction. The fact that the brothers dipped the coloured coat of Joseph in the blood of a male goat which they specially slaughtered for that purpose telling their father: “this is what we have found,” was considered an act of great cruelty on their part. This is why their punishment which involved their bodies commenced immediately after Joseph’s death. Eventually, during the time of the Romans and after the destruction of the second Temple [which was destroyed due to an excess of groundless hatred between Jew and Jew. Ed.] the ten martyrs paid the last installment of that penalty with their deaths. As a reminder of all this, our Parshah mentions the word אנשים or האנשים a total of ten times when describing the brothers. Had it not been for this consideration, the Torah would have called them אחי יוסף, “Joseph’s brothers” or “the sons of Yaakov” each time. [The author lists the ten instances. I leave this to he reader. Ed.]
    It is important to realise that contrary to a perception that all the ten martyrs listed in our prayers commemorating their death as martyrs occurred at one and the same time, this is simply not so. We find the following text in Pirke Heychalot: “Rabbi Yishmael said that the decree to torture these sages to death came out on a Thursday. News came from the capital in Rome that Emperor Lupinos had ordered the execution of four of the outstanding Jewish scholars. They were Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel, Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha, Rabbi Eleazar ben Dama, and Rabbi Yehudah ben Baba. Many thousands of other scholars in Jerusalem offered to take the place of those condemned. When Rabbi Nechunyah ben Hakanah realised that this decree was irrevocable he inquired about it from Suriel the Sar Hapanim (one of the angels close to the attribute of Justice). He was told that actually, in the books of G’d (attribute of Justice), there was a list of ten scholars whose lives had been handed over to Samael, (the angel of death) the guardian angel of Esau. The instructions which this guardian angel of Esau had received at the time were to destroy amongst the leaders of Israel every “good cut of meat” and throw it into the cauldron.” The purpose of this decree was to complete the expiation needed for the sin of the brothers who had sold Joseph at the time, and who had violated the prohibition in Exodus 21,16 “if someone steals and sells a person and the party concerned is found in his hands, he is to be executed.” This decree, i.e. application of this penalty, could be delayed all the time until “In that day, the Lord will punish the host of heaven in heaven and the kings of the earth on earth” (Isaiah 24,21). This expiation could occur by means of the goats and sheep on Yom Kippur.
    Rabbi Yishmael said that Samael had heard all these threats and conditions and that he had said that he accepted them. As a result he chose 10 of the outstanding scholars of Israel to be that unexpired expiation, “scape-goat,” for what had been done to Joseph. When G’d heard about these resolutions of Samael, i.e. the Romans to kill ten outstanding Jewish scholars, He was so angry that He imediately wrote down decrees which would afflict the entire Roman Empire, each one for six months at a time. As a result of all the afflictions that will strike the Romans at that time, one individual will say to another that if he were offered the entire Roman Empire in exchange for a minor copper coin he would decline to make such a purchase. Thus far the quote from Pirke Heychalot [with minor changes. Ed.]
    One of the amazing statements in that passage concerns Rabbi Chanina ben Tradyan who supposedly was exchanged for Emperor Lupinos who was burned in his stead. Similar statements appear concerning the other martyrs on that famous list. Concerning such far-out statements, I have heard that they must be understood as analogous to the binding of Yitzchak. Once Avraham was irrevocably committed to slaughtering Yitzchak, and the latter had accepted the decree, he was replaced by the ram Avraham found which had been caught in the thicket (Genesis 22,13). According to that view something similar occurred with all of the ten martyrs. Seeing that they had submitted to G’d’s decree it became possible to exchange them for Romans or others. The point is that once the lives of these scholars were spared they were in effect reborn. It is therefore no contradiction to say that they had indeed died a martyr’s death. These scholars had all “tasted” death so that the sin for which their lives were meant to expiate had been wiped out  once and for all.
    When the Torah wrote: “and place each man’s money at the mouth of his feeding bag,” this was an allusion that the Torah treats the life-force, נפש, of a person as equivalent to minted silver wheras his body is compared to a feeding bag seeing it contains the soul (silver). I believe we can carry this allusion a little further when we look at 43,10 when Yehudah said: “we could have returned already twice.” He may have hinted at something we find in Job [based on the concept of a soul’s repeated return to life on earth in order to cleanse itself of sins committed in a former life. Ed.]. In Job 34,36 and 33,29 the point is made that in order to deal finally with some sin, retribution may have to be spread over several installments. [Rabbi Moshe Alshich makes this point more clearly when explaining why G’d did not wipe out Pharaoh with a single plague. His sins were such that a single act of retribution would not have sufficed to punish him. He had to have relief between one affliction and the next in order to absorb and suffer the next installment. Ed.]
    Job 33,29 פעמים שלוש עם גבר, “two or three times with a man,” may be a reference to the need for someone to be reincarnated repeatedly in order to expiate for sins committed in a previous incarnation. The words וישובו העירה describing the return of the brothers to the capital of Egypt may be an allusion to Yehudah’s feeling on the matter. All the Torah had needed to write was וישובו מצרימה, “they returned to Egypt.” The use of the word העירה suggests a meta-physical aspect of the matter. (compare the use of the word עיר as a hyperbole in Kohelet 9,14) This is the reason that the Parshah concludes with the words
   ואתם עלו לשלום אל אביכם, “and you return and make your peace with your father (in heaven).” Menashe could simply have said: ”go on your way in peace.” Seeing that the Torah focuses on the ten brothers and the grievous wrong they had done to their brother Joseph, it is not surprising that the Torah also uses this opportunity to hint at the historical consequences of the brothers’ behaviour at the time. Our sages in Pesachim 50 go so far as to say that the acceptance of G’d’s decree by the ten martyrs who died a cruel death at the hands of the Romans for a crime committed over fifteen hundred years earlier put these people into a class by themselves, one that could not be matched in piety/faith by anyone else previously. We can apply to them the verse in Isaiah 64,3: “Such things have never been heard or seen. No eye has seen them O G’d, but You, who acts for those who trust in Him.”
    
    
    
    
   ויגש אליו יהודה
    
   מענה רך ישיב חמה, ודבר עצב יעלה כעס, “A gentle response turns away wrath; a harsh word causes anger.” (Proverbs 15,1) Solomon warns us in this verse to train ourselves to become mature enough to respond in measured tones even to extreme provocations.  A softly worded reply is apt to reduce the wrath of someone who had expressed himself very angrily. On the other hand, provocative responses are apt to incite the party to whom they are addressed.
     It is a well known fact that the spoken word possesses the power to achieve either positive or negative results. Speech is to man what fruit is to a tree. If we were not able to verbalise our thoughts we would not be human anymore than a tree which does not bear fruit  does truly  perform the function for which trees have been created. [compare Rashi on the earth failing to fully respond to G’d’s command to produce trees which had both edible trunks and edible fruit Genesis 1,12. Ed.] When the Torah wrote (Genesis 2,1) “man became a living creature,” it meant to inform us that the essential part of man was its נפש חיה, its life-force, i.e. its ability to communicate its thoughts by means of speech. This is why Onkelos translates this expression as לרוח ממללא, “a talking spirit.” We have examples of speech being considered as “a fruit, i.e. as a product “ in Isaiah 57,19: בורא ניב שפתים “who creates  the fruit of the lips.” Speech is the product of one’s lips. If Isaiah attributed the fruit of the lips to something G’d had “created,” this is due to the fact that speech is derived, distilled, from the abstract power of the human brain. Man’s נפש life-force, is different from that of the animals which do not possess this power of speech. This advantage man possesses over the animals is expressed in Job 35,11 in these words: “who gives us more knowledge than the beasts of the earth, makes us wiser than the birds of the sky.” We also have a verse in Proverbs 18,21 making this point even more strongly. Solomon writes “death and life are within the power of the tongue.” This is a warning to those people who indulge in free use of their tongue to be very careful with each word they utter as their words may hold an awesome power which must not be abused. Such power is to be used to spread the knowledge of Torah, to further the performance of G’d’s commandments, etc.. It must not be used for anything contrary as then it becomes an instrument leading to someone’s death. Solomon tells us that if one uses most of one’s words  in the right way this leads to man qualifying for Leviticus 19,24 “all its fruit shall be set aside for jubilation before the Lord.” People who are circumspect in the use of their tongue will qualify for a great deal of reward. If, perchance, they abuse this power of speech on a regular basis, they will be severely punished. It is precisely because the power of speech is so crucial to man that Solomon felt impelled to teach us something about the prudent use of this power. He taught us that a gentle response is apt to influence even the decisions of powerful kings and to assuage their feelings if they had been bruised. 
    In Proverbs 16,14 Solomon writes: “the king’s wrath is a messenger of death.” Yehudah, who was very well aware of the potential of any words he might say, couched what he had to say in words which were apt to touch the heart of even the most obstinate ruler. Joseph’s relenting and revealing himself to the brothers was the direct result of the diplomatic use of his tongue by Yehudah. Had he accused Joseph of planting the goblet in Binyamin’s bag, something which was the truth, after all, he would not have achieved the desired result, i.e. to make Joseph reconsider his decree to keep Binyamin as a slave. Yehudah had three major objectives  i.e. to assuage Joseph’s anger with words. 2) to demand his rights on a legal basis. 3) (as a last resort) to take Binyamin back by force. This is the meaning of 
    
    44,18. ויגש אליו יהודה ויאמר בי אדוני, ידבר נא עבדך דבר באזני אדוני ואל יחר אפך בעבדך כי כמוכך כפרעה, “Yehudah approached him and said: “if you please my lord, may your servant speak a word in my lord’s ears and let not your anger  flare up at your servant- for you are equal to Pharaoh.” The expression הגשה, “approach” is found as having one of three meanings. דין, פיוס, מלחמה “judgment, reconciliation, or war.” (based on Bereshit Rabbah 93,4) “and they approach the court and they shall judge them.” It occurs as meaning reconciliation in Joshua 14,6: “the members of the tribe of Yehudah approached Joshua, etc.” Finally, it occurs as a prelude to war in Samuel II 10,13: “Yoav and the people with him marched into  battle.” In this instance, Yehudah combined all these three meanings of the word when he “approached” Joseph. When he said בי אדני, this meant that he gave Joseph the chance to choose which of the three kinds of 
הגשה he wanted to make the basis of this meeting. He spoke like someone who is fully armed, ready for a military confrontation. He meant: “you may find in me a partner for discussion on any one of these three levels. If you want to be conciliatory, fine and good. If you want to debate the rights and wrongs of what has happened also well and good. If, however, you want to use your military power to enforce your decree I am willing to confront you also on that basis.
    Alternatively, the word בי here means: “(the guilt is all) mine.” He said this seeing that superficially it appeared that the entire guilt was that of Binyamin in whose sack the goblet had been found. He pleaded with Joseph not to treat Binyamin as the sole guilty party but to consider him, Yehudah,  the guilty party instead. He asked Joseph to keep him as a slave in lieu of Binyamin and to treat him as if he had been the guilty party. He wanted Joseph to set Binyamin free. Throughout the entire story Yehudah focused on substituting for Binyamin. When he said the words ידבר נא עבדך דבר he meant that this “word” would be instead of any that Binyamin would have to say. Yehudah had no other purpose than to serve as the surrogate slave instead of his brother Binyamin. 
    He went on by explaining why it was seemly for Joseph to listen to his plea and to his reasons, seeing כי כמך כפרעה, “you are of equal stature to Pharaoh,” and as such  it is incumbent upon you to at least listen to my arguments. Yehudah then proceeded to explain that seeing he had guaranteed the safety of Binyamin it was logical that he should take it upon himself to pay any penalty Binyamin had incurred.
    Having taken permission to speak by saying ידבר נא עבדך דבר באזני אדני, Yehudah came to the substance of the issue, i.e. the circumstances preceding Binyamin traveling to Egypt altogether. He used the tactic suggested by Solomon in being extremely gentle in any implied rebuke of Joseph’s part in this whole affair. He begins with the fact that Joseph had inquired about their family background in order to appeal to his feelings of mercy. At the same time he implied that Joseph had described himself as a G’d-fearing man in 42,18. He reminds Joseph 
   אדוני שאל את עבדיך לאמור, “my lord asked your servants to say,” Yehudah reminded Joseph that he and his brothers had not volunteered speaking about their family status, etc. but had been forced to do so in answer to Joseph’s inquiries concerning their younger brother. Originally, they had not been willing to have  Binyamin travel to Egypt at all and had only brought him there in response to Joseph’s ultimatum. By giving them this ultimatum Joseph had severely endangered their aged father’s peace of mind. Had it not been a matter of survival for them to come to Egypt and to buy grain, they would never have been able to persuade their father to agree that his youngest son Binyamin undertake a potentially dangerous journey. If Binyamin would now fail to return home his father would die an embittered man.
   והורידו עבדיך, “and your servants would bring down;”  Yehudah used a third person pronoun, i.e. “they would bring down,” instead of saying “you would bring down.” He did not want to accuse Joseph outright of becoming the cause of their father’s premature death as an embittered man. By adding the words עבדיך, “your servants,” meaning himself, he suggested that by keeping him instead of Binyamin, Joseph would not only save their father’s life, but he would acquire a far better slave than Binyamin seeing that he, Yehudah, was superior to Binyamin in all aspects pertaining to performing the tasks allocated to slaves. Moreover, Joseph would thereby be spared the sin of failing to honour his guarantee that he would bring Binyamin back safely.
   ועתה ישב נא עבדך תחת הנער עבד לאדוני...כי איך אעלה אל אבי והנער אינני אתי?; “And now allow your servant to remain as a slave to my lord,...for how could I return to my father when the lad is not with Me? Yehudah made it plain that he would feel more at ease as a slave for the rest of his life than returning as a free man to his father minus Binyamin.
    A Midrashic approach  based on Tanchuma Vayigash 3 to Yehudah’s speech. The words ויגש יהודה introduce a confrontation between the lion and the ox. Yehudah represents the lion (Gen. 49,9), Joseph the ox (Deut. 33,17). The words בי אדני are a plea not to apply the attribute of Justice when judging Binyamin as well as themselves. The words: “let me say a word in the hearing of my lord,” mean “may my words find a receptive ear.” He then proceeded to tell Joseph that Sarah, the great-grandmother of Binyamin had been kept against her will in the palace of a previous Pharaoh. (Genesis 12,17) As a result, both Pharaoh and his entire household had been so stricken by G’d that he immediately not only released her but pacified her husband with generous gifts. Joseph was to reflect what this G’d would to him if he tried to keep Binyamin as a slave. He added that Binyamin’s mother died prematurely due to a carelessly worded curse by her husband Binyamin’s father (Gen. 31,32). Imagine what would happen if his father were now to pronounce a deliberate curse upon Joseph for depriving him of his son! He asked Joseph to also reflect on the fact that two of their number had destroyed an entire city (Gen. 34,25). He could imagine what all of them could do if they set their mind on it. At that time the reason for their act of vengeance had been the rape of their sister. This time it involved freedom of a male, their brother. Seeing this male was destined to house the Sanctuary of the G’d of the heavens on earth (Deut. 33,12), they would move heaven and earth to ensure that that prophecy would be fulfilled. Yehudah added: ”for you are like Pharaoh.” He meant: “just as Pharaoh makes promises and does not keep them, so you too make promises and do not keep them.” You had said that you merely wanted to take a look at Binyamin to convince yourself that we had spoken truthfully (42,20). Just as Pharaoh is known to indulge his homosexual tastes, so you appear to want to keep Binyamin for similar reasons. Just as Pharaoh is the King and you are his number two, my father has the rank of king in his country and I am second in command. He added that if he were to draw his sword he would start by slaying Joseph and finish by slaying Pharaoh.
    
    44,22. ועזב את אביו ומת, “if he leaves his father he will die. The lad will die from the onerous conditions of the journey seeing he is such a spoiled lad.  It is possible that the words refer also to Yaakov dying in the event that Binyamin would not be restored to him. This teaches that the life of a father is tied in some way to the life of his son. Yehudah spelled this out more clearly in verse thirty with the words ונפשו קשורה בנפשו, “his soul is tied to his soul.” This is even clearer in verse thirty-one: “when he sees that the lad is missing  he will die;”
    
    44,27. ילדה לי אשתי, “my wife bore for me.” The Torah should really have written “Rachel bore for me.” However, the point Yehudah made was that he too was aware that Yaakov had considered only Rachel his true wife, seeing that he had served Lavan for Rachel and not for Leah. His marrying Leah had been a totally unwilling act on his part. Yaakov’s true wife had borne him only two children one of whom had disappeared. His love for these two was therefore exceptional. If you will search the Bible you will find that Rachel’s name always precedes that of Leah though Leah was the older of the two. Even in the Book of Ruth, where the townsfolk of Bethlehem congratulate Boaz on taking Ruth as a wife, they phrase their blessing in these words: “may she become like Rachel and Leah who built up the house of Israel.” There are numerous other verses in all of which Rachel is mentioned before her older sister.
    
    44,32. כי עבדך ערב את הנער, “for your servant has guaranteed the safety of the lad.” I have undertaken to be surety for him in a manner which is irrevocable and not subject to any redemption by substitution. If I fail to honour the terms of my guarantee all my brothers will remain within the family circle whereas I will be condemned to remain outside. I will be ostracised both in this life and in the hereafter. This is the meaning of the words: “I have sinned against you for all time” (43,9). Another example in Scripture where the words כל הימים also refer to both life in the terrestrial world and life in the hereafter is found in Deut. 6,24 לטוב לנו כל הימים. When Yehudah said here וחטאתי לאבי כל הימים, this may be understood as “I have sinned against my Father in Heaven.” Yehudah included both his biological father Yaakov as well as his father in heaven in this statement. Seeing that Joseph was on record as “I am a G’d-fearing man” (42,18), Yehudah reminded him of his committing a sin against his father in heaven if he were to keep Binyamin as a slave for himself. He would also be guilty of committing a wrong in both worlds.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 93,1 the words “for your servant has guaranteed the lad,” are reminiscent of what Solomon said in Proverbs 6,1: “my son if you have become surety for your friend, etc.” It is customary for the guarantor to ask the potential borrower: “do you want me to guarantee the loan for you?” Concerning such an invitation to become a surety for a second party, Solomon warns (Proverbs 6,2) “you are trapped by the wards of your mouth.” The guarantor usually agreed to the lender’s request and this is why Solomon describes him as trapping himself by his words. In verse three of that chapter. Solomon warns a guarantor who is trapped by his guarantee that in order to extricate himself from his commitment he should try to use humility and plead with his friend. He should ask for an extension from the lender and should ask the borrower to release him from his guarantee. Solomon used Yehudah’s guarantee of Binyamin as the model for these verses and his advice. Having heard all this, Joseph replied: “why did you not guarantee your other brother just as you have guaranteed the safety of Binyamin?” He added that he could see in his goblet that Yehudah sold his other brother for a sum of money and caused his father a great deal of anguish so that he exclaimed: “Joseph has been torn to shreds by a wild beast.” Whereas Joseph at the time had not been guilty of a sin against Yehudah, Binyamin had proven to be a thief.
    When Yehudah heard Joseph’s words he exclaimed in a loud voice: “how can I go up and the lad is not with me, etc.?” He challenged Joseph to debate the issue with him, at the same time telling his brother Naftali, the most fleet-footed one of their number, to check the number of public markets in Egypt in preparation for going to battle. Naftali came back reporting that there were twelve such market places. Yehudah undertook to destroy three of them single-handedly. Joseph warned him that Egypt was not comparable to Shechem. If they were going to destroy Egypt this would be equivalent to destroying the earth. (seeing the whole earth depended on Egypt’s grain supplies). To this Yehudah replied that Joseph had accused him and his brothers of being spies already when they came to Egypt the first time, a totally unjustified accusation. Secondly, he had accused them of looking for weak points in Egypt. Thirdly, he had accused them now of stealing the goblet. Whereas he, Yehudah, swore in the name of the Almighty G’d, Joseph, by contrast had sworn by the life of Pharaoh the pagan. It was clear that if he would draw his sword he would cause a blood-bath in Egypt.
    After this outburst by Yehudah, Joseph told him that if he dared draw his sword, he, Joseph, would strangle him with it by wrapping it around his own neck. To this Yehudah replied: “if I so much as open my mouth I will swallow you.” Joseph countered: “if you open your mouth I will shut it with a rock.” Yehudah then asked:  “what shall I tell my father if I return without Binyamin?” To this Joseph replied: “tell him that the rope followed the bucket.” [an allusion to Binyamin having a genetic tendency to steal. Rachel his mother had stolen the teraphim having given birth to a son who became a thief also.] Yehudah shot back that Joseph was framing them and judging them for a sin they had not committed. Joseph retorted that the only perverted justice at stake was the sale of their brother. Yehudah then said that the holy fervor which had imbued him in their fight against Shechem which was caused because of sin involving illegitimate sex was beginning to fill him now. Thereupon Joseph replied that the sin of illegitimate sex he should be thinking about was that of sleeping with his daughter-in-law Tamar. He implied that it did not take much to extinguish Yehudah’s supposedly sincere fervor. Yehudah responded shouting: “I am boiling over with fury and no one takes me seriously!” Joseph said it would be easy to cool down Yehudah’s anger. Thereupon Yehudah announced that he was about to go and paint the market places of Egypt with the blood of its people. To this Joseph replied that this was nothing new. The brothers had experience in painting their brother’s coat with blood and bringing it to their father suggesting to him that it was Joseph’s blood and that the latter had been attacked and killed by a ferocious beast. At that point all the brothers agreed to destroy Egypt. When Joseph realised this he said to himself: “I have to reveal myself to them so that they will not destroy Egypt.” At this point he said to them: “I am your brother Joseph.”
    
    45,1. ולא יכול יוסף להתאפק לכל הנצבים עליו, “Joseph could no longer control his emotions from all those who stood around him.” It appears from this wording that the courtiers around Joseph became gradually more inclined to side with Yehudah in that argument, something that Joseph was not prepared to tolerate. This is why he ordered them out of his presence, calling out: “remove everyone from my presence!”  Subsequently, the Torah reports: ויתן את קולו בבכי, “he raised his voice by weeping.” He broke out crying after he was left alone with the brothers,
   וישמעו מצרים וישמע בית פרעה, “The Egyptians heard; then this was heard in Pharaoh’s palace.”  According to Tanchuma Vayigash 5 things happened somewhat differently. The words “Joseph could no longer control himself” reflect a tremendous inner conflict raging within Joseph. If the brothers were to kill him, he had no next of kin who would demand to avenge his blood. He finally decided to take a chance on the brothers killing him rather than his exposing the fact that he had been kidnapped and sold into slavery by these men. This was the consideration which prompted him to order everybody out of the room.
    
    45,3. העוד אבי חי “is my father still alive?” Joseph’s very first words concerned the well being of his father and the concern if he was still alive.
   ולא יכלו אחיו לענות אותו כי נבהלו מפניו, “his brothers were not able to answer him as they had become frightened of him.” They were dumbstruck realising that they had sold him into slavery and now he wielded the authority of a king. They were also scared that he would take revenge on them now. The expression נבהלו occurs in that sense in Isaiah 13,8 ונבהלו צירים וחבלים יאחזון, “And, overcome by terror, they shall be seized by pangs and throes.”
    According to Tanchuma Vayigash 5 Joseph said to them: “did you not say: ‘this one’s brother is dead?’ I shall call upon him now and he will come to me.” Thereupon he started calling: “Joseph, son of Yaakov, come to me!.” The brothers looked at each of the four corners of the room and nothing happened. Then Joseph said: “what are you looking for, I am your brother Joseph!” When the brothers heard that they lost consciousness. This is why they could not answer  him. Rabbi Yochanan used this experience of Joseph’s brothers to exclaim “woe to us on the day of our death, woe to us when we will be called upon to answer for our sins.” If the brothers were so stricken when they heard Joseph reveal himself to his them, how much more will we be frightened when we stand before G’d to be judged! This is what is meant by the verse in Isaiah 10,3: “What will you do on the day of punishment, when the calamity comes from afar?” Another verse on the same theme is found in Maleachi 3,2: “But who can endure the day of his coming, and who can hold out when he appears?”
    
    45,4. גשו נא אלי ויגשו, “step closer to me! They stepped closer.” When Joseph saw that the brothers were frightened and were trying to retreat he told them to come closer to him in order to calm their fear. According to Bereshit Rabbah 93,10 the reason he asked them to step closer was to show them that he had been circumcised, repeating that he was their brother and felt as their brother in spite of their having sold him. He told them that he would not “boss” them around at all.
    
    45,10. והיית קרוב אלי, “and you will be close to me.” The land of Goshen is close to the capital of Egypt. Joseph was well aware that his father would not want to reside in the capital; this is why he arranged for him to live in Goshen. Concerning the words: 
   וכלכלתי אותך שם... פן תורש, “I will provide for you there. so that you will not become impoverished,” (verse 11) the meaning of these words is: “if you remain in Canaan you will surely become impoverished during the next five years of famine.” Joseph implied that he would not be able to look after his family economically while they were in the land of Canaan as he would be suspected of sending them grain in order to trade in it on the local market and to profiteer through their connection to him. Furthermore, they would suspect that the export of such grain supplies to his family were only a prelude to his own return there. On the other hand, if they would all come to Egypt everyone would know that he had no reason to return to Canaan and that he was not amassing a secret fortune in order to enable him to leave the country.
    
    45,12 .והנה עיניכם רואות ועיני אחי בנימין, “and here you can see with your own eyes and so do the eyes of my full brother Binyamin.” He equated Binyamin with the total of the other brothers. The Torah teaches that the love of the other brothers for him was no less than that of Binyamin who had not been a party to the sale.
   כי פי המדבר אליכם, “that it is my mouth that is speaking to you.” He referred to the fact that he addressed them in Hebrew (without interpreter). According to Nachmanides the fact that Joseph had a command of Hebrew did not prove that he was their brother as many people in Egypt knew that tongue and the ruler was bound by law to be familiar with all the languages spoken in countries which had trade relations with Egypt. The proof of his identity was the revelation that he knew they had sold their brother Joseph to Egypt. The meaning of the words: “that my mouth is speaking to you,” was a reference to his authority and that by dint of this authority he decreed that the brothers bring their father to Egypt as well as their families. By underlining that he was “your brother,” he demonstrated that he had their welfare at heart when he wanted them to move to Egypt.
    According to Megillah 16 the words mean that “my mouth speaks only what is in my heart.” Although Joseph made no reference to his heart, our sages arrive at this conclusion as he could simply have said: “I am speaking to you.” He mentioned “my mouth” as the mouth is the instrument used to convey feelings of the heart.
    
    45,14. ויפול על צוארי בנימין אחיות, “he fell on the neck of his brother Binyamin.” The verse tells us that Joseph embraced Binyamin and Binyamin embraced his brother Joseph by each one falling on the other’s neck, a customary gesture amongst brothers who wanted to demonstrate their fondness for each other. Solomon refers to such an embrace in Song of Songs 8,1 when he wrote: “if only I could embrace you as I would embrace a brother who has nursed at my mother’s breast.” The intimate relations between brothers of the same mother are also spelled out in the Torah in Deut. 13,7 where the Torah describes a secret seduction to idolatrous practices by someone who is the brother of the second party by the same mother.” Evidently, the Torah considers the bond between two sons of the same mother as stronger than a similar bond by two sons of the same father. The reason our verse refers to צוארי, i.e. “two necks,” is that a person’s “neck” consists of two parts known as עורף and גרון respectively. Jeremiah 2,27 distinguishes between עורף and פנים, the rear of the neck and the part of the neck facing forward. The sides of the neck are also known as צואר.
    A Midrashic approach to the plural form of the “necks.” Joseph wept when he foresaw that the Temple in Binyamin’s territory would twice be destroyed. The reason that the neck of a person evokes the image of the Temple is that it is the highest part of his body and the Temple was also erected on a mountain. When Binyamin wept, he thought of the destruction of the Tabernacle at Shiloh which was situated in the territory of Joseph (Ephrayim), and which was also slated to be destroyed.
    
    45,15. וינשק לכל אחיו ויבך עליהם, “he kissed all his brothers and wept upon them.” He assured them that he not only harboured no ill feelings toward them but that on the contrary, he meant to treat them well.
   ואחרי כן דברו אחיו אתו; “after this his brothers talked with him.” Up until this moment he had been speaking and they had not had a chance to talk to him. Now their minds had been put at ease.
    Tanchuma Vayigash 5 interprets the words וינשק את כל אחיו as meaning that every brother kissed Joseph and wept while doing so. Joseph did not reconcile himself with the brothers until they had wept. This is a lesson for future Jewish generations that G’d will not send the  salvation until the Jewish people have wept in remorse for their sins. This is the meaning of Jeremiah 31,9: “They shall come with weeping, and with compassion will I guide them.”
    
    45,16.והקול נשמע בית פרעה , “the news was heard in the palace of Pharaoh.” All of Egypt was already aware that Joseph had prominent brothers as he had told them about it. Now, when they heard that the brothers had arrived this was very pleasing to the Egyptians seeing that originally they had felt ashamed to be ruled by a onetime slave. Now that Joseph had been able to establish that he never had been born a slave but was a member of a highly respected family they felt honoured.
    Tanchuma Vayigash 5 takes an entirely different view of the meaning of the words “a voice was heard in the house of Pharaoh.” According to this Midrash as soon as the brothers recognised Joseph they wanted to kill him. An angel descended and scattered them to the four corners of his mansion. At that moment Yehudah raised his voice in a thundering tone so that all the walls in the public squares of Egypt collapsed; all pregnant women immediately had miscarriages from the sound of that voice. Joseph fell off his throne and the faces of the guards who surrounded Joseph’s throne turned gray in consternation. Tanchuma bases himself on Job 4,10: “The lion may roar, the cub may howl, but the teeth of the king of beasts are broken.” At any rate, the sound that was heard in the house of Pharaoh was that of Yehudah’s roaring like a lion.
    
    45,18. ואכלו את חלב הארץ , “and you will eat the fat of the land.” Pharaoh prophesied without being aware that he prophesied. The same applies to verse 20 where Pharaoh said “the best of the whole land of Egypt is yours.” These remarks were allusions to what the Jewish people would do to the Egyptians at the time of the Exodus. We read there (Exodus 12,36) “they emptied out all of Egypt.”
    
    45,19. ואתה ציויתה  זאת עשו, “and you are under orders to do the following.” Pharaoh was well aware of Joseph’s modesty and loyalty and the fact that he would not send anything to his father and his brothers unless he had been given express instructions. This is why Pharaoh had to order him to do all this.
    
    45,21. עגלות על פי פרעה, “wagons, at the command of Pharaoh.” Joseph sent his father a sign seeing that when he had parted from him he had studied with him the subject of how a murdered person whose murderer is not known is to be expiated. One of the needs to obtain forgiveness for possible indirect involvement in such a murder is the killing of an עגלה, a calf which had not yet been used to perform any work (compare Deut. 21.) [The Hebrew word for wagon עגלה is the same as for “calf.” This is why the sending of wagons was symbolic. Ed.] This explains also why Yaakov’s spirits revived as soon as he saw the wagons (verse 27).
    
    45,22. ולבנימין נתן שלש מאות כסף, “and he gave Binyamin three hundred pieces of silver.” The number 300 is related to the indebtedness of the brothers. When ten brothers sold a slave they each have to pay 30 shekel ransom. This is the value of the life of a slave who has been killed  [gored by an ox or otherwise] and the compensation payable by the killer according to Exodus 21,31. When a Jewish master sells his slave to a Gentile he may be required to pay punitive compensation of up to ten times the value of the slave, i.e. three hundred shekel silver (Gittin 44).
   חמש חליפות שמלות, “five changes of clothing.”  He hinted to him that eventually Mordechai would be descended from him who would be distinguished with five garments as mentioned in Esther 8,15.
    
    45,23.ולאביו שלח כזאת “and to his father he sent the following:” The word מנחה, “gift” is missing here. The meaning of the verse is that Joseph sent his father a gift consisting of the items mentioned in our verse. He sent both male and female donkeys just as Yaakov had done when he sent a number of gifts to Esau [though Yaakov had sent twice as many female donkeys as males. Ed.]
   בר ולחם ומזון, “grain, bread, and food.” The word בר includes the five major cereals fit to bake into bread. The word לחם in this instance refers to kitniyot, pulses. The word מזון, refers to dried fruit such as figs, dates, raisins, etc. Whereas every kind of בר is suitable raw material to make into bread, the same does not apply to the term לחם. Similarly, whenever we encounter the word לחם, it is definitely a kind of food, whereas the word מזון does not necessarily refer to something which can be converted into bread.
    
    45,24.  וישלח את אחיו וילכו“he sent off his brothers and they went on their way.” All his brothers, Reuven, Shimon and the rest, including Binyamin so that Yehudah kept his promise to his father. Why then did the sages (Sotah 7) say that Yehudah was punished for his guarantee so that the bones in his coffin rattled during all the 40 years the Israelites wandered through the desert? The reason is that his vow and its fulfilment depended on the goodwill of others. It is sinful to make such promises unless the factors relating to fulfilment of the promise are all under the control of the person making the promise. Yehudah had known from the outset that it would depend on the ruler of Egypt if he could make good on his guarantee.
    Our sages (Makkot 11) used this incident to formulate a halachah concerning conditional excommunication, saying that the threat of excommunication even if conditional, requires a retroactive annulment even if in the meantime the party who had been threatened with such excommunication had fulfilled the conditions imposed upon him. This explains why Yehudah qualified for punishment for having guaranteed Binyamin’s safe return.
   אל תרגזו בדרך, “do not become agitated on the journey.”  The word may mean: “do not be afraid,” based on Deut 28,65 ולב רגז, “a trembling heart,” or on Deut. 2,25 ורגזו וחלו מפניך, “they will tremble and be anxious before you.” It is customary that during periods of famine people who are loaded with grain and food  are constantly afraid of being attacked. How much more so would this apply when the whole clan of the Hebrews including all their chattels would travel to Egypt. This is also why Joseph told his brothers to rush home and not to have any fear at all as his reputation and the fact that they were under his protection would suffice to frighten off marauders. Thus far Nachmanides on the subject.
    Our sages in Taanit 10 understand the words אל תרגזו בדרך, as an instruction not to get involved in halachic discussions while they were traveling as this would slow them down. He did not mean to stop them from discussing such matters; he only did not want them to go into them at depth as this would prove time-consuming. He could not in good conscience have told them not to discuss Torah as we have a statement in Sotah 49 that when even two Torah scholars travel together without discussing matters of Torah they deserve to be burned at the stake. Our sages base this on Kings II 2,11: “as they kept on walking (Elijah and Elisha), a fiery chariot with fiery horses suddenly appeared and separated one from the other.” They needed to be separated because they were engaged in Torah-discussions. Had they not been engaged in discussing Torah they would both have been burned to death.
    
    45,26. ויפג לבו, “his heard went numb.” The word ויפג is related to Lamentations 3,49 מאין הפוגות, “without respite.” The meaning is that Yaakov’s tears went on flowing without interruption. The meaning of the expression here is: “his heart stopped beating, he became like dead.” It is not unusual for someone to faint when he is the recipient of unexpected good news. The physiological explanation is a sudden expansion of the arteries of the heart which causes the heat inside the heart to suddenly dissipate and to cover the outside of the body. As a result, the heart itself is left cold, or at least too cold to perform its task. This causes fainting. These phenomena are more common among the elderly and among people with a weak constitution.
    Ketuvot 62, when discussing the frequency or otherwise of marital relations between Torah scholars and their wives, reports that after an absence of twelve years from his home, the wife of Rabbi Chanina ben Chachinai suddenly saw (according to Rashi thought she saw) her husband standing in the doorway. Her heart gave such a leap that she died from the shock. Her husband was stunned that this should be the reward of a pious woman who had enabled him to study Torah all these years. He prayed for her revival and she was restored to life.
    
    45,27. וידברו אליו את כל דברי יוסף אשר דבר אליהם, “they told him all the words Joseph had said to them.” According to Nachmanides what they told Yaakov was as follows: “Your son Joseph has said: ‘G’d appointed me as ruler over the whole land of Egypt, etc. etc. G’d has sent me to be the provider of my whole family, etc.’,” When they told Yaakov all this they failed to mention that Joseph had added the words “you who have sold me to Egypt.” Yaakov was never told of this. He was left under the impression that Joseph had lost his way at the time he tried to locate his brothers at or near Dothan, and that the members of some caravan who had found him had kidnapped him and sold him to Egypt. The brothers on their part did not tell their father about their part in the sale of Joseph as they did not want to incriminate themselves. In addition, they were afraid that if they would tell their father about their share in Joseph’s disappearance he would curse them as he did on his deathbed when he referred to the sins of Reuven, Shimon and Levi.
    Joseph, in his humility  and dedication to maintaining peaceful relations with his brothers, never told his father either. This leaves us with the problem of why the brothers claimed after Yaakov’s funeral that the latter had asked them to tell Joseph to forgive them (Genesis 50,14). Actually, these words were proof that Yaakov had never known about who had sold Joseph. Had he known about it surely the brothers would have begged their father to intercede with Joseph while he was still alive and to beg Joseph personally to forgive his brothers. Surely Joseph would not have refused such a request by his father.
   ותחי רוח יעקב אביהם, “the spirit of their father Yaakov revived.”  Onkelos renders this as ושרת רוח נבואה על יעקב אבוהון, “a prophetic spirit came to rest on their father Yaakov.” The reason Onkelos added this dimension to the meaning of the word is clearly that the Torah could have simply written: “their father Yaakov revived.”
    
    45,28. ויאמר ישראל, “Yisrael said.” As long as his prophetic spirit had not been restored to him, the Torah referred to him only as Yaakov. Now that he had regained this additional spiritual dimension he is once more referred to as Yisrael. We have 18  instances from here until the end of the Book of Genesis where Yaakov is referred to as ישראל, such as 46,1; 46,5; 46,8; 46,29; to name but a few. The reason that G’d called him “Yaakov” in 46,2 whereas the Torah (G’d Himself) had referred to him as ישראל in the same verse was because the journey to Egypt was a voluntary exile on the part of Yaakov and it was not appropriate that the name Yisrael which denotes authority, victory, etc., should be applied to someone who exiles himself and subordinates himself to a human ruler. Once G’d had called him by the name Yaakov, it is not surprising to see that the Torah reverts to use of that name (compare 46,5, 46,6, 46,8, 46,19, 46,26, 46,27, etc.).
    When the Torah (46,5) nonetheless speaks of וישאו בני ישראל את יעקב אביהם, “the sons of Israel carried their father Yaakov, etc.,” the message of the Torah is that Yaakov’s descent to Egypt involved both his names, i.e. although at this stage he had become an exile, ultimately, -through the exile experience in Egypt- he (his people) would be redeemed there and would emerge as more deserving of the name בני ישראל than before. This is the reason that in the verse mentioned the sons of Yaakov are referred to as בני ישראל rather than as the בני יעקב. The Torah could have simply written that “Yaakov’s sons carried him, etc.” We have this concept repeated at the beginning of the Book of Exodus where the Torah speaks of: “these are the children of Israel who came down to Egypt.” The same verse goes on naming them as “Yaakov and his sons.” These are the very ones who in the future would be called “the children of Israel.”
   רב, עוד יוסף בני חי, “it is indeed great! My son Joseph is still alive!” According to the plain meaning of the text the two separate exclamations by Israel refer to the two separate pieces of information that the brothers had brought with them. 1) The information that Joseph was alive. 2) The news that he occupied such a lofty position in Egypt. When Israel exclaimed רב!, he meant that the news that Joseph was alive was already sufficient good news. The fact that he occupied such a lofty position was an added bonus to the principal news that he was alive.
    A Midrashic approach to this verse  is that the exclamation רב, was meant to acknowledge Israel’s satisfaction at having been granted such a reward in his life on earth, whereas the second exclamation עוד, “in addition,” refers to the meta-physical dimension of this news, i.e. that his standing in the world to come would remain unimpaired, not as he had been afraid that the fact that he lost a child during his own lifetime was a sign that he had forfeited his claim to that world. Technically speaking, the use of both these exclamations in this sense is found in Psalms 31,20 מה רב טובך,  whereas the word עוד in this sense is found in Psalms 84,5 עוד יהללוך סלה, “forever (even in the hereafter) they will praise You.”
    I believe that this is also what Onkelos alluded to when he translatedסגי לי חדוא , “great joy for me.” This kind of joy is of a type reserved for the hereafter. Joy in this life is something finite and only in the hereafter do we encounter something enduring. This in spite of the fact that Yaakov had experienced more than his fair share of disappointments during his life on earth [compare his own words in Genesis 47,9. Ed.] Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 76,2 state that “promises made to the righteous by G’d are not ironclad as to their validity during the terrestrial life of the recipient (my translation).” When Yaakov had thought that he had lost Joseph and had said (37,35) “for I will go down to my grave mourning for my son,” this expressed his fear that he had forfeited eternal life. He had come to believe that both Joseph and he himself were slated for purgatory due to sins they had committed. Now that he heard that Joseph was alive he was certain that both he and his son would merit life in the hereafter.
    
    46,1. ויזבח זבחים לאלו-הי אביו יצחק, “he offered meat-offerings to the G’d of his father Yitzchak.” The Torah really should have written: “he offered sacrifices to the Lord.” Seeing that the Torah did not use this wording, it is clear that the emphasis on the words “G’d of his father” refers to the attribute of G’d which had served as the model his father Yitzchak was in the habit of emulating. It was the attribute גבורה, the attribute of Justice. This was a kind of admission that Yaakov felt he had already been granted by G’d all that he was entitled to. Until he had returned to the land of Canaan, Yaakov had not been able to serve that particular attribute of G’d exclusively. This is why the Torah here informed us that this particular sacrifice of Yaakov was offered specifically to this attribute of G’d.
    This is what the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 94,5 had in mind when they said concerning this verse that we learn from it that “a person is obligated to honour his father more than his grandfather.” The name of G’d י-ה-ו-ה represents the attribute of חסד, loving kindness, Avraham’s (Yaakov’s grandfather’s) outstanding attribute. Had the Torah reported Yaakov as offering his sacrifice to Hashem, i.e. the attribute י-ה-ו-ה, Yaakov would have demonstrated more honour for his grandfather than for his father. This is why the Torah here spoke of “the G’d of his father Yitzchak,” [even adding the name Yitzchak though all us know that Yaakov’s father was Yitzchak. Ed.]
    In the same section of Bereshit Rabbah 94,5 the illustration provided by the Midrash as to what constitutes honouring ”one’s father before one’s grandfather is that one greets one’s student before greeting one’s teacher.” This means that when one encounters both Rabbi and student simultaneously, one first addresses the student. Seeing that the students walk ahead of their teacher, one encounters them first and also greets them as one meets them. One does not get to meet the teacher until after one has met the students. Seeing that Yitzchak was a student of Avraham, Yaakov sacrificed to the attribute represented by Yitzchak described by the Torah as “the G’d of his father Yitzchak.” Yaakov was bound to mention Yitzchak ahead of Avraham either because Yitzchak had been Avraham’s student or because  Yitzchak was Yaakov’s father.
    The type of sacrifices which Yaakov offered were שלמים, “peace-offerings,” seeing Yaakov realised that the exile commenced now for his sons, something which filled him with fear. He considered it appropriate therefore to offer them to the attribute of פחד יצחק, i.e. the attribute of Justice. The word שלמים contains an allusion to the fact that Yaakov strove to perfect his various character traits. Seeing that this was his goal, he merited a vision of the “weaker” form of that attribute, i.e. G’d appeared to him in a nocturnal vision while he was asleep. This was to reassure him that although he was on the way to Egypt and to exile that his descendants would not perish as a result of being exiled. When the Torah stressed that G’d appeared to him במראות הלילה, “in a nocturnal vision,” this was an allusion to the fact that subsequent to their exile, his descendants would experience redemption after having suffered cruel persecution.
    
    46,3. אנכי הא-ל אלו-הי אביך ,”I am the Lord G’d of your father.” G’d meant: “I am the same G’d who prevented your father from leaving the Holy Land by telling him “do not go down to Egypt (Genesis 26,2). If I tell you now to proceed to Egypt, I do not want you to be afraid of this trip.” We have a similar assurance phrased by a warning not to be afraid in Isaiah 41,14 “do not be afraid, O worm Jacob.” A third example of G’d offering reassurance by phrasing it in a similar manner is found in Isaiah 41,10  “fear not for I am with you, be not frightened for I am your G’d.”
    
    46,4. אנכי ארד עמך מצרימה, “I will go down to Egypt with you.” According to the plain meaning of the text this verse contains an assurance by G’d that He will be with Yaakov on this descent. This is why He said “I will go down,” instead of “I will make you go down.” If not for this lesson the latter form would have been more appropriate as G’d uses it when describing Yaakov’s return to the land of Canaan as a corpse which is described in the transitive form of אעלך instead of the intransitive form we have here.
   ואנכי אעלך, “and I will bring you up.” G’d hinted to Yaakov that he would be buried in the land of Israel, “the highest” of the countries as it commands the gateway to heaven. G’d added the words גם עלה, “also raise up,” as Yaakov would experience also an “elevation” of a different dimension emanating from there, one to eternal life and the spiritual vistas in store for him there. This is the reason the term עליה appears twice in this verse. The verse contains the promise that his descendants would be redeemed in due course and that they would then reside in the land of Israel, the only country in which Torah precepts can be practiced to the full. The second עליה promised is that to the heavenly spheres, to eternal life of the soul, something for which every Israelite will qualify as part of his birthright (compare Sanhedrin 90). This is something which even Bileam, the accuser of Israel, already recognised when he wished himself a similar future as that of Israel, saying: “may my soul experience the death of the upright, and may my afterlife be like that of Israel” (Numbers 23,10). By saying this, Bileam hinted that pagans are not going to share in that afterlife. This is why he added immediately before this: “they are a nation that dwells in splendid isolation” (Numbers 23,9).
    The reason G’d emphasised the word אנכי, when giving these assurances to Yaakov was that this was the word with which G’d introduced Himself at the revelation at Mount Sinai, when He gave us His Torah (Ten Commandments). He who abides by them would qualify for the promises made to Yaakov in this verse.
    A kabbalistic approach to our verse: The words: “I will go down with you,” are an allusion to the Presence of G’d, the שכינה, which would go down to Egypt with the Israelites. Our sages in Shabbat 89 and elsewhere say that G’d’s Presence descended with the Israelites.  In order to hint at this, Onkelos translates the words as אנא אחות [a “physical” as opposed to a merely spiritual descent, in anthropomorphic terms, of course. Ed.] instead of as אנא אתגלי which is his usual translation for the word ירד, such as in Exodus 19,11 when applied to G’d. This is especially remarkable considering the care Onkelos takes not to apply anthropomorphic terms to G’d or His activities.
    The reason the Torah writes מצרימה instead of למצרים, i.e. concluding with the letter ה, and also writing the word עלה in a form ending with the letter ה, is to provide tangible proof that G’d’s Presence, i.e. “ה,” will accompany the Israelites to Egypt. The letter ה, the last letter in the Ineffable Name, is the attribute which provided sustenance for Egypt during the years of famine.
    Joseph already hinted at this attribute when he told the Egyptians in 47,23 הא לכם זרע, “here is seed for you.” In the following verse Joseph speaks of the חמישית, “fifth” or “hand” which G’d used to enact retribution from the Egyptians for abusing the Israelites during their exile there. This “hand” of G’d was in evidence when the livestock of the Egyptians was struck in Exodus 9,3,  and it was the attribute the Israelites witnessed at the sea 14,31. It is also the attribute which Ezekiel mentioned when he described G’d’s anger during the destruction of Jerusalem and the Holy Temple (Ezekiel 16,43). We also find the words לא אחמול, “I shall not display pity,”  five times in connection with that destruction (commencing in Ezekiel 5,11) after having described such scenes as parents eating the flesh of their children and children eating the flesh of their parents, to illustrate this lack of G’d’s pity for the state His people were in at that time.
    We find that Daniel 2,43 refers to this attribute when he speaks about iron not blending with earthenware. Daniel mentions five different categories of materials which cannot form a blend, an alloy. This word הא occurs a total of three times in the Bible, once in the Torah, once in the Books of Prophets (Ezekiel 16,43), and once in the Hagiographa (Daniel 3,25). The message is that this attribute of G’d will accompany the Israelites through all the various exiles. The very word עמך, “with you,” which G’d uses to describe Himself as accompanying Yaakov to Egypt, is also associated with  צרה, distress, sorrow, trouble, as we know from עמו אנכי בצרה, Psalms 91,15 “I am with him when it is in trouble.” In our verse the choice of that word then is a double-entendre. It means that even when the Israelites were exiled to Babylon the שכינה was with them also. Our sages base this on Isaiah 43,14: “for your sake I send (the redeemer) to Babylon.” We have a similar situation regarding the exile under the Edomites, (the present exile). Isaiah 63,1 describes the redeemer as coming from Edom, his clothing full of blood, etc., an allusion to G’d taking His vengeance on our oppressors. The word זה in that verse is a reference to G’d Himself being that redeemer. The word זה referred to our redeemer, i.e. G’d, already when the Israelites had crossed the sea and watched the Egyptians drown. At that time they broke out in a song of thanksgiving adulating G’d by saying זה א-לי ואנוהו “this is my G’d and I want to enshrine Him.” The word זה, of course, also ends with this letter ה, the attribute we have been discussing. Interestingly enough, even Joseph phrased his invitation to his father to come to him in Egypt in a word ending with the letter ה, when he said (45,9) רדה אלי אל תעמוד, “come down to me, do not  delay.” He added the letter ה instead of saying רד אלי, which would have been quite sufficient. He meant to convey his confidence that the attribute of G’d represented by the letter ה would accompany his father and his family. Keeping all this in mind, the phenomenal increase of the Jewish people from 70 souls to over 600,000 arms-bearing men at the time of the Exodus (only 210 years later) becomes much less surprising. Clearly the Presence of G’d’s benevolent שכינה must be credited for this. (the author had referred to the addition of the latter ה in Avraham’s name in Genesis 17,5 as supplying the element which would enable his descendants to multiply prolifically). This element came into its own while the Jewish people were in Egypt and actually was also a prime factor in their eventual enslavement (compare Exodus 1,7-13). Once they had attained the required number of 600.000 men over 20 years of age they qualified for G’d revealing Himself to them openly at Mount Sinai.
    Having heard all this you will now understand the meaning of the scholar who claimed in a public lecture that a single Jewish woman in Egypt gave birth to 600,000 children (compare Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,7) The word לידה, giving birth in an expanded sense, means to bring potential to fruition. The birth of Moses was equivalent to the coming into existence of 600,000 Israelites. The reason the scholar is described as making this mind-boggling pronouncement during a public lecture was because the audience had begun to doze off and the scholar wanted to rouse them from their sleep by making such an earth-shaking statement. The multitude was aroused by this statement though learned people knew that it was not to be taken at face value but summed up a certain concept. The scholar had sufficiently provoked his audience so that they asked who that woman was. He then told them that he referred to Yocheved who gave birth to Moses who was equivalent to 600,000 Israelites. The reason the scholar had used the term אשה, “a woman,” is the same as the reason which prompted Solomon in Proverbs 12,4 to say אשת חיל עטרת בעלה, וכרקב בעצמותיו מבישה, “a virtuous wife is the crown of her husband, but a wife who embarrasses him is like rot in his bones.” Solomon pointed out later in Proverbs 31,10 that finding such a virtuous woman was something very exceptional. 
    
    46,7.בנותיו , “his daughters.” This is a reference to Dinah. We find a similar instance of a single son being described in the plural in 46,23 ובני דן חושים, though he had only one son. We also encounter this phenomenon in Chronicles I 2,8 ובני איתן עזריה, “and the sons of Eytan, Azaryah.” Our sages in Baba Batra 143 used these examples as the basis for their statement that if someone says: “my property is to be given to my sons,” and he has a son and a daughter, that the entire property goes to his son. The Talmud there questions: “since when does a father call a solitary son, “my sons?” Answer: indeed this is so as we know from Numbers 26,8 ובני פלוא אליאב “and the sons of Phalu were (was) Eliyav.” 
    
    46,8. ואלה שמות בני ישראל הבאים מצרימה יעקב ובניו, “and these are the names of the children of Israel who arrived in Egypt, Yaakov and his sons.” All the three patriarchs were called “Israel,” (Bereshit Rabbah 63,3). At this point Yitzchak is called “Israel” by the Torah as we read: that the “children of Israel” were none other than “Yaakov and his sons.” This verse clearly indicates that Yitzchak too was called “Israel.” We find proof that Avraham was also called “Israel” in Exodus 12,40: “and the length of time the Israelites had stayed in Egypt was 430 years.” We know that the calculation of the 400 years of which G’d spoke in Genesis 15,13  commenced with the birth of Yitzchak. Seeing the Torah refers to “the children of Israel” at a time when the Israelites left Egypt this makes their founder Avraham also one of the “Israelites.” How else could they be described as the “children of Israel?” This is also why the Talmud (Kidushin 18) calls Esau an “heretic Israelite.”
    
    46,12. ובני יהודה ער ואונן ושלה ופרץ וזרח, “and the sons of Yehudah: “Er, Onan, Shelah, Peretz, and Zerach.” The verse includes the two sons Er and Onan, though already deceased, as amongst the seventy people of Yaakov’s family who migrated to Egypt. This is extremely puzzling. How could the Torah include those two amongst those described earlier as “arriving” in Egypt? The answer is provided by the kabbalists (who have elaborated on the theme of migration of the souls) and it is made clearer in Numbers 26,19 where the Torah wrote: “and the sons of Yehudah, Er and Onan; Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.” Immediately following that verse the Torah writes: “The sons of Yehudah according to their families were: Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; Peretz, the family of the Partzites; Zerach, the family of the Zarchites.” This is the mystical dimension of Ruth 4,15; “he (the new born Oved)” shall be for you as a life-restorer. This also explains why Naomi’s neighbours exclaimed at Oved’s birth “a son has been born to Naomi” (remember she had lost both her sons before either one had fathered a child). If not for the approach of the kabbalists, the prophet should have described Oved as having been born to Ruth instead of to Naomi.
    
    46,15. כל נפש בניו ובנותיו שלושים ושלושה , “all the people- his sons and daughters numbered thirty-three”. Yaakov himself is not included in the count of seventy. The count of the seventy commences with the word “Reuven.” When you count from Reuven to Dinah you obtain a total of thirty-two. The missing person is accounted for by Yocheved who was born between the entrance gates to Egypt as mentioned in Baba Batra 123. The total of seventy is divided here into four segments in accordance with the four wives of Yaakov. The Torah mentions the word נפש each time repeating  the word נפש in the singular when summing up the total number of Yaakov’s family. This teaches the indivisibility of the Jewish people. All Jews are members of the same whole. The four times נפש preceding the final word נפש may allude to the four “camps” in the celestial spheres presided over by the four arch angels (compare commentary on verse 27).
    
    46,26. יוצאי ירכו מלבד נשי בני יעקב, “his biological descen-dants aside from the wives of Yaakov’s sons.” According to our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 84,19 where Rabbi Yehudah claimed that a twin sister was born to each one of Yaakov’s sons, the words יוצאי ירכו here are an allusion to the fact that the wives of the sons of Yaakov were each one of those twins. What would be the point of the Torah writing: “apart from the wives of the sons of Yaakov,” if the reference had been to Canaanite women  whom the brothers married? Who would ever have thought that Canaanites would have been included in the count? The Torah had to mention that these women were not included in the count of seventy precisely because they were descendants of Yaakov. When the Torah here concludes with the words  כל נפש ששים ושש, “all the persons sixty-six,” this is because only sixty-six were included in the ones previously described as הבאים מצרימה, arriving in Egypt. Joseph and his two sons as well as Yocheved (who did not make the journey as she had not been born yet) made up the missing four from the number seventy. The Torah testified in Numbers 26,59 that “Yocheved was born for Levi in Egypt.”
    
    46,27.כל הנפש לבית יעקב הבאה מצרימה שבעים , “all the people of Yaakov’s household who came to Egypt--seventy.” They were seventy without Yaakov. This is why they have been described as “descendants of Yaakov” (Exodus 1,5), Yaakov included there were 71. This is also the reason that when G’d responded to Moses’ request to have executive help, G’d ordered him to assemble seventy men so that together with him there would be a total of seventy-one elders. The Jewish Supreme Court later on also consisted of seventy-one members. The number seventy when applied to the nations of the earth also excludes the Jewish people so that all in all there are seventy-one nations.
    These numbers are all patterned after what goes on in the celestial regions where seventy angels surround G’d’s throne. When combined with G’d Himself, this amounts to seventy-one and is known in Rabbinical parlance as the בית דין של מעלה, the Heavenly Tribunal. This may be the reason why the Torah did not add the word ליעקב, when speaking of it as it did in verse twenty-six but here it speaks about לבית יעקב, the household of Yaakov; this is to show that Yaakov together with the seventy members of his household amounted to 71 just as the Heavenly Tribunal including G’d amounts to seventy-one members.
    From all the above we can deduce the spiritual power of Yaakov  who transmitted  a great portion of this to 600,000 of his descendants. In fact, until this number of his descendants formed a nation, G’d did not see fit to reveal Himself to Israel and to give His Torah to that nation. The number 600,000 also corresponds to a similar number in the celestial regions. Once that number of Israelites had been reached, the inhabitants of these celestial regions all consented to the Torah being transferred to earth. Furthermore, unless this number of Israelites is present the שכינה does not rest on Israel on an ongoing basis.
    During the existence of the second Temple the שכינה did not rest over it and the Jewish people as it had during the first Temple (Yuma 21). This does not mean that G’d’s Presence was not present in that Temple at all; seeing that we have evidence of the שכינה manifesting itself in the presence of 22,000 Jews. (based on Numbers 10,36: “Return, O Lord, You who are Israel’s myriads of thousands!”) We also have a verse in Psalms 68,18 where the psalmist makes a similar point by saying: “G’d’s chariots are myriads upon myriads The Lord is among them as in Sinai in holiness.” There is therefore no need to prove that the Presence of G’d hovers over Israel when there are 40,000 of them, i.e. the approximate number of Jews returning to Zion under the leadership of Zerubabel (Ezra 2,64 mentions 42,360). The prophet Chagai 1,8 specifically promises G’d’s Presence when he writes: ”Go up to the hills and get timber, and rebuild the House; then I will look on it with favour and I will be glorified- said the Lord.” The difference between the conditions prevailing during the first and the second Temple respectively was that during the former G’d’s שכינה was “at home” in the Temple whereas during the latter it was only “visiting.” Our sages in Yuma 21 have characterised the difference by citing the absence of the following five items during the existence of the second Temple. There was no Holy Ark, no oil (the special mixture of ingredients listed in Exodus 30,31-33) for anointing the High Priest and other holy vessels. There was no heavenly fire which descended on the altar to consume sacrifices; there was no Shechinah; and there were no urim vetumim, (the means of direct communication between the High Priest and G’d) A look at the spelling of the wording of the verse we quoted from Chagai illustrates the point of our sages. The prophet wrote ואכבד (“and I will be glorified”), whereas we read ואכבדה. This is a hint of the five items that G’d said would be missing in that second Temple He asked Chagai to build. You will note again the crucial role of the letter ה in matters pertaining to the intervention of that attribute of G’d in the affairs of man, or rather when the welfare of the Jews is involved. Expressed differently, whereas the second Temple enjoyed a measure of שכינה, it did not enjoy the presence of G’d’s תפארת, “glory.” Moses described such irregular presence of the שכינה by using the word חופף, “hovering”  to describe it in Deut. 33,12 when he blessed Binyamin.
    In the future, after the redemption, a time of which the prophet says that the number of the children of Israel will parallel that of the sand of the shores of the sea (Hoseah 2,1) the situation will change drastically. The prophet does not speak of the “number of descendants of Israel;” rather, he speaks of מספר בני ישראל, “those who had once been counted as ‘the children of Israel;” i.e. the males of over 20 years of age, they will bring back the element תפארת, “glory,” that has not been seen in Jerusalem since the destruction of the first Temple. This is what Isaiah 60,1 speaks of when he writes: “Arise! Shine!, for your light has dawned; the Presence of the Lord has shone upon you!”
    
    46,28.ואת יהודה שלח לפניו אל יוסף , “and he sent Yehudah ahead of him to Joseph.” He sent Yehudah ahead to prepare living quarters for him in Goshen; he picked Yehudah as the most capable one of his sons.
    Our sages (Tanchuma Vayigash 11) paid especial attention to the unusual word להורות in this verse stating that Yaakov’s purpose in sending Yehudah ahead was for him to establish a Torah academy so that Torah study could take place as soon as Yaakov and his family would arrive in Goshen. This is not nearly as strange as it sounds at first glance as we have a tradition that Yaakov had been instructing his son Joseph in Torah and that at the time he had sent him on that fateful errand they had studied the subject of eglah arufah together, a subjcet dealing with a town’s expiation for a murder committed in its vicinity by a murderer or murderers unknown. When Yaakov had seen the עגלות his son sent him for transportation, he realised that his son had not forgotten this last lesson and that is what made his spirit revive (45,27).
    Another Midrash (Tanchuma Vayigash 8) on the same verse  draws attention to the miraculous reconciliation between two brothers. Only yesterday the ox and the lion had been crossing swords, whereas already now Yaakov sends Yehudah to Joseph as his emissary. This is an example of what Isaiah had in mind when he wrote (Isaiah 65,25): “the wolf and the lamb shall graze together and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.” The wolf in that verse is a reference to Binyamin, based on Genesis 49,27: “Binyamin is a predatory wolf.” The lamb in Isaiah is a reference to the tribes of Israel as Jeremiah 50,17 describes the tribes as “Israel are scattered sheep.” The words: “the lion and the ox will eat straw,” are a reference to Yehudah and Joseph. Joseph has been compared to an ox in Deut. 33,17, ”like a firstling bull in his majesty.” Yehudah symbolises the lion as we know from Genesis 49,9 “Yehudah is a lion cub.” They have been described as sharing the same meal in Genesis 43,33: “he seated them, the oldest according to his birthright, etc.” The fact that Yaakov sent Yehudah ahead to Joseph is proof that the brothers had reconciled completely.
    
    46,29. ויאסר יוסף מרכבתו, “Joseph harnessed his chariot.” Tanchuma Vayigash 7 states that there were two people who were honoured in a manner unparalleled. One was Yitro, the other was Yaakov. When Yitro visited Moses in the desert, the Torah writes: (‎Exodus 18,7) “Moses went forth to greet his father-in-law.” As soon as someone saw Moses leave his customary place in order to welcome Yitro, all the princes, Aaron the High Priest, as well as the entire nation went out also to welcome Yitro. Yaakov experienced something similar. As soon as people saw that heir ruler harnessed his chariot in order to welcome his father, the entire nation did the same. This was an example of what Isaiah 24,23 had in mind when he said: “and the Presence will be revealed to His elders.”
   ויפול על צואריו ויבך על צואריו עוד. “He fell around his neck and he kept crying on his neck exceedingly.” Nachmanides writes that one must not understand this verse as if Joseph fell around his father’s neck, seeing that this would not be in good taste. Good taste would have dictated for Joseph to kiss the hand of his father or to prostrate himself in front of him. The verbs in this verse all apply to Yaakov. It was Yaakov who fell around the neck of Joseph and broke out crying for quite some time. Just as he had still been crying over him while they had not been reunited, the reunion also evoked a crying spell. He cried over the reunion, and he cried additionally when he considered the position of power and eminence Joseph had attained.
    
    46,32. והאנשים רועי צאן, “and the men are shepherds of flocks.” Joseph meant that they were self-employed and had minded their own flocks. In order to make doubly sure that Pharaoh should not misunderstand and think that his brothers worked as employees for others, he added: “for they have been cattlemen.” They were very wealthy. If they had chosen this vocation of their fathers before them, they were motivated by two considerations. 1) It was a very profitable vocation. They reaped the wool of the sheep, the milk, the young animals, etc. It is a vocation which does not require a great deal of physical labour and does not tempt those who pursue it to commit sins, dishonest business practices, etc.. Solomon already said in Proverbs 27,23: “make sure that you know the looks of your flock; pay attention to the herds.” 2) Seeing the brothers were aware of the prophecy that when the time came they would be exiled in Egypt  and they were aware that the Egyptians worshipped the ram in the zodiac, they chose this vocation in order that their descendants would be familiar with sheep and the limitations of such animals. This would be an antidote to the temptation to deify sheep. When you examine Scriptures you will find that a majority of the righteous people of whom the Torah tells us were shepherds. Hevel, Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, Moses, the prophet Samuel, King Saul prior to his election as king, as well as  David, all practiced this vocation. They used this as an excuse to separate themselves from urban centers as they realised that most sins are the direct result of people living together in urban centers. A rural life, relatively lonely, keeps one from most of the temptations offered in the city. It reduces one’s opportunity to engage in slander, libel, petty thievery, violence, etc.. Compare what happened to Lot after he began to associate with the city dwellers of Sodom. He was forced to flee Sodom, leaving all his wealth behind in order not to become killed by association with the sinners of that city. He absorbed his lesson and henceforth resided on a mountain, far from an urban society. He had taken temporary refuge in Tzoar, citing the fact that that town was of recent origin as proof that they could not yet have become too guilty in the eyes of the Lord (Genesis 19,20). Even this fact did not persuade him to settle there but he moved to a mountain preferring the isolation of the mountain to associating with sinners.
    Another advantage to living in isolation on a mountain is that such isolation enables one to better concentrate on one’s Creator and, if one has attained the proper degree of spiritual preparation, to qualify for prophecy, for a communication from G’d. Most major prophets practiced living in isolation for long periods of time, not even engaging in tending sheep. Examples are Elijah and Elisha. Of Elisha we read in Kings I 19,19 that “12 yokes of oxen were ahead of him.” This means that he had already given up his vocation of tending the oxen and had withdrawn from them. This is what Jeremiah meant when he wrote there in verse 20 that Elisha asked permission from Elijah “to let me kiss my father and mother good-by, and I will follow you.” At the end of verse 21 we are told: “Then he arose and followed Elijah and became his attendant.”
    
    47,3. רעה צאן עבדיך , “your servants are shepherds.” When the Torah has the letter ה at the end of the word רעה instead of the customary letter י for the plural ending, this can be explained because the letters אהו'י are interchangeable.
    
    47,4 . כי אין מרעה לצאן, “for these is no grazing land for the flocks.”  Due to the severity of the famine in the land of Canaan the grazing land normally used for the animals to feed on had turned into meagre grass and even that was reserved for human consumption.
    
    47,7.  ויברך יעקב את פרעה, “Yaakov blessed Pharaoh.” He wished him wealth and success in his position as ruler of a great Empire. This was the customary blessing conferred by elders and pious people who were granted an audience by a king. We find an example of this in Kings I 1,31 where Bat Sheva, David’s wife, blesses him in a similar vein, saying: “may my lord King live forever.” The Torah mentions Yaakov blessing Pharaoh again before he took his leave. Our sages (Tanchuma Nasso 26) say that the blessing consisted of a wish that the river Nile would rise again and irrigate the fields of Egypt. 
    
    47,8. כמה ימי שני חייך, “how old are you?” Yaakov appeared to Pharaoh as considerably older than anyone he had seen in Egypt. When Yaakov replied he was careful not to equate the years he had been on earth as “life.” He said: “the days of my sojourn on earth, etc.” This is typical of the righteous. They consider themselves as merely transients in this world. Having established how he related to the experience of living within a body here on earth, he did say: “the days of my life are fewer and have been marked by sorrow.” He used the word “life” in contrast to his fathers who had not experienced such sorrows and who could therefore describe their days of life on earth as “life.” In order for Pharaoh to understand that the term “life” applied to his fathers was merely relative, Yaakov reverted again to describing even the lives of his fathers as “the days of their sojourn.”
    
    47,14. וילקט יוסף את כל הכסף הנמצא, “Joseph collected all the money which could be found, etc.” When the verse continues with: “Joseph brought the money he had collected to the palace of Pharaoh,” the letter ה is to tell us that he brought all of it to Pharaoh’s palace. All the acquisitions Joseph made from the people he channeled to Pharaoh. He did not pocket any of it for himself. Although he took from the people their most precious possessions he remained popular with them. This was clearly something that G’d had arranged.
    The plain meaning of all these verses is that the money mentioned (verse 18) is money which Joseph collected over a period of five years  and brought it to Pharaoh’s palace. It is not reasonable to suppose that the population of Egypt ran out of money and cattle within a single year or two. The Egyptians had hoarded their money and it had lasted them for five years although under non-famine conditions they would have been less frugal and would have used it up much sooner. The Torah records only that after five years when their money had run out, the people turned to Joseph. Joseph agreed to hand out food in return for their cattle and, when at the end of  the sixth year, they had no more cattle left either, he had to warn them to be very frugal in their eating habits.
    
    47,18. ותתם השנה ההיא, “when that year came to a close, etc.” This is the year during which they had received food in exchange for their cattle.
   ויבואו אליו בשנה השנית, “they came to him in the second year.” This was the second year after their money had run out, i.e. the seventh year of the famine. At this point the people asked Joseph to acquire them as well as their soil in exchange for the food he would give them. Subsequently Pharaoh would have to provide the seed for planting to prevent the land from becoming wasteland.
   למה נמות לעיניך....קנה אותנו ואת אדמתנו בלחם ונחיה אנחנו ואדמותנו עבדים לפרעה, “Why should we die before your eyes?...Acquire us and our land for bread;  and we and our land will become serfs for Pharaoh.”  According to the plain meaning of the text this was an offer to buy both their bodies and their lands.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah  that there were actually only a total of two years of famine seeing that Yaakov’s blessing that the Nile should rise again had stopped the famine in its tracks, we would have to understand verse 18 “that the people came to Joseph at the beginning of the ‘second’ year” as referring to the second year of the famine. If you were to say that this would result in the Egyptians suspecting Joseph of not having correctly interpreted Pharaoh’s dream, we would have to assume that the remaining five years of famine occurred immediately after the death of Yaakov.
    Another possibility is that seeing Joseph had not predicted that the seven years of famine would occur consecutively, there was no question of Joseph’s competence as an interpreter of dreams would be questioned. Rabbi Yoseph in Tossephta Sotah 10,9 points out that the famine resumed after Yaakov’s death and that Joseph’s promise to provide for his brothers (50,21 made after his father had died) was precisely because the famine had resumed at that time. Just as Joseph had used the expression וכלכלתי אתכם, “I will provide for you” in 45,11 at a time when the famine was in full force, so the same expression used in chapter 50 also reflects that the famine was again in full force. Rabbi Shimon did not feel that such an explanation would reflect credit on G’d as it creates the impression that blessings by the righteous are valid only during their own lifetime. His son Rabbi Eleazar nevertheless said that he preferred Rabbi Yoseph’s interpretation to that of his father. 
    
    47,27וישב ישראל בארץ מצרים בארץ גושן., “Israel settled in the land of Egypt, in the province of Goshen.” The city Goshen is close to the capital of Egypt. Seeing that his twelve sons were all prominent people in their own right, each one of them capable of dealing with kings on a basis of equality, Yaakov did not want to reside in Egypt proper to forestall his sons becoming politically involved in Egyptian matters of state. Yaakov was well aware that this was the time when the exile of his descendants began. He wanted to minimise this exile to the greatest extent possible and this is why he preferred the status of “וישב" , he “settled down,” to the status claimed by those of his sons who had been introduced to Pharaoh and who had claimed the status as resident strangers, i.e. לגור בארץ באנו, “we have only come here as temporary residents” (47,4). It had been the sons’ intention to return to the land of Canaan as soon as the famine ended.
   ויאחזו בה, “they acquired property in it.” The word ויאחזו suggests the acquisition of permanent, hereditary property; their intention was never fulfilled, however. The correct wording of the verse should have been ויאחזו בניו בה, “his sons acquired landed property there.” In fact, what happened was the very reverse. The passive form of the word ויאחזו describes that instead of becoming masters of that soil they became enslaved to it. The word is reminiscent of something taking root. Seeing that their father had already “taken root” in that land as the Torah described him as “settling,” there was no need for the Torah to mention that his offspring branched out like roots. If the Torah describes what happened with Yaakov’s sons as something in its own right, it indicates that there was some dramatic change in the spiritual direction of future generations of Yaakov’s sons. 
    The righteous are described as active, as setting the tone for something.  Examples are Isaiah 27,6: “In days to come Yaakov shall strike root.” The psalmist in Psalms 80,10  speaks of “it took deep root and filled the land.” The reason that in this paragraph the Torah wrote: “these are the names of the Israelites who came to Egypt,” is an indication that only that generation was still “master” of its destiny. Later generations became “possessed” by the land instead of actively possessing it. We have numerous instances in the Bible of the wicked not striking root. Examples: Ezekiel 31,3 (speaking about Sancheriv). The prophet extols the height to which his kingdom had risen comparing it to a lofty cedar but carefully omitting mention of any roots. Daniel 4,8 describes Nebuchadnezzar and his rise to power in similar terms. The lesson is that the wicked, though apparently flourishing greatly at one time or another, are devoid of roots and therefore prone to sudden collapse. There is an exception to this in Daniel 4,12 where a root is mentioned in connection with Nebuchadnezzar’s dream (“however its major roots leave in the ground”); the angel mentioned this only to show Nebuchadnezzar that the kingdom would be restored to him. It has no bearing on the fact that the wicked are depicted as devoid of roots. This idea is spelled out in Isaiah 40,24: “their roots will dry out and the storm beats them off like straw.” The righteous by contrast is depicted as having solid roots which will not deteriorate. This is what Solomon alluded to when he said (Proverbs 12,3) “but the root of the righteous cannot be shaken loose.”
    
    
    
    
   ויחי  יעקב
    
    
    
    
   באורח צדקה חיים ודרך נתיבה אל מות. “The road of righteousness (charity) leads to life, by way of its path there is no death” (Proverbs 12,28). In this verse Solomon wishes to extol the virtue of charity in the wake of which much reward may be expected; in fact, the performance of that good deed may add years to one’s life (compare Psalms 19,12). The practice of charity is a panacea for both body and soul. It is capable of overcoming what is in store for people based on the mazzal they have been born under. We have proof of this in Samuel I 26,10  where David speaks of: “or his time will come and he will die.” What he meant was that the person’s day of death will approach sooner than had been originally scheduled. Death may sometimes occur sooner than originally scheduled, such as in the case of David of whom we read in Kings I 2,1 “David’s days approached to die.” On the other hand, there are instances when years are added to the life of a person who had been born under horoscopic influences which presaged a much shorter life for him. The best known example of this was the King Chiskiyah who, 
though he had been told by the prophet Isaiah to make his last will and testament, was granted an additional 15 years in response to his prayer (Isaiah 38,4-8).
    Conversely, we find that the life span of a person may be shortened from what had originally been decreed for him as we find in the case of King Yehoram son of Achazyah who was punished for his idolatry. We find in Kings II 1,16 that  Elijah told him: “because you sent messengers to inquire of Baal-Zevuv the god of Ekron- as if there were no G’d in Israel whose word you could seek- assuredly you shall not rise from the bed which you are lying on but you shall die.” This is what prompted Solomon to say that charity is such a powerful virtue that it can overcome even decrees of death. Its power is equal to that of “being fruitful and multiplying.” The word  חיים in the sequence בארח צדקה חיים means that an additional life span may be granted in recognition of the charity one practices. The word מות, “death,” in the second half of our verse refers to shortening someone’s life expectancy as retribution for some sin committed. 
    We are told in Baba Batra 11 that a certain righteous individual Binyamin, who was in charge of the distribution of public charity once had a certain woman approach him  during a year of famine. The woman said to him: “please support me!” He answered her that there were no funds left in the kuppah. Thereupon she said to him: “if you do not provide me with food, a woman and her seven children will surely die.” He then gave her of his own money. Some time later, this very Binyamin fell sick and was on the point of death. At that point the angels said to G’d: “did You not say that anyone who keeps alive even a single Jew is considered as if he had kept a whole world alive? Did not this Binyamin save the lives of a woman and her seven children? Why does he have to die so young?” Thereupon the decree ordering his death was torn up and he had 22 years added to his life span.
    The words ודרך נתיבה אל מות mean that because a person is performing constant acts of charity he may be certain that he does not die prematurely. Translated literally: “there is no death on its path.” This idea is expressed also by Proverbs 10,2 צדקה תציל ממות, “charity saves from death.” This means that the person who practices charity does not die before his appointed time thanks to his acts of charity. Seeing that on occasion acts of charity are the reason why someone’s life span is extended beyond what was originally decreed, it is only logical that such acts protect the person performing them against dying prematurely.
    The subject matter of charity, how to practice it, and in what amount to practice it is quite complicated; the fundamental ingredient of doing charity is that one gives to someone else something which belongs to one. There are many ways of doing this. A minimal performance of the commandment would be giving a small alms to a Gentile. The next higher level of charity would be giving a similar amount to a Jewish person from another town who is in need. A still higher level of charity is giving this amount to a needy Jew from your own city. This is based on Exodus 22,24 “the poor person who lives amongst you.” A poor person residing in your house takes precedence in his claim on your charity over someone who lives out of town. A poor person who is also a next of kin takes precedence over another poor person of your hometown. The relevant verse in Isaiah 58,7 states: “do not ignore your own kin.” A still higher level of charity is to provide one’s children with a livelihood. Our sages (Ketuvot 50) applied to this Psalms 106,3 “Happy are those who do right at all times.” They argued that it is not possible to do right at all times as most people do not become called upon to perform acts of charity all the time. The only way they can fulfill what the psalmist talks about is by providing for their children while they are minors. The next higher level of performing charity is looking after one’s aged parents financially. By doing this one also fulfills the commandment to honour father and mother. This is the finest way of doing charity. When one does this one may be in line for living to a ripe old age oneself. This is why the Torah wrote in connection with this commandment (Exodus 20,12) “in order that you may experience long life on the earth that the Lord your G’d is assigning to you.” This is precisely what Solomon termed בארך צדקה חיים, that the path to life is righteousness. G’d repays measure for measure. If children keep their parents alive longer by ensuring that they can enjoy their old age, G’d in turn will recompense the children in a similar manner.
    We see a perfect example of this principle in the relationship between Yaakov and Joseph. Yaakov had provided for Joseph during the first 17 years of his life; in our Parshah we are told that Joseph repaid his father by providing for him during the last 17 years of his life. This is why the Torah (Genesis 47,28) was at pains to write: “Yaakov lived in Egypt for 17 years.”  [Had the Torah not wanted to make this point it could simply have written that Yaakov lived for a total of 147 years. We know that he was 130 years old when he was presented to Pharaoh. Ed.]
    
    47,28.ויהי ימי יעקב שני חייו שבע שנים וארבעים ומאת שנה  “the years of Yaakov’s life were one hundred and forty-seven years.” This Parshah is “closed,” i.e. we do not have the customary separation of words, lines or letters between the last portion and this one. There are two reasons for this. 1) The exile was about to start and the hearts of the Israelites became “closed”  due to the progressively increasing difficulties in their daily lives. 2) Yaakov wanted to compensate for their feeling that a deterioration in their lives was about to take place by revealing to them the glorious future in store for them after the redemption. However, he was unable to do so. In other words, Yaakov’s channels of communication with the celestial regions had become “closed.” He had announced that he would reveal to them “what will befall you in the end of days” (49,1). When reading what follows it becomes clear that this is not what Yaakov announced. The “end of days” Yaakov had in mind was the exile in which we find ourselves now, not the exile in Egypt or Babylon. Seeing that Yaakov was the third of the patriarchs it is reasonable that his life should have foreshadowed experiences of the Jewish people during their third exile, i.e.  our exile. At any rate, G’d would not let him reveal these matters and even Daniel (Daniel 12,9) states that these matters remained sealed secrets until the end of that exile. Our sages felt that Daniel had known about these developments and that is why the angel had to tell him to obscure the matter (Daniel 12,4).
    Isaiah said something similar in Isaiah 9,6 where we read: לםרבה המשרה ולשלום אין קץ. The final letter ם in the middle of the word לםרבה where we should have had a regular “open” letter מ, is a warning that whatever the areas in which Israel excels, these will not be in evidence during their exiles. The prophet seems to be saying that even attempts to hasten the redemption through Torah-study, through establishing G’d’s authority on earth, etc., will not affect G’d’s timetable. It is interesting that we find exactly the reverse phenomenon in the Book of Ezra (Nechemyah 2,13) where an open letter מ appears at the end of a word, i.e. בחומות ירושלים אשר המ פרוצים, “the walls of Jerusalem which are broken down.” A Midrash comments on this verse that this is an allusion that whereas when the walls of Jerusalem which are now “open,” i.e. broken down, were still “closed,” i.e. intact, such as during the period of the Temple, G’d’s authority which had been “closed”, i.e. not in evidence during that period, will re-emerge and reassert itself as a result of the Jewish people learning their lesson during a harsh exile. Just as the two letters מ in the verses we have quoted from Isaiah and Nechemyah respectively contain allusions to matters hidden from us, so the unusual absence of a division between the two portions Vayigash and Vayechi  also contain allusions to matters hidden from us, i.e. hidden from Yaakov.
    There is a Midrash according to which Yaakov saw that the names of his twelve sons [the future tribes of Israel. Ed.] contained between them all the letters of the alphabet except the letters ח and ט. He concluded that this was a hint that none of these sons were guilty of a sin (chet.) This prompted him to reveal to them what he knew about the period preceding the final redemption. When he re-examined the letters in the names of the sons and realised that the letters ק and צ also did not appear in the names of any of them, he reconsidered and decided that his sons were not fit to have this information revealed to them. He therefore desisted, and this is why this portion is “closed.”
   שבע עשרה שנה. “seventeen years.” This is something we already knew from when Yaakov had told Pharaoh that he was 130 years old. If the Torah enumerates the total number of years Yaakov lived in this verse this is another reason to see allusions in these numbers, in this information. We know that the Torah does not contain a single superfluous sentence, word, or even letter. In this verse the Torah alludes to the number of years Yaakov lived or did not live as an example of how G’d deals with us on the basis  of מדה כנגד מדה, measure for measure.
    
    47,29. ויקרבו ימי ישראל למות, “The time approached for Israel to die.” How did Yaakov know that his death was approaching? He realised that his strength was ebbing and this is why he wanted to make his last will in the presence of Joseph; however, at this stage he had not yet been taken ill. Later on, when he was taken ill (48,1) Joseph was informed of this. We find something similar before King David died. Kings I 2,1 speaks about “the time for David to die approached;” he himself said of himself: “I am going the way of all the earth” before giving his final instructions to his son Solomon.
    The plain meaning of why the Torah suddenly calls Yaakov by his alternate name Yisrael again instead of writing “the time approached for Yaakov to die,” (which would have been the natural sequence to the line: “Yaakov lived in the land of Egypt for seventeen years”) is that ever since he had been given the additional name the Torah uses both names interchangeably.  Throughout our portion the names Yaakov and Yisrael are used intermittently. [the name “Yaakov” appears six times, whereas the name “Yisrael” appears thirteen times. Ed.]
    From a more rational/scientific point of view we may detect a distinct pattern in the Torah sometimes choosing to refer to Yaakov by his original name and sometimes by his additional name. The name Yaakov applies to the physical part of Yaakov’s personality, matters connected to his terrestrial existence, whereas the name Yisrael refers to spiritual aspects of his personality, matters connected to his eternal existence in celestial regions. When Yaakov had first been given the name “Yaakov” the Torah stated that this reflected his holding on to the heel of his brother Esau (Genesis 25,26). We find the name Yisrael first used in connection with Yaakov having successfully contended with the celestial force representing his brother Esau (Genesis 32,29). It is therefore clear that the additional name Yisrael was intended principally to reflect Yaakov’s spiritual accomplishments. Seeing that it is impossible for a  human being while part of a body to divest himself totally of bodily needs and concerns, we can appreciate what our sages said that contrary to the name Avraham which replaced the name Avram, the name Yisrael did not replace the name Yaakov. It reflected the fact that this Yaakov had attained an additional dimension in his personality development (compare Berachot 13). The name Yaakov henceforth became subordinate to that of Yisrael. The use of these names teaches amongst other matters that if someone makes his spiritual dimension subordinate to his physical, terrestrial concerns this “kills” him, leads to his death sooner or later. This is what David had in mind when he said in Psalms 22,30: “all those who in full vigor shall eat and prostrate themselves, all those at death’s door whose spirit lag, shall bend the knee before Him.” David refers to people who make a point of first tasting all the pleasures of terrestrial life before prostrating themselves before G’d as having their priorities reversed. As a result, such people experience death in a very real sense of the word. In the verse we just quoted the word יכרעו, “they will bend the knee” does not refer to something similar to השתחוה, “prostrating” oneself (before G’d). Rather, it is similar to Psalms 20,9. In that psalm it is used as meaning falling down and not rising up again. This is the punishment for having had one’s priorities mixed up. When the people mentioned in Psalm 22 finally decide to “give to Caesar what is Caesar’s,” i.e. to also make an obeisance to G’d as an afterthought, it is too late. They had not lifted a finger to secure their share in eternity while there was time.
     Upon closer examination you will find that when the Torah employs the name Yaakov to describe our patriarch it refers to his terrestrial concerns, concerns which are indispensable for any human being, whereas when it switches by calling him Yisrael it refers to his spiritual concerns, matters which are largely abstract. This is what the prophet (Isaiah 43,1) had in mind when he said: ”who created you O Yaakov, who formed you O Yisrael?” In connection with the name Yaakov, the prophet only mentioned the word בריאה, a primitive kind of creation, whereas in connection with spiritual parts of man the prophet speaks of a more sophisticated product, one that has undergone יצירה, an advanced stage of formation. You will note that at the revelation of the Torah at Mount Sinai (Exodus 19,3) G’d says to Moses: “so shall you say to the house of Yaakov and relate to the children of Yisrael.” The name Yaakov referred to the women, the word Yisrael to the men. [Perhaps the fact that Adam had described Eve as “bones of my bones and flesh of my flesh,” but not as “spirit of my spirit” (Genesis 2,23), is the reason that woman symbolises primarily the physical part of the human being. Ed.] Isaiah 43, 22 had something similar in mind when he wrote: “But you have not worshipped Me, O Yaakov, that you should be weary of me O Israel.” He meant that while you Yaakov were concerned with your terrestrial matters you did not really worship Me (even if you paid lip-service). As to worshipping Me as “Yisrael,” you indicated that it was too wearisome for you.
    When our Parshah commences by referring to Yaakov’s existence on earth by calling him Yaakov (twice in 47,28), this is in keeping with what we have explained. In 47,29 however, when the Torah commences to speak of “death” of the body, it switches  to using the name “Yisrael” seeing that the death of a righteous person is but the necessary preamble to his taking his place in eternal life in the celestial spheres. Whenever preparations for death are described, including the very mention of the bed on which Yaakov lay sick, the Torah describes him as Yisrael. As soon as  the Torah finishes describing his preparations for the life in the hereafter by blessing Joseph and his brothers, it reverts to the use of the name Yaakov. The Torah never describes Yaakov as having died. Only Yisrael is described as having died. The embalmers are described as embalming Yisrael (50,1). As soon as Yaakov had made the physical preparations for death, i.e. “he gathered in his feet to the bed,” the Torah calls him Yisrael again. As of that moment he had entered eternal life. When we find in 49,1 that the Torah refers to Yaakov suddenly again as Yaakov, the reason is that at that moment G’d withheld from him the visions of the redemption and what precedes it which he had intended to reveal to his sons. In other words, at that moment he had become primarily physical, his spiritual dimension having temporarily become subordinate. There is another instance where we could question why the Torah suddenly reverts to the use of the name Yaakov. This is in 48,3 where he explains to Joseph where and when he had his first communication from G’d, i.e. at Luz. The reason that  the Torah calls him Yaakov at that point in our chapter is because he referred to a time in his life prior to his having the name Yisrael added to his regular name. in other words, we detect the following pattern. When the Torah indicates that Yaakov had not yet established mutual communication with G’d he is called Yaakov. When, even after he had established such communication, this channel of communication had been interrupted, he is also called Yaakov instead of Yisrael.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Vayechi 1: the words “the days of Yisrael’s death were approaching” reflect what we have read in  Chronicles I 29,15: “for we are sojourners with You, mere transients like our fathers; our days on earth are like a shadow, with nothing in prospect.” If at least the shadow would be that of a wall or a tree, i.e. an enduring shadow; but our days are only like the passing shadow of a bird which flies over us. This is what the psalmist had in mind when he wrote concerning man (Psalms 144,4): “Man is like a breath; his days like that of a passing shadow.” As soon as the bird flies over, his shadow departs with it. When David said in Chronicles that “there is no prospect,” he meant that there is no prospect of escaping physical death. Everybody knew and verbalised the fact that he would die. Avraham  phrased it by saying (Genesis 15,2) “I am going to die without a child.” [Had he not known that he would die, having no child to replace him would not have bothered him. Ed.] Yitzchak had called in his son Esau in order to bless him “before I die” (Genesis 27,4). Yaakov referred to his impending death by saying “I want to be buried with my fathers” (Genesis 47,30). Seeing that he said these words close to his death, it is clear he spoke about the need to die, i.e. “when the days of Yisrael to die drew near.” When Yaakov was close to death he began to belittle himself in the presence of Joseph by saying: “if I please find favour in your eyes.” You find a similar phenomenon happening with David where the prophet describes the last days of his life as “the days for David to die drew near,” whereas nowhere else did the prophet refer to him as merely David instead of as “King David.” All of this proves that on or about the time of a man’s death he loses whatever control he used to possess over his spirit as mentioned in Kohelet 8,8: “No man has authority over the lifebreath- to hold back the lifebreath;” there is no authority over the day of death.”
   ויקרא לבנו ליוסף, “he called in his son Joseph.” He did not call upon his firstborn son Reuven or upon Yehudah who represented Royalty but upon Joseph who had the authority to carry out his request.
   אל נא תקברני במצרים, “do not bury me in Egypt.” Actually, Yaakov requested two things from Joseph. 1) not to be buried in Egypt. 2) to be buried in the land of Israel. He did not want to be buried in Egypt in order that the Egyptians should not deify him after his death.  He was afraid that just as the people worshipping idols are punished so are the objects of their worship. We know this from Exodus 12,12 “and G’d punished all the idols of the Egyptians.” He asked to be buried in the land of Israel just as all the patriarchs expressed a desire to be buried in the Holy Land. This is because the nature of the land helps those buried there to obtain atonement for their sins. Isaiah speaks of this when he said: “It shall be inhabited by folk whose sin has been forgiven.” We also have a verse in Deut. 32,43 stating the same. The Torah writes of the Holy Land: “its land will atone for its people.” Eretz Yisrael is the gateway to heaven, the place whence all the prayers of the Jewish people ascend to heaven. This is the reason all the sages wished themselves to die in that land when their time to die came. There is a tradition that certain highly spiritual people enter heaven from there without the need for their souls to take painful spiritual detours. We also have a tradition that the people who died in the land of Israel will be amongst the first to be revived at the time of the resurrection. People buried in other lands will experience pain at the time of the resurrection as they will have to travel underground after bursting out of their graves until they arrive in the land of Israel (based on an interpretation of Ezekiel 36,14).
    
    47,30. ושכבתי עם אבותי ונשאתני ממצרים, “I wish to lie with my fathers and that you carry me up from Egypt.” The first request pertained to his spirit, the second to his body. Yaakov meant that he was convinced that even if his body were to be buried in Egypt his spirit would reside with his fathers and that it would not have to undergo painful גלגולים, metamorphoses, before arriving in its rightful place in the celestial regions.
    Rabbi Yitzchak claims that this verse teaches us that on the day a person dies he becomes aware of what destination he is headed for, whether he will be assigned to the region reserved for the righteous or the region reserved for the wicked. This is why Yaakov first said: “I will lie with my fathers,” and subsequently he asked Joseph to transport him there. He taught Joseph that even if one were to die on a boat or in a remote inaccessible island, one’s spirit would immediately head for the location assigned to it. We  have been told that Rabbi Avohu saw the reward that was in store for him shortly before his death. The sages base this principle on Psalms 31,20: “How abundant is the good that You have in store for those who fear You, that You do in the full view of men for those that take refuge in You.” According to tradition when Rabbi Avohu was shown all the reward which was in store for him he was so overwhelmed that he could not help exclaiming: ‘is all this really in store for Avohu?!’ He immediately wished himself dead and began to recite the above quoted verse from Psalms.
   וקברתני בקבורתם, “and bury me in their burial vault.”  Our sages used this verse to tell us that the righteous ought to arrange that they be buried alongside other righteous people. We have a verse in Kings II 13,21 describing that someone who had been thrown into a grave next to that of the prophet Elisha emerged resurrected through having contacted the remains of the prophet. This is also what the false prophet said before he died when he requested to be buried alongside the true prophet. He had said: “you shall bury me in the grave of the prophet.” According to this interpretation the temporary resurrection of the sinner in question served the purpose of preventing him remaining buried next to the righteous man, the true prophet Elisha. (compare Sanhedrin 47 on details of this story.)
   אנכי אעשה כדברך, “I will comply with what you have said.” According to the plain meaning of the text Joseph agreed to honour his father’s request. According to a Midrashic interpretation the words mean “just as you made me swear to bring your bones up to the land of Canaan, so I will make my brothers swear to do the same for my own bones when the time comes.”
    
    47,31. השבעה לי, “swear to me!” seeing that Joseph had already agreed to honour his father’s wish in this regard, Yaakov most certainly did not suspect him of reneging on his promise. The purpose of the oath was so that in the event urgent matters of state would claim Joseph’s attention after his father’s death, or in the event that Pharaoh would raise an objection to Yaakov’s remains being taken out of Egypt, Joseph would have something to reinforce his desire to fulfill his father’s last wish. We know that Yaakov was very astute in the matter as in fact Joseph did have to tell Pharaoh that he had had to promise his father on oath that he would not allow him to be buried in Egypt (50,4). According to Nachmanides Pharaoh then instructed Joseph to go to the land of Canaan in order to bury his father there.
   וישתחו ישראל, “Israel prostrated himself.” Seeing that Joseph had agreed to honour his father by undertaking to fulfill his wishes, Yaakov in turn prostrated himself before him to show that he respected the position Joseph occupied as effective ruler of the country. This is the view of Megillah 16 quoted by Rashi. Concerning similar situations, our sages are on record as saying: “prostrate yourself (even) before a fox when you see that fortune is smiling upon him.”
    A different approach quoted in Tanchuma Vayechi 3 holds that Yisrael prostrated himself before G’d and thanked Him for the promise Joseph had made him. The reason the Torah defines the exact location where Yisrael prostrated himself-toward the head of the bed- teaches us that G’d’s Presence takes up its position at the head of the bed of a sick person. Regardless of before whom Yisrael prostrated himself, the interesting thing is the mention of the word מטה, “bed,” in our verse. This is to teach us that whereas the “bed” of Avraham and Yitzchak were not “complete,” (i.e. neither Avraham nor Yitzchak had succeeded in raising all their children true to their beliefs) Yisrael was the first of the patriarchs who had succeeded in doing this.
    Pessachim 56 relates the following concern expressed by Yaakov prior to his death when his prophetic powers suddenly failed him: “Maybe G’d forbid one or more of my children is not really loyal to my teachings as happened to Avraham with Ishmael and as happened to Yitzchak with Esau.” His sons reassured him by reciting the words שמע ישראל ה' אלוקינו ה' אחד. Another reason why the word מטה is mentioned here is that the שכינה had come to Egypt with Yaakov. When he is now reported as “gathering in his feet to the bed,” this is a reference of his joining the שכינה which had accompanied him ever since he had gone down to Egypt. The word מטה occurs in that sense also in Song of Songs 3,7 just as the word יאסף appears in Isaiah 58,8 as referring to G’d’s Presence being Israel’s rear guard.
    
    48,2. ויתחזק ישראל, “Israel summoned his strength.”  Reflecting on this exertion by Yaakov, our sages asked themselves why he subjected himself to the obvious pain of sitting up in bed? They say that Yaakov reasoned that if a mere general were to send him some clothing would he not go out of his way to show honour to such a general? How could he shame his own son by showing him less honour?
    
    48.5. כראובן ושמעון יהיו לי, “they will be for me just like Reuven and Shimon.” This verse shows that Yaakov transferred the birthright to Joseph. As to the verse in Chronicles I 5,1 “Reuven the first-born of Israel, but when he defiled his father’s bed his birthright was given to he sons of Joseph son of Israel but he is not to be reckoned as the first-born in genealogy,” Rashi holds that the transfer of the birthright did not include transfer of the right to inherit an extra portion of his father’s estate, but that only the honour due to the first-born was taken away from Reuven. Nachmanides rejects Rashi’s approach arguing that it is impossible to say that Joseph was given only part of the birthright, i.e. that he would be two of the twelve tribes without inheriting accordingly in the land of Israel. He quotes 49,22 as proof that Joseph became two tribes and uses the plural in the words יקראו בנחלתם, “they will be called such in their respective inheritances” as proof that Joseph’s birthright included the extra share of the inheritance. This is also in accordance with the translation of Onkelos who renders the words בנות צעדה עלי שור in 49,22 as תרין שבטין יפקון מבנוהי יקבלון חול'קא ואחסנתא as “two tribes from my sons will receive חולקא and אחסנתא” (different categories of land shares respectively). 
    
    48,7. ואני בבואי מפדן, “as to my own situation, when I was on the way from Padan, etc.,” seeing that Yaakov was about to request from Joseph that he bury him in the cave of Machpelah he first had to apologise to him for not having brought Joseph’s mother Rachel to be buried there; this is why he said: “Rachel died on me on the journey in the land of Canaan.” He emphasised that Rachel too had been buried in the Holy Land and not outside its boundaries. The fact that she was not buried in the cave of Machpelah was due only to her sudden and unexpected death which did not afford Yaakov an opportunity to carry her all the way to Chevron seeing he had so many children and cattle with him. Had he buried her there she would have started to decompose on the journey to that cave which would have taken several days at least. According to our best estimates today such a journey should not have taken longer than half a day. This is why he emphasised that although she died “on the way,” she was not buried on the way, but on a hill, a distinctive place.
   ואקברה שם בדרך אפרת, “and I buried her there on the way to Efrat.” The words “I buried her there” would have sufficed. Why did he add the words: “on the way to Efrat?” We have already seen told that Rachel died only a tract of land away from Efrat, another name for Bethlehem. Yaakov hinted what our sages told us in Bereshit Rabbah 82,10 that Yaakov buried Rachel where he did as he foresaw that in the future Jews going into exile would pass her grave and she would offer prayers on their behalf. This is what the prophet (Jeremiah 31,15) referred to when he wrote: “Thus said the Lord: ‘a voice is heard in Ramah- wailing bitter weeping- Rachel weeping for her children.’” All of these details Yaakov revealed now so that Joseph would not become angry at what might appear an unreasonable request by his father who himself had not shown such concern about Joseph’s mother. This is what Nachmanides wrote on our verse.
    
    48,8.  וירא ישראל את בני יוסף“Yisrael saw the sons of Joseph, etc.” The word “he saw” in this verse is to be understood as a vision; he did not see them physically. We have already been told כי לא יכול לראות, “for he was unable to see.” (verse 10)
   מי אלה, “who are these? How can they qualify for a blessing?” He foresaw at that moment that Jerobam, a future descendant of Ephrayim, would erect two golden calves of whom it was said: “these are your gods O Israel” (Exodus 32,8). He also foresaw that Yehu and his sons would be descendants of Menashe. To this question Joseph replied:
   בני הם אשר נתן לי אלוקים בזה, “they are my sons whom G’d has given me here.” Joseph mentioned the name of the Lord who had performed miracles for him and had raised him to the position of king so that he had been given this woman as a wife by Pharaoh. This wife had born these children for him. Targum Yonatan explains the word בזה to mean that he showed his father his marriage certificate, כתובה.  
    48,13. ויקח יוסף את שניהם, “Joseph took both of them, etc.” He presented them to his father in the proper order, Menashe the older one on his father’s right, and Ephrayim the younger one on his father’s left. Yaakov realised that this was the order in which Joseph would place his sons before him. This is why he crossed his arms in order to place his right hand on the head of Ephrayim on the left hand on the head of Menashe. He possessed sufficient divine inspiration to foresee that historically Ephrayim would be of greater significance than his senior brother Menashe. This is why he said of Menashe (verse 19) “he too will become a nation, however his younger brother will be greater than he.”
    According to Rabbeinu Chananel Yaakov did not actually cross his arms but he placed his hands one on top of the other. What the Rabbi meant was that Yaakov did not rearrange the position of the boys but the position of his hands. This does not seem right. We do not need Rabbeinu Chananel to tell us this as the Torah had already made it plain that the lads remained in their respective positions but that Yaakov crossed his hands!
    The correct interpretation of Rabbeinu Chananel appears to be that  the words שכל את ידיו, “he rearranged his hands” mean that relative to Joseph he rearranged his hands. When the Torah said: “he placed his right hand on the head of Ephrayim,” the meaning is that he rearranged the boys and placed them so that Ephrayim was opposite his right hand, etc. He also rearranged the position of Menashe so that he stood opposite Yaakov’s left hand. He did not rearrange his own hands at all. All he did was to rearrange the position of the boys. This is the correct meaning of the words שכל את ידיו, i.e. he rearranged them differently from the way Joseph had arranged them. The blessing took effect as a result of Yaakov placing his hands firmly on the heads of the lads. We find something similar in Numbers 27,23 where Moses placed his hands on Joshua and proceeded to bless him, making him his successor. The act of placing one’s hands on the person one blesses is designed to facilitate the transfer of the holy spirit possessed by the one conferring the blessing to the recipient of said blessing. 
    When the sages of old ordained someone they also literally placed their hands on the head of the person so ordained. In the case of the priests blessing the people this was physically impossible. Instead the priest spread his hands heavenwards in a gesture commanding G’d’s blessing on all those present. This is the deeper meaning of the words שכל את ידיו,  the word שכל being derived from שכל,חכמה, “intelligence, wisdom.” The ten fingers are to be the instrument which draws down blessings from its celestial source.
   כי מנשה הבכור, “although Menashe was the first-born.” Yaakov ignored this biological phenomenon as the younger of Joseph’s sons displayed signs of spiritual superiority. The use of the word  כי in the sense of “although” is not unique. We find it being used in the same sense in Psalms 41,5  רפאה נפשי כי חטאתי לך, “heal me although I have sinned against You.” Another example of the use of the word כי in the sense of ”although” is found in our daily prayer: “forgive us our Father although we have sinned.” It would certainly not be logical to translate the words סלח לנו אבינו כי חטאנו, “forgive us our Father for we have sinned.”
    
    48,15. ויברך את יוסף ויאמר, “He blessed Joseph, saying:” In commencing with Joseph’s blessing Yaakov blessed him only by conferring his blessing on Joseph’s sons.
    From what appears to be a simplistic point of view, i.e. a reading of the text without reading between the lines, the message of the Torah is that the true blessing a person can experience is that his sons (children) are being blessed. The vicarious aspect of the blessing is its most powerful aspect. (The Torah only had to write: “he blessed them,” instead of bothering to write ”He blessed Joseph and said; etc.”)
    A kabbalistic approach sees in this blessing an allusion to all ten emanations. The wordsאשר התהלכו אבותי לפניו  ה-אלו-הים embody the attributes חסד וגבורה, the outstanding qualities of Avraham and Yitzchak seeing that it is such an unusual way of phrasing the blessing. We would have expected Yaakov to say ה-אלו-הים אשר הלכו לפניו אברהם ויצחק. The fact that Yaakov added the words אבותי are a reference to the names of the attributes of G’d which had been revealed to Yaakov. A few words later he adds: ה-אלו-הים הרועה אותי; the word רועה is derived from ריע, companion. Yaakov referred to the attribute of G’d which had become manifest to him throughout the vicissitudes of his trouble-filled life. His שלום וריעות, “peace and serenity,” had been achieved only by means of that attribute of G’d. Psalms 80,2 alludes to this when the psalmist says: רועה ישראל האזינה, נוהג כצאן יוסף, “Give ear, O shepherd of Israel who leads Joseph like a flock!” He concludes his blessing with the words המלאך הגואל ...בקרב הארץ, “the angel who redeems me...may they proliferate like the fish within the land.”  The word בקרב, is analogous to כי שמי בקרבו, “for My name is present within him (Exodus 23,21).” Had Yaakov begun his prayer with the words המלאך הגואל, this would have sounded heretical, as if he had prayed to the angel. Seeing that he commenced his prayer with the words ה-אלו-הים, there cannot be a suspicion that he addressed the angel as the one who should fulfill his prayer.
    A careful analysis of the wording used by Yaakov in verses 15-17 will demonstrate that this blessing is essentially the same as the one he extended to Joseph in verses 22-26. In the latter blessing Yaakov spoke of מידי אביר יעקב, “from the hands of the mighty One of Yaakov,” as being the source which רעה אבן ישראל, “shepherded the stone of Yisrael.” The words ידי are a reference to the two hands supporting the throne of Solomon, the attributes גדולה and גבורה respectively; these attributes were earlier referred to by the words אברהם ויצחק; the expression אביר יעקב which refers to תפארת ישראל, the attribute which combines the attributes of Avraham and Yitzchak respectively, is called אביר יעקב, in verse 24. Proof that the Torah speaks of a unique attribute of Yaakov is the fact that you do not find the expression אביר אברהם or אביר יצחק anywhere in the Torah. In our prayers we call upon this attribute when we say עננו אביר יעקב “answer us O mighty One of Yaakov” in the Selichot during the days preceding Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. This attribute occurs only in connection with either יעקב or ישראל. In verse 24 it appears in both forms as אביר יעקב and as רועה אבן ישראל The overall meaning of verse 24 is that the source of Yaakov’s spiritual strength also known as תפארת ישראל is אבן ישראל, another name for כנסת ישראל, the “spiritual concept of the people of Israel.” There is therefore no reason to be surprised that the Torah (Yaakov) describes the blessing of Joseph’s sons as the blessing of Joseph. Blessing the “fruit,” i.e. the product, is the most effective way of blessing the tree, the source.
    
    48,19. וגם הוא יגדל ואולם אחיו הקטן יגדל ממנו, “he too will become great; however, his younger brother will become even greater than he.” Yaakov used both the adjectives “great” and “small” in connection with Joseph’s sons. We have encountered this description of relative “smallness” already in connection with the sun and the moon on the fourth day of creation (Genesis 1,16) where both luminaries have first been described as “great;” subsequently the Torah distinguishes the relative greatness of one of he luminaries, the sun, by describing it as “great” when compared to the lesser luminary the moon. The “greatness” of Ephrayim which Yaakov referred to was that Joshua would be descended from that tribe. Joshua was so great that he could arrest the orbit of both sun and moon as we know from Joshua 10,12. In response to Joshua’s instruction for the sun and the moon to “stand still,” the Book of Joshua informs us in Joshua 10,13 that they did indeed interrupted their respective orbits until Joshua had taken his revenge of the Canaanites. In that verse the prophet reports that this miracle was recorded in a book called ספר הישר, and our sages in Avodah Zarah 25 have revealed to us that the ספר הישר is none other than the Book of Genesis, a Book describing the outstanding feats of the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov. They are the ones who are called ישרים, “the upright ones.” Joshua was a product of these people and the prophet testifies that G’d was with Joshua and that his fame spread throughout the globe (Joshua 6,27).
    
    48,20. בך יברך ישראל, “By you shall Israel bless:” Yaakov told Joseph that when Israel would bless its children they would hold up Joseph’s children as the models they hoped their own children would emulate. When blessing Jewish boys the father would invoke the names of Ephrayim and Menashe as the models he wished G’d to use when blessing his own children.
   וישם את אפרים לפני מנשה, “he placed Ephrayim ahead of Menashe.” The Torah means that in all the blessings Yaakov bestowed he always mentioned the name of Ephrayim before mentioning the name Menashe. He did so knowing full well that Ephrayim was the younger of the two as he had detected qualities in the character of Ephrayim which were superior to those of Menashe.
    It is also possible to interpret the words: “ahead of Menashe,” in a literal sense, i.e. Ephrayim stood in front of Menashe. In that event Yaakov would not have referred to Ephrayim’s superiority over Menashe. The words “in front of Menashe” would emphasise Menashe’s superiority, his being used as the term of reference. We find something similar in Genesis 44,14 where Yehudah is mentioned before Joseph and the Torah describes the brothers as prostrating themselves “before Him,” meaning Joseph, of course, seeing he was superior in stature to Yehudah though he was named last. If we accept this interpretation then the lesson in etiquette which Yaakov taught us on that occasion was that the older brother is to be treated respectfully because he is biologically senior. When a person places someone in front of a person of superior rank then this does not mean that the person so placed is superior but the very opposite is the case. This interpretation does not conflict with the fact that Yaakov foresaw a greater future for Ephrayim. On the contrary, precisely because in the future someone may attain a higher rank than his brother this is no excuse not to defer to his older brother when this future has not yet occurred.
    
    48,21. ויאמר ישראל אל יוסף, “Yisrael said to Joseph, etc.” After Yisrael had blessed the lads and appointed each one of them to become a founding father of one of the tribes, he turned his attention back to Joseph and promised him both matters pertaining to the exile as well as matters pertaining to the eventual redemption when G’d would bring the nation back to the land of Canaan.
    
    48,22. שכם אחד על אחיך, “one portion more than to your brothers.” According to the plain meaning of the text Yaakov told Joseph that he had already apportioned the one piece of land which was specifically his to apportion to Joseph. This was the portion which according to Jewish law is the extra portion belonging to the first-born. Seeing Yaakov personally had wrested the town of Shechem from the Emorite by fighting when attacked by the Emorite, he was personally entitled to it as spoils of war. This fact enabled him to apportion two parts to the sons of Joseph and to appoint princes from each without depriving any of Joseph’s brothers of their rightful share or even diminishing their shares. 
    The words מיד האמורי, “from the hands of the Emorite,” may be understood as if he had said מיד הכנעני, “from the Canaanite.” The reason Yaakov mentioned the Emorite was because of all the Cannanite tribes the Emorite was the most powerful and the most aggressive. What did Yaakov mean when he described himself as having taken that city בחרבי ובקשתי, ”with my sword and with my bow?” Did he really mean that he personally had been involved in a battle for the town of Shechem? Yaakov meant that when the time would come for the Jewish people to inherit the land of Canaan this would be preceded by physical warfare. Our verse is an allusion to Joshua 11, 19-20 that “there was not a city that had made peace terms with the Israelites; all were taken in battle. For it was the Lord’s doing to stiffen their hearts to give battle to Israel, in order they might be proscribed without quarter and wiped out, as the Lord had commanded to Moses.” [The only exception were the Gibeonites who misrepresented themselves as not being Canaanites and tricked the Israelites into making a covenant with them]. Actually, you would have expected Yaakov to say: בחרב וקשת, “with sword and bow,” instead of “with my sword and my bow.” The reason Yaakov represented the sword and bow he spoke of as being his very own  was that he claimed that success of the Israelites in battle was due to his merit. Compare Psalms 44,4: “it was not by their sword that they took the land, their arm did not give them victory, but Your right hand, Your arm, and Your goodwill for You favoured them.” The psalmist attributes the success of the Israelites’ arms to the merit of the patriarchs. The word “Your goodwill” is a reference to  Yaakov. The words “Your right hand” are a reference to Avraham, and the words “Your arm” are a reference to Yitzchak. The facial features of Yaakov are engraved on G’d’s  throne.
    Onkelos translates the word בחרבי as בצלותי, “with my prayer,” and the word בקשתי as ובבעותי “with my entreaty.” We could read the word bekashti as bakashati, “my request,” changing only the vowel pattern. From a defensive point of view, prayer and entreaty may be viewed as viable alternatives to sword and bow. It is also possible that the word בחרבי is a veiled reference to Torah, i.e. the merit of having studied Torah. The patriarchs had not only studied but also observed even minutiae of the Torah precepts. They had divined by means of their intellect what G’d would require of the Jewish people when He would give them the Torah in due course. Our sages also interpreted Yaakov’s words when he sent a message to his brother Esau as informing him that he had observed the 613 commandments of the Torah while employed by Lavan. The words he used (Genesis 32,5) to hint at this were עם לבן ג-ר-ת-י, the word גרתי having a numerical value and the same letters as 613. We find that the Torah is compared by our sages to a two-edged sword in the hands of those who study it and practice it in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,16 (compare Psalms 149 6). A two edged sword cuts with both edges. The Ten Commandments, i.e. the Tablets, are also described by the Torah as being two-edged, i.e. as having been engraved from either side (Exodus 32,15).
    Nachmanides writes as follows: It is very likely that Yaakov acted similarly to the prophets. He aimed his sword in the direction of the Emorites and sprayed arrows in that direction so that he land was conquered before him. Elisha did something like this as reported in Kings II 13,16-17. He said to the King of Israel: “grasp the bow!” When the King had grasped the bow, Elisha put his hands over the King’s hands and said to him: “open the window toward the east.” When the King had opened the window Elisha said: “shoot!” and he shot. Then Elisha said: “an arrow of victory for the Lord.” The report goes on suggesting that if only the King had  carried out all of Elisha’s instructions his symbolic actions alone would have secured victory over Aram for him.  Yaakov referred to his own symbolic actions with sword and bow which had resulted in the Emorites’ defeat.
    The words אשר לקחתי, “which I captured,” may be a reference to the birthright Yaakov secured for himself from Esau who was the original Emorite, i.e. who acted as did the Emorites. Alternatively, Esau was compared to the Emorites as he also hunted, using his mouth as his weapon in setting traps for his father. When  Yaakov said: “I have given it (Shechem) to you,” he meant that seeing he had come by it by his own merit he was entitled to give it to whomever he wanted.
    A Midrashic interpretation (compare Rashi) does not see in Yaakov’s assertion the right to apportion the birthright he had himself bought from Esau to Joseph, but sees in it a reference to the actual town of Shechem. Yaakov said to Joseph: ”since I put you to the trouble to bury me in the cave of Machpelah, I for my part have assigned the city of Shechem to be the place where you will be buried.” This accounts for Joshua 24,32 writing “and the remains of Joseph whom the children of Israel had taken up from Egypt they buried in Shechem.”
    
    49.1. ויקרא יעקב אל בניו, “Yaakov called in his sons.” According to a Midrash Yaakov commenced his blessing from the point where Yitzchak had concluded blessing his son as it is written: “Yitzchak called Yaakov and blessed him” (Genesis 28,1). Moses in turn commenced his blessing (Deut. 33,1) from the point where Yaakov had left off. David in turn, at the commencement of the Book of Psalms, began with the words with which Moses had left off, i.e. אשרי האיש, “happy the man who has not followed the counsel of the wicked.” Moses  had concluded (Deut. 33,29) his blessings of the Jewish people with the words: “happy Israel, who can compare to you?” Referring to this David said in Psalms 119,100 “I have gained more understanding than my elders .”
   באחרית הימים, “in the End of Days.” The time Yaakov referred to is the messianic age. It was quite appropriate that he should tell his sons matters dealing with the redemption from Egypt rather than matters dealing with the redemption  in a distant future. How could he have preferred to concentrate on matters far distant instead of revealing some of what was relatively close at hand? We surmise that perhaps he had already given his sons allusions of the redemption from Egypt when he told them in 48,21 “and the Lord will be with you and He will bring you back to the land of your fathers.” After all, had it not been for the incident with the spies the redemption at the time of the Exodus would have resulted in Israel immediately taking possession of the land of Canaan.
    Seeing that he had alluded to the Exodus in the previous verse, it was quite normal that at this point Yaakov would want to reveal something about a final redemption. After all, both redemptions have this in common that the Jewish people would emerge from a very terrible exile. Besides, we have it on the authority of our prophets that the final redemption will parallel the redemption from Egypt in many respects. The principal difference will be that the final redemption will result in mankind acquiring a far greater knowledge of G’d and His attributes.
    When you examine Yaakov’s introduction you will note that he was going to concentrate on two assemblies i.e. he said האספו והקבצו, “assemble yourselves,” and in the next verse “gather yourselves.” The first expression האספו referred to the exiled people of the Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Yehudah respectively, just as mentioned in Isaiah 11,12 “and assemble the banished of Israel and gather the dispersed of Yehudah.” Isaiah 56,8 also speaks of G’d “gathering in the dispersed of Israel.” This indicates that there will be two redemptions after Isaiah’s time. It most likely refers to the redemption of the ten tribes in a separate redemption after the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin have been redeemed first. The only time all of the tribes were redeemed simultaneously was at the Exodus from Egypt. The next time this will happen would be the final redemption. This is why the prophet (Isaiah 11,11) says “in that day My Lord will again apply His hand to acquire the other part of His people  who have been left over.” Seeing that at the redemption from Babylon only 42.000 Israelites were redeemed the prophecy could not apply to that redemption. This is why the verse in Isaiah refers to a “second” redemption.
    
    49,2.  הקבצו ושמעו, “assemble and listen!” Yaakov refers to both of his names when addressing his children. He speaks of “Yaakov” when referring to his בנים, children, as at the time when his sons were still children he had not yet been given the name “Yisrael.” When he refers to himself as simply “your father,” he uses his name “Yisrael.” It is also possible to understand the words אביכם ישראל as a reference to “your Heavenly father O Israel.” In that event Yaakov introduces his blessings by exhorting his sons to remain loyal to G’d, who is known in Rabbinic terms as ישראל סבא, “grandfather (of) Israel.” This would account for the repetition of the names Yaakov and Yisrael respectively in these two verses.
    I have found some support for this theory in Bereshit Rabbah (Vilna edition under the heading שיטה חדשה לברכת יעקב),”on the first of Yaakov’s blessings.” The Midrash says that what occurred at this stage in Yaakov’s life may be compared to the following parable. A king had a trusted servant and was in the habit of leaving everything in that servant’s care. When the servant was about to die he called in his sons in order to make free men out of them, and to tell them where they could find the documents proving that they were free men. When the servant suddenly noted that the King was observing what he was about to do, he  did an about-turn by asking his sons to serve the King all their lives just as he himself had served him all his life.
    Yaakov experienced something similar. First he wanted to reveal to his sons the end of their exile, when and how they would be redeemed. When he noted that G’d looked at the matter he was going to do with disfavour, he switched gears and exhorted his sons to remain loyal to G‘d throughout their lives just as he had been i.e. האלו-הים אשר התהלכו אבותי לפניו, “the Lord before Whom my fathers have walked.” G’d had expressed concern that whereas Yaakov had called upon his sons, he had not called upon Him. This is what the prophet (Isaiah 43,22) referred to when he said: “upon Me you did not call O Yaakov!” When Yaakov heard this he prostrated himself at the head of the bed and whispered “blessed be the name of His exalted Majesty forever more.”
    
    49,3.  ראובן בכורי אתה, “Reuven you are my first-born.” As a first-born Reuven was entitled to three advantages over his younger brothers. He was entitled to all the privileges normally accruing to the first-born; he was entitled to be the family priest; and he was entitled to a position of authority including Royalty if and when his family would develop into a nation. He lost all three parts of what would have accrued to him by reason of his being the biological first-born due to his sin. He lost the ordinary privileges of being a first-born as Yaakov gave those privileges to Joseph. He lost the priesthood to Levi, and he lost his status as potential king of the Jewish people to Yehudah. This is the deeper meaning of Yaakov saying (verse 4) “water-like, impetuously-you cannot be foremost.” The expression פחז is used in that sense by our sages in Shabbat 88 where they quote a Gentile referring to the Israelites saying to G’d at Mount Sinai: “we shall do and we shall hear,“ ”you are still an impetuous nation referring with your mouth to matters your ears have not heard yet.”
    Yaakov referred to the priesthood when he said יתר שאת, “foremost in rank.” Yaakov referred to the eventual status of Royalty when he said יתר עז, “foremost in power.” The expression עז denoting such power is found in Samuel I 2,10 ויתן עז למלכו as well as in Psalms 99,4 ועז מלך משפט אהב, “Mighty king who loves justice.”
    
    49,4. כי עלית משכבי אביך, “because you mounted the couch of your father.” Yaakov revealed here that when the Torah wrote of Reuven that he “slept with Bilhah” (Genesis 38,22) that that verse is not to be taken literally, but that all he did was to disarrange the sheets on his father’s couch, compare Shabbat 55 where it is made clear that Yaakov criticised Reuven only for mounting the bed. This in itself was an act of desecration. According to the Talmud the words אז חללת...אביך must be understood as “then you desecrated your father (in heaven) whose Presence was associated with my bed.” Proof of the validity of this interpretation is the fact that Yaakov spoke of משכבי אביך, “your father’s beds (pl).” On the same folio of the Talmud our sages also said that this means that Reuven desecrated two couches, two sheets,  that of his father, and that of the Divine Presence. The authors of that interpretation were forced to say this as they were of the opinion that the Divine Presence, שכינה, was ever present in Yaakov’s vicinity. G’d was never out of Yaakov’s thoughts. We have an interesting nuance in Genesis 30,16 where the Torah speaks of Yaakov sleeping with Leah on a night which was not originally her turn [in return  for her giving Reuven’s dudaim to Rachel. Ed.]. The Torah does not write וישכב עמה בלילה ההוא, “he slept with her on that night,” but it writes: וישכב עמה בלילה הוא, “He (G’d) slept with her at night.” This is proof  that the Divine Presence was present even on Yaakov’s couch. Leah’s conceiving on that night may well have been helped by that Divine Presence. She may have been aware of this when she called the son born to her as a result יששכר.
    This episode also teaches that anyone who honours his father  also honours G’d vicariouly. Conversely, anyone who dishonours his father dishonours G’d at the same time. All of this corresponds to what our sages (Kidushin 30) taught that every human being is the result of input by three partners, i.e. his father, his mother, and G’d (who provides the soul). As a result, G’d accounts it as a meritorious deed when someone honours his father and mother, seeing that by honouring His partners such people honour G’d Himself. By doing this they treat G’d as if He were present in the company of his parents.
    Another Midrash (Yalkut Shimoni 157) states that the words אז חללת יצועי עלה, reflect Yaakov saying to his son Reuven: “your sin will not be fully expiated until the presence on earth of the one of whom the Torah writes (Exodus 19,3) ומשה עלה אל האלו--ים, ‘and Moses ascended to G’d.’” When Moses came to Mount Eyval (Deut. 27,20) and appointed the tribe of Reuven as the first one (amongst the ones who would utter the curses) we find that the paragraph contains the words: “cursed anyone who sleeps with the wife of his father.” This is proof that by that time Reuven’s misdemeanour had finally been totally expiated.
    You should also know that the very name Reuven is an allusion to the attribute of Justice and how it operates in our terrestrial world. I have dealt with the subject of the mystical dimension of the names of the twelve sons of Yaakov in Genesis 29, 32-34.
    
    49,5.  שמעון ולוי אחים, “Shimon and Levi are brothers, etc.”  Who did not know that these two were brothers? According to the plain meaning of the verse Yaakov wanted to state that when these two brothers attacked the people of Shechem they were both of one mind that only violence was the solution to the problem of releasing Dinah which confronted them. When Yaakov uses the termמכרותיהם , the meaning is similar to סעודותיהם, that which is “their meal,” i.e. what provides them with סעד, support, sustenance. The word מכרה is related to כרה, i.e. a meal (compare Kings II 6,23). What Yaakov meant was that these brothers use the tools of violence to live and sustain themselves. Yaakov implied that when the brothers Shimon and Levi killed the male inhabitants of Shechem they killed people who personally had not done any harm to them, but on the contrary, had made a covenant with them. Yaakov therefore felt the need to apologise and to make clear that he had not been a party to their scheme. This is why he stressed בסודם אל תבא נפשי, ”may my soul not enter their conspiracy.”
    A Midrashic approach to this verse (Bereshit Rabbah 99,7) “Shimon and Levi are brothers when it comes to taking revenge for the rape of Dinah,--but when it came to their behaviour vis-a-vis Joseph they certainly did not act as brothers.” By using the word מכרותיהם, Yaakov alluded to the sale of Joseph i.e. מכירה.  We should remember that the four brothers Reuven, Shimon, Levi, and Yehudah were the senior brothers. Seeing that the Torah reported that both Reuven and Yehudah considered the sale of Joseph as inappropriate (compare 37,22 and 37,26), this leaves Shimon and Levi as the ones who must have suggested that Joseph be sold. This explains why when the brothers went to Egypt, Joseph detained only Shimon.
     כלי חמס מכרותיהם, “instruments of violence are their stock-in-trade.”  According to Bereshit Rabbah 99,7 the arms in their hands are used to perpetrate acts of violence and have been stolen from Esau. The Midrash bases himself on Ovadiah 10, “for the outrage to your brother Jacob, disgrace shall engulf you.” [the abuse of Yitzchak’s blessing to Esau “you will survive by your sword.” Yaakov had not attacked Esau. Ed.]  
    A kabbalistic approach: please refer to 29,32 where I have explained the mystical dimension of these words.
    
    49,7.  אחלקם ביעקב¸ ”I will disperse them within Yaakov,” so that they will not be able to conspire together. Yaakov added ואפיצם בישראל, ”and I will scatter them in Israel.” He wanted to make it difficult for the members of these tribes to all assemble in one place simultaneously. History proves that Yaakov’s intention was carried out. The territory of the tribe of Shimon was an enclave within the territory allocated to Yehudah (compare Joshua 19,1), and the Levites were assigned 48 separate towns throughout the territories of the various tribes. The dispersal of the Levites was to prove especially beneficial as it helped fulfill Moses’ blessing in Deut. 33,10 that the Levites were to disseminate Torah knowledge throughout the land of Israel. You will note that Yaakov did not dispense a blessing to either Reuven, Shimon, or Levi, but instead accused them of faults. He accused Reuven of the indiscretion involving the tent of Bilhah, and he accused Shimon and Levi of their high-handed handling of the males of Shechem. He did see fit to dispense a blessing to all the other sons however.
    
    49,8. יודוך אחיך, “your brothers will acknowledge you.” According to the plain meaning of the text this is a reference to the Israelites eventually acclaiming David, a descendant of Yehudah as their king.
   ישתחוו לך בני אביך, “the sons of your father will prostrate themselves before you.” He did not say: “the sons of your mother.” There was no need for him to say that Leah’s sons would acknowledge Yehudah as their leader. The point Yaakov made was that even the sons of his other wives would also acknowledge him as their leader. Yaakov referred to Yehudah (verse 9)  as גור אריה instead of as אריה, a fully grown lion. He added the word גור seeing Yehudah had still been a child (less than 20 years old when the brothers first deferred to him). He called him אריה on account of his physical power which [paralleled that of the lion, the king of the beasts. He is also called גבור,  to reflect Proverbs 30,30  “the lion is the mightiest of the beasts  and recoils before none.” Yehudah is described in similar terms by Chronicles I 5,2.
    
    49,9. מטרף בני עלית , “from the prey, my son, you elevated yourself.” Yaakov referred to his suspicion that it had been Yehudah who had “torn Joseph like a wild beast” (37,33). Yaakov refers to Yehudah’s having had second thoughts when he had said: “what advantage is there in killing our brother?”
    He mentioned that “the scepter shall not depart from Yehudah until the arrival of Shiloh.” This was an allusion to the redemption from the exile in Egypt which was relatively close at hand (in terms of Jewish history). Yaakov did not feel that he could fail to allude to this redemption in view of the fact that this particular exile was about to commence as soon as he had died. How could he fail at least to allude to the first redeemer of Israel, the one who would be from the tribe of Levi, while he did allude to the eventual redeemer? He therefore alluded to the first and last redeemer by the same word, the numerical value of the word שילה  being the same as the numerical value of the name משה, i.e. 345. The immediate meaning of the verse is that up until the arrival of the first redeemer, i.e. Moses, the leadership of the Jewish people will be in the hands of Yehudah. At that time the leadership of the Jewish people would revert to the tribe of Levi. Moses’ position of “king” is stressed in Deut. 33,5 ויהי בישורון מלך, “he became King in Yeshurun.” Concerning the appointment of Moses as de facto king of Israel Yaakov said here כי לו יקהת עמים, “for to him an assembly of people will congregate.” Deut. 33,5 phrases this as בהתאסף ראשי עם, “when the heads of the people would assemble around him.” The fact that the people of Israel are referred to as עמים, “nations (pl), is not unique but occurs also in Deut. 33,3. In other words, the paragraph containing the blessing of Yehudah contains also references to the first redemption the Jewish people would experience.
    In commenting on the plain meaning of the text of this verse, Nachmanides writes as follows: “the words ‘the scepter will not depart from Yehudah’ mean that Yaakov granted Yehudah the status of Royalty and blessed him by saying that he would not be deprived of that status by any of the other tribes. He assured him that as long as the Israel would be a kingdom, its king would be from the tribe of Yehudah The meaning of the blessing, however, was not that Israel would always be a kingdom and would always be ruled over by a king. After all we have an explicit verse in Deut. 28,36 that under certain conditions “G’d will lead you as well as your king whom you will set up over yourself to a nation you never knew, etc.” Moreover, it is an undeniable fact that nowadays we do not have a king nor princes.” It follows that Yaakov’s promise applied only to the periods in history when the whole Jewish people would be ruled over by a single king. If, temporarily, the Jewish people would be deprived of the conditions which call for it to be ruled by a king, in due course when the proper conditions return, the kingship would again be accorded to a member of the tribe of Yehudah.”
    This is why David said (Chronicles I 28,4) “The Lord G’d of Israel chose me of all my father’s house to be king over Israel forever. For he chose Yehudah to be ruler, and of the family of Yehudah, my father’s house; and of my father’s sons He preferred to make me king over all Israel;” We also have a verse in Chronicles II 13,5: “surely you know that  the Lord G’d of Israel gave David kingship over Israel forever- to him and his sons- by a covenant of salt.”
    Seeing that by rights the kingship of Israel was granted only to descendants of the tribe of Yehudah, any kings from another tribe who occupied that throne were punished and could not perpetuate their dynasties. Even King Saul, the first king over Israel,  was killed in battle and his sons died a violent death. The Hasmoneans (from the tribe of Levi) who claimed the throne of the Jewish people were all punished and died violent deaths as they had disregarded this cardinal rule established by Yaakov. The Hasmoneans wound up by becoming slaves to slaves (to the extent that any of them survived at all). He who took the crown by force was punished by having it taken away from him by force. Our sages in Baba Batra 3 go so far as to say that anyone claiming to be a descendant of the Hasmonean Kings is an impostor and is in fact a slave (who has falsified his genealogy).
    This is what Hoseah 8,4 had in mind when he said: “they appointed kings without My permission, and they made officers but not of My choice.” Apart from the fact that slaves or their descendants must not become Kings over Jews, the tribe of Levi and in particular the priests were prohibited from ascending the temporal throne. We have an explicit verse in Numbers 18,7 telling the Levites and the Priests to dedicate themselves exclusively to their tasks in tending to the altar and what is beyond the curtain. Seeing that the Hasmoneans who appointed themselves kings neglected to observe this commandment they became liable to such terrible punishment.
    The Jerusalem Talmud Horiot 3,2 specifically rules that priests must not be anointed as kings. Rabbi Yehudah there explains the linkage between Deut 17,20 “so that he and his descendants may reign long in the midst of Israel,” with the following verse (18,1) “the levitical priests, the whole tribe of Levi, shall have no territorial portion with Israel,” as clear evidence that the spiritual leadership of the Jewish people and its temporal leadership, i.e. the kingship, are to be separate.
    Ibn Ezra explains the words “the scepter shall not depart from Yehudah” as an indication that the kingship of Yehudah would not commence until David was crowned king. Accordingly, the word לא יסור must be translated: “he will not attain;” in other words: none of the descendants of Yehudah will attain a position of which it can be said that a “lawgiver has emerged from between his feet until Shiloh.” The word יסור does appear in that sense in  Exodus 3,3 אסורה נא ואראה, as well as in Ruth 4,1 סורה שבה פה. In both instances the word expresses a desire to attain either information or it is an instruction to do something.
   עד כי יבא שילה, “until the coming of Shiloh.” According to the plain meaning of the text “until the destruction of Shiloh;” [the word יבא in the sense of “the sun is setting, i.e. its light is failing. Ed.] We also have a specific verse indicating that the reign of the house of David did not commence until after the destruction of Shiloh. In Psalms 78,67-70. Asaph says: ‘“He rejected the clan of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Ephrayim. He did choose the tribe of Yehudah, Mount Zion, which He loved. He built His Sanctuary like the heavens, like the earth that He established forever. He chose David, His servant, and took him from the sheepfolds.” Historically speaking, after the destruction of Shiloh (in which Eli presided as High Priest) the prophet Samuel anointed David as King (while Saul was still on the throne).
    It is also possible to explain this entire paragraph in which Yaakov blesses Yehudah without reading anything between the lines. Yaakov alluded to two redeemers, both in the distant future. The first one is David, son of Yishai. The second one is David reincarnated as the Messiah. I believe the very fact that the Torah devotes three separate verses to Yehudah’s blessing before mentioning the excellence of the territory Yehudah would inherit in the land of Israel (verses 11-12) supports this line of interpretation. In each of the three verses 8-10 Yehudah is mentioned by name; (something most unusual, something that does not occur in connection with any of the other sons).
    The reason that the name of Yehudah appears on three separate occasions in his blessing is that the blessing refers to three distinct periods of Jewish history. The Torah refers to Yehudah, son of Yaakov. Then it refers to King David. Finally, it refers to King Messiah. The first verse in which Yaakov says that his brothers will acknowledge Yehudah refers to his biological son Yehudah. In that verse Yaakov blesses his son by granting him גבורה, both spiritual and physical strength, the ability to lead his brothers in warfare as well as the authority needed to be a leader. To make certain we understand this, Yaakov addressed Yehudah by saying to him: אתה, “you.”. The second verse, where Yaakov speaks of Yehudah as גור אריה, a lion cub, he refers to King David. The reason he calls him “Yehudah” in that verse is because David is descended from Yehudah. He refers to him as גור, “a cub,’ i.e. not fully matured, as at the time when Samuel anointed David, Saul was still the effective King over Israel. David qualified for the description אריה, “lion” only after Saul had died. The words מטרף בני עלית “you arose from the prey my son,” is a reference to David having been saved from Saul’s persecution of him The words כרע רבץ כאריה, “he crouched and lay down like a lion,” refer to the time of Solomon, David’s son, when each and every Israelite is described as securely resting “under his grapevine and under his fig tree” (Kings I 5,5). Finally, the third verse, in which Yaakov says לא יסור שבט מיהודה, “the scepter will not depart from Yehudah,” is a reference to Israel’s final redeemer the King Messiah. This is why Yaakov said עד כי יבא שילה, “until ‘Shiloh’ arrives, i.e. a “son” of David [descendent, reincarnate]. The reason Yaakov described the final redeemer as “Shiloh” instead of as a son (descendant) of Yehudah is that he wanted to make sure we understand that this final redeemer would be a human being in the full sense of the word, i.e. born משלית אשה, “by woman including her afterbirth.” [clearly the author wants to dispel the Christian concept of the Messiah being the “son of God.” Ed.]  The letter ה at the end of the word שילה is a reference to the last letter in G’d’s Ineffable Name י-ה-ו-ה, a certain attribute of G’d. We have discussed this on numerous occasions. This “letter” is also known in kabbalistic jargon as בתו של אברהם, “the ‘daughter’ of Avraham,” the one married to King Solomon, the one who represents the foremost attribute of the Messiah. Concerning this attribute the prophet uses five separate expressions in Isaiah 11,2-3: “The spirit of the Lord shall alight upon him: a spirit of wisdom and insight; a spirit of counsel and valour; a spirit of devotion and reverence for the Lord. He shall sense the truth by his reverence for the Lord.” In his time “the land shall be filled with knowledge of the Lord as waters covers the sea” (verse 9).
    The meaning of our verse then is: “once Shiloh=the Messiah has arrived, the kingship will never again depart from this descendent of Yehudah.”
     According to a Midrash quoted by Rashi, the word שילה is a composition of the words שי לו, “at that time people will bring gifts to him” (the Messiah). According to Onkelos the meaning of the word שילה is שהמלכות שלו, “the kingdom belongs to him.” In this connection my own teacher Rabbi Shlomoh Adret explained that the word עד in this instance means the same as לעד, “forever.” This is to teach that the word עד does not belong to the expression כי יבא שילה. This explains why Onkelos translated it as “forever.” Onkelos translated the word כי יבא שילה as דיית משיחא, “when the redeemer arrives.” Anyone who translates the sequence as “until the Messiah arrives” is in error. The whole message is that once the Messiah arrives the kingship will not depart anymore from Yehudah forever.
    We find confirmation of this theme in Daniel 2,44: “In the days of these kingdoms the G’d of heaven will establish a kingdom that will never be harmed nor will its sovereignty be left to another people; it will crumble and consume all these kingdoms and it will stand forever.”
    Seeing that the Christians have used this very verse to prove their theory that the Messiah (in the form of Jesus) has already arrived  by interpreting our verse that the rule of Yehudah would last only until the advent of the Messiah, my teacher responded to them that, on the contrary, Yaakov stated and Daniel predicted that  the kingship of Yehudah once it commences will endure forever Seeing this is not the case in our time, this is proof that the Messiah has not come until now.
    You should realise that when Yaakov said עד כי יבא שילה, the first redeemer as well as the last redeemer are both included.  [by the “last” redeemer, the author refers to the period of the resurrection. Ed.] Both will be descendants of Yehudah and both will tend the flock of G’d  in the Holy land. This is what the Talmud (Sanhedrin 91)had in mind when it discusses the fact that in Exodus 15,1 the Torah reports Moses and the Jewish people as אז ישיר instead of as אז שר “then he will sing,” instead of as “then he sang.” This wording is considered as proof that the resurrection is a Biblical Promise. Devarim Rabbah  at the end of the third section uses Exodus 34,1 where G’d tells Moses to carve the second sets of tablets himself, the ones which G’d in turn will inscribe with the Ten Commandments. G’d said to Moses: “by your life, seeing you went to such lengths to secure a second set of tablets for the Jewish people in this life, when the time comes and I will send the prophet Elijah in advance of the Messiah, you too will reappear on earth.” What proof do we have that the opinion cited by the Midrash is correct?  We read in Nachum 1,3: “He (G’d) travels in בסופה, whirlwind, and storm.” This is a reference to Moses  of whom it is said ותשם אותו בסוף, “she (his mother) placed him in theסוף . Of Elijah we are told that ויעל אליהו בסערה השמים, “Elijah ascended to heaven in a storm” (Kings II 2,11).
    We have other allusions and predictions concerning the same matter such as Micah 7,15 who predicts that G’d will perform miracles in those days which parallel or excel those He performed during the time of the Exodus. The prophet quotes G’d as saying to him אראנו נפלאות, “I will show him miracles.” We would have expected G’d to say: “I will show you miracles.” This can only mean that G’d will display miracles to him who has once before experienced such miracles.
    This is the reason that as soon as Yaakov had concluded with his blessing for Yehudah, he added אסרי לגפן עירה ולשרקה בני אתונו, “he will tie his donkey to the vine and his donkey’s foal to the vine branch.” The similes refer to the excellence of the land of Israel, its produce and its fruit.
    A Midrashic approach based on (Bereshit Rabbah 99,8) The words יודוך אחיך, “your brothers will acknowledge you,” are designed to put Yehudah’s mind at rest. When Yehudah had heard his father chastise all three of his older brothers he had become afraid that his father would level criticism at him also.for his having slept with Tamar. Instead, his father used the word יודוך as a reminder of Yehudah owning up to his making his daughter-in-law Tamar pregnant. This confession of his would cause his brothers to acknowledge him as their leader. He would be their king both in the terrestrial world and in the world to come. In this terrestrial world 30 kings descended from Yehudah ascended the throne. We know this from Ruth 4,18 “these are the descendants of Peretz, etc.” When you count the number of Kings starting with David through Yehoyachin you will find a total of 20 kings. The Temple was destroyed during the reign of Tzidkiyahu. David was the tenth generation from Peretz son of Yehudah. David will also be pre-eminent in the world to come as we know from Ezekiel 37,25 “and My servant David will be their prince forever.”
   מטרף בני עלית. These words are understood by the Midrash as referring to four people whom Yehudah saved personally, i.e. Joseph, Tamar, Peretz and Zerach. G’d saved four more people, all of them descendants of Yehudah, i.e. Daniel, Chananyah, Mishael and Azaryah. Thus far Bereshit Rabbah. The Midrash tells us that G’d saved Daniel from the pit of lions as a reward for Yehudah  having saved Joseph from the pit. He saved the three righteous men Chanayah, Mishael and Azaryah from a fiery death at the hands of Nebuchadnezzar’s furnace (Daniel 3,25) because Yehudah their ancestor had saved Tamar and the twins Peretz and Zerach inside her womb from death by burning.
    The Midrash refers to further repercussions in the distant future due to Yehudah’s conduct, citing the fact that the first Temple was built by Solomon a descendant of Yehudah whereas the second Temple was built by Zerubabel, also a descendant of Yehudah. (compare Chagai 2,23), Zecharyah 4,9 and Zecharyah 4,7) The third Temple which we hope will be built soon will be erected by the King Messiah, also of David’s i.e. Yehudah’s descent. We base this on Isaiah 11,10.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words יהודה אתה יודוך אחיך, sees in the name Yehudah the beginning of an expanded awareness of a mystical connection between this world of matter and the celestial world of the spirit. The word יוודך אחיך suggests that he will be the one who transmits greater awareness of these connections to the other brothers. If Yehudah mastered the attribute of גבורה it was due to his ability to acknowledge his own mistakes. The letters in his very name are indicative of this. We find something similar in Genesis 29, 34-35 where Leah acknowledged with thanks that she had given birth to more children for Yaakov than she was entitled to on the basis of each of Yaakov’s wives bearing him three sons. Leah expressed her feelings in naming her fourth son יהודה. [The ethical lesson to be learned from all this is that gratitude, i.e. acknowledging that G’d does more for us than we are entitled to, leads to a deeper understanding of the mystical bonds that hold the terrestrial world and the celestial world together. Ed.]
    
    49,11. אוסרי לגפן עירה, “he will tie his donkey to a grapevine.” Yaakov predicted that the territory of Yehudah would produce wine in abundance, that wine would flow there just like a fountain. The meter of the verse is: “a man from Yehudah would tie his donkey to one vine and would completely load it with the grapes from that single vine. Similarly, a she-ass would be loaded fully with the produce from a single choice vine. When Yaakov continued with: “he laundered his garments in wine,” he also alluded to the abundance of wine in his land. According to Onkelos our verse speaks of Jerusalem and Israel respectively. The words אוסרי לגפן refer to the people of Israel, the word עירה to Jerusalem. The word שורקה again refers to Israel as we find Jeremiah saying in Jeremiah 2,21: “I have planted it (Israel) as a choice vine.” The words:בני אתונו   are rendered by Onkelos as עמא יבנון היכלה, “the people who will build the Sanctuary.” Clearly, Onkelos understands the word בני as related to בנין, “building.” He understands the word אתון as based on Zecharyah 9,9: “riding on a male donkey the son of a she-ass.” The prophet thus describes the arrival of the Messiah.
    
    49,12. חכלילי עינים מיין, “Red-eyed from wine,”  This too is a hyperbole relating to the abundance of wine to be found in the tribal territory of Yehudah. Yaakov said that every person in the territory of Yehudah would have red-looking eyes due to the abundance of wine. The word חכלילי is really spelled backwards. Its meaning is as if it had been spelled כחלילי. The idea is that the people would actually have blue eyes, i.e. כחול, [women always used a blue tint to enhance the appearance of their eyes. According to the Talmud they used פוך, antimony, as eye-shadow to achieve this effect. Ed.] Just as women throughout the rest of the country colour their eyes blue so the eyes of the women of Yehudah  would be coloured red from the abundance of wine. White teeth would be white by contrast due to the abundance of milk in the valley and the abundance of milk yielding flocks of sheep.
    According to Bereshit Rabbah 99,8 the wordחכלילי  is a composition of the three words חיך לי לי, i.e. when the palate, חיך, has tasted the wine of the land of Yehudah its owners will request refills of this beverage by saying לי, לי “more for me, more for me.” Onkelos believes that the mountains on the land of Yehudah are reddish looking due to the vineyards which cover them. This is why he described them was עינים, “eyes,” organs which are on top of the body. Mountains on earth are similar to the eyes in the body. He describes the valleys as white-looking due to the abundance of sheep and the milk they yield. The word שינים when used by the Targum here is related to שיני סלעים, the “teeth of rocks.”
    If you will examine this paragraph carefully you will find that it contains all the letters of the alphabet except the letter ז. The message is that the Kingdom of Israel as represented by Yehudah does not base its military victories on its arms, כלי זיין,  as do the other nations whose inheritance is the power of the sword.
    The Jewish people did not conquer the land of Canaan because of superior arms or superior military skills of its soldiers. Its entire success or failure is due to the system of reward and punishment by which G’d operates in this world and specifically in the land of Israel. This is all symbolised by the fact that Yehudah’s name contains all the four letters of the Ineffable Name. When the Israelites act in accordance with G’d’s laws they will always be able to perform deeds of valour (compare Numbers 24,18). Their Kingdom will progressively become stronger and more secure and its inhabitants will not need to resort to force of arms at all. All of this is hinted at in the absence of the latter ז during the lengthy blessing given to Yehudah.
    There is also a moral message in the addition of the letter ד to the letters of the Ineffable Name in the name יהודה. The letter ד, meaning “four,” is reminiscent of the fourth day of creation, the day the sun was placed in orbit. Yehudah was also the fourth of Yaakov’s sons symbolising the fact that the fourth son was to shine forth just like the sun which was placed in orbit on the fourth day. The fact that the Kingdom of Yehudah is compared to the sun is already reflected in the words of the psalmist (Psalm 89,37) “his throne is as the sun before Me.” 
    Alternatively, seeing that that the specific attribute of Yehudah has been described by Moses as זאת (Deut. 33,6), he has been crowned with the letter ז, already, so that there was no need for Yaakov to include this letter in Yehudah’s blessing here. Yaakov had already alluded to this when he said to Yehudah: “your hand will be on  your enemies’ nape” (49,8). This was an allusion to the bow which is described as Yehudah’s weapon [The word קשת in this connection refers to the original קשת, the rainbow, which was the sign of G’d’s covenant with man (Genesis 9,12)]. This is the mystical significance of Samuel II 1,18 (where David eulogises King Saul) “He ordered  the members of the people of Yehudah to be taught (the song of) the bow. It is recorded in the Book of Yashar.” We needed the verse in Deut. 33,6 to explain the meaning of the verse in Samuel.
    When Moses continued in Deut, 33,6 ידיו רב לו “his hands fight for him,” this helps round out the meaning of Yehudah’s blessings.
    We may also find an additional reason why the letter ז is the only letter of the alphabet missing in Yehudah’s blessing here. The reason is that Yehudah was the seventh of the “patriarchs” counting from Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, Reuven, Shimon, Levi, Yehudah.” Accordingly, Yehudah corresponds to the number “seven,” i.e. the seventh day, the Sabbath. This is also why the word יודוך, “they will acknowledge you” appears in connection with Yehudah seeing that the psalmist also uses that word in connection with the Sabbath when he says (Psalm 92,2) טוב להודות לה', “it is appropriate to acknowledge the Lord on the Sabbath).” The words מטרף בני עלית also assume a new significance in that context, meaning that on the Sabbath it is appropriate to desist from the struggle to gain a livelihood, something comparable to the animal devouring its prey. Yaakov’s words parallel those of the Torah that on the Sabbath one must refrain from any manner of work, even the kind of work which helps one to stay alive in this world. When Yaakov continued: “when he crouched and lies down  like a lion, or even like a lion cub, who dares to rouse him,” this also parallels what the Torah commands the Jewish people to do on the Sabbath, i.e.  שבו איש תחתיו, “let every man remain in his place” (Exodus 16,29). The words ומחוקק מבין רגליו, are an allusion to the commandment to circumcise Jewish males on the eight’s day after birth. The performance of this commandment on time (unless there is danger to the baby’s life) overrides even the prohibition to perform work on the Sabbath. [the male organ which is situated בין רגליו, between the baby’s legs, is exempt from the commandment not to perform any work on the Sabbath. Ed.] Yaakov continued with אוסרי לגפן עירה ולשורקה בני אתונו, to alert us to the fact that the work prohibition on the Sabbath also includes one’s beasts as we know from Exodus 23,12: “in order that your that your ox and your donkey rest, etc.” The words כבס ביין לבושו, are an allusion to the requirement to sanctify the Sabbath by reciting a benediction over a cup of wine. When Yaakov added the word חכלילי עינים מיין, this may be a reference to the statements of our sages Berachot 43 that he who makes big steps (on the Sabbath) impairs his eyesight by doing so to the extent of 0.2%. By drinking a cup of wine on Friday night one can counteract the damage one has inflicted on his eyesight by taking big steps.
    
    49,12. זבולון לחוף ימים ישכון, “Zevulun will reside along the coast of the seas, etc.” The order in which the names of the tribes are listed here corresponds to  the order of their births The first six sons being blessed are the sons of Leah; they are followed by the list of the four sons born to the servant-maids, i.e. Dan, Gad, Asher and Naftali. They are followed by the sons of Rachel, Joseph and Binyamin. Actually, according to this principle, Issachar should have received his blessing before Zevulun, seeing that he was senior to him. However, Yaakov blessed Zevulun first as he foresaw that Issachar’s Torah study was due to Zevulun who provided for him so that Issachar did not have to worry about making a living. When we look at the order in which Moses blessed the tribes prior to his own death, we find that he too blessed Zevulun ahead of Issachar (Deut. 33 18).  The meaning of the words לחוף ימים ישכון is that seeing that his territory will be alongside the sea he will be near the sea constantly and will engage in maritime pursuits. His commercial activities will provide for his brother Issachar also, enabling him to pursue his Torah studies without financial worry. Zevulun’s share in the merit of Issachar’s Torah will be so great that we apply to it
the verse in Kohelet 7,12: “to be in the צל of wisdom is to be also in the צל of money.” Normally, we would translate the word צל as “shadow.” In this instance we have to consider the word as derived from אצילות, “nobility,” something transcendent,” an emanation. The meaning would be that the emanation “wisdom” can be maintained by means of the nobility of the money. Using money to enable Torah to be studied ennobles the money itself, makes into something of transcendental significance, something of enduring value.
    It is important to understand that the very name Zevulun alludes to what is called the קו האמצאי, the “middle line,” i.e. the line that forms the connection between the terrestrial and celestial world. This is why he is described as residing (being at home) לחוף הימים, at the beach of the seas. The wordימים  appears in Genesis 1,10 ולמקוה המים קרא ימים, “and the accumulation of water he called seas, or oceans.” The word חוף is connected to חופה, the wedding canopy. Zevulun is viewed as the groom who emerges from his wedding canopy when he engages in commerce to supply his brother Issachar with the necessary funds to study Torah. No wonder then that he enjoys precedence over his older brother.
    
    49,14. יששכר חמור גרם, “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey.” According to the plain meaning of the text he is like a donkey whose proportion of bones far overshadows the amount of its flesh. People who engage in constant study of Torah will not be found to amass much flesh. The people of the tribe of Issachar are burdened down by the weight of their Torah study as the donkey is burdened down with physical loads.
   רובץ בין המשפטים, “he lies down between the sheepfolds.” Donkeys work both by day and by night and even when they lie down briefly, they lie down between the boundaries of the towns instead of in their own stables at the home of their owners.
    
    49,15. וירא מנוחה כי טוב, “He saw that tranquillity was good;” Issachar realised that warfare and military activity was far inferior to Torah study, a quiet way of life. Torah study can flourish only when the body is physically as inactive as possible as the mental strain of studying drains the body of its strength. Torah study engages the opposite energies of the pursuit of vocations involving activity of one’s physique. The latter engage the body fully while leaving one’s mental faculties relatively uninvolved. The former makes great demands on one’s mental faculties while leaving the body relatively at rest. It is quite impossible for true Torah study to be successfully carried on by someone whose body has been worn out by physical labour or even by mental anguish and the like. This is one of the reasons that our sages included the request השיבה שופטנו כבראשונה ויועצינו כבתחילה, “restore to us our judges as in former times and our advisors as originally,” in our daily prayers. They added the words והסר ממנו יגון ואנחה, “and remove from us sorrow and anxiety,” as these factors are so inhibiting to anyone who wants to dedicate himself to Torah study. The purpose of this prayer is not that G’d should give us advisors to show us how to escape the burden of taxation, etc. This was not what the prophet Isaiah 1,26 had in mind when he promised that: “I will restore to you your judges as of old and your erstwhile advisors.” The prophet first and foremost had in mind the kind of advisors who had been able to calculate the occurrence of the new moon and other astronomical dates with precision. The judges who were able to do this were the ones who sat in the offices adjoining the Holy Temple. Once these types of judges will be restored to us the entire people would be able to upgrade the level of their Torah study. At that time the prophet’s promise that “the whole earth would possess a  knowledge of G’d as the waters which cover the seas” (Isaiah 11,9) would be fulfilled. This is why the sages followed the request to restore these judges to us with the request to remove sorrow and sighing. They hinted that it would be impossible to pursue intensive Torah studies until the requisite conditions had been met with the help of G’d. These conditions include absence of sorrow and physical rest for the body. This benediction was suitably arranged by our sages as the next step following our return to the Holy Land i.e. תקע בשופר גדול לחרותנו, “sound the great horn heralding our freedom!”
   כי טוב, “that it was good.” The word “good” in this connection is similar to  כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם, “for I have given you a good instruction.”
   ואת הארץ, “and the earth.” This word is related to ומארצו יצאו in Ezekiel 36,20 meaning (according to Targum) “and it will emerge from religious discourse, from Torah study.” The words כי נעמה are a reminder of the verse דרכיה דרכי נועם, that “the ways of Torah are the paths of pleasantness” (Proverbs 3,17).
   ויט שכמו לסבול, “yet he bent his shoulder to bear.” The burden he bears is that of Torah study. We have another example of this kind of wording in Samuel II 22,10 ויט שמים וירד, “He bent the sky and came down.” Subjecting spiritually gigantic concepts to one’s understanding results in one’s back being bent. An additional meaning included in this may be that “by humbling oneself, i.e. bending down, Torah knowledge may be acquired.” Our sages stated that it behooves a Torah scholar to walk with a stoop.
   ויהי למס עובד, “he became an indentured labourer.” He was subservient to all of Israel, dispensing religious rulings, pointing out errors in Torah-observance made by the people. This is expressed more clearly in Chronicles I 12,33 where the tribe of Issachar (respectively its representatives at the crowning of King David) is described as “of the Issacharites, men who knew how to interpret the signs of the times, to determine how Israel should act; their heads consisted of 200 men and all their kinsmen acted according to their instructions.”
     Bereshit Rabbah 99,11 on our verse writes: “the words ‘Issachar is a sturdy donkey,’ allude to when Yaakov returned from the field in the evening, and Leah heard the sound of his donkey which was lowing, she immediately went out towards him telling him that she had made a deal according to which he would spend this night in her tent  The Torah reports that as a result of that night with Leah, Issachar was conceived. In other words, the donkey גרם,  was the indirect cause, of her bearing Issachar.
    A kabbalistic approach to the same verse: Kabbalists concentrate on the word רובץ in that verse comparing it to Deut. 22,6 והאם רובצת “while the mother (bird) is sitting (on her eggs)”. This is another allusion to the emanation בינה, associated with Issachar. We just quoted a verse from Chronicles in which Issachar is represented as the most insightful tribe (the one possessing בינה). This would account for the fact that Yaakov associated מנוחה with Issachar as without this quality no deep insights are possible. 
    49,16. דן ידין עמו, “Dan will judge his people.” This is a reference to Samson the judge who was a member of the tribe of Dan. The reason Yaakov said ידין “he will judge,” is because Samson was only a judge and not a king.
   כאחד שבטי ישראל, “uniting the tribes of Israel.” The word כאחד is to be understood as כמיוחד, “like the unique one amongst the tribes,” like Yehudah of whom it is said that his hands were at the nape of his enemies. The judge Samson from the tribe of Dan would display similar strength when vanquishing his enemies.
    Bereshit Rabbah 99,11 understands the word  כאחדas describing the judge from the tribe of Dan as having something in common with the “unique One,” i.e. with G’d. Just as G’d has no need of anyone, so Samson would be a one-man army not relying on anyone else to help him. Of G’d it is said (Isaiah 63,3) “I trod out a vintage alone; of the peoples no one was with Me. I trod them down in My anger, trampled them in My range.” Samson’s dealings with the Philistines who had aroused his justified anger could be described in similar terms. (compare Judges 15,16: “with the jawbone of an ass I killed one thousand men.”)
    
    49,17. יהי דן, “Dan will be, etc.” There are several reasons why Yaakov in his blessing compares Dan to a serpent, a snake. The first one is that Samson, unlike others before or after him, did not command armies in his battles against the enemy of his people. He acted totally alone, just like a snake which attacks from an ambush, coming out of its lair. Secondly, just like a snake receives some mysterious whisper which causes it to act aggressively, so Samson would respond to the whisperings of Delilah. This is the deeper meaning of Judges 16, 16-17: “Finally, after she had nagged him and pressed him constantly, he was wearied to death and he confided everything to her. He said to her: ‘no razor has ever touched my head; for I have been a Nazirite to G’d since I was in my mother’s womb. If my hair were cut, my strength would leave me and I should become as an ordinary man.’” Furthermore, just as a snake is also known as שרף due to its venom which burns, so Samson burned down the fields of the Philistines when the corn in them was close to being harvested. (compare Judges 15,5). Also, just as the snake attacks man in his heel, at is lowest point, seeing the first serpent had been condemned to crawl on its belly, and G’d had told it that the way it would attack man would be by biting man’s heel (Genesis 3,14), so Samson  is described as נוקב עקבי סוס “attacking the heel of a horse,” i.e. bringing down the pillars of the temple of the Philistines (compare Judges 16,29). He killed 3,000 Philistines who were sitting on the roof of that temple (Judges 16,27). The reason Samson’s exploits are described here as causing “the rider to fall backwards,” is that when a snake bites the heel of a horse, the horse rears upwards with its front legs throwing its rider backwards. Just as the snake kills without the use of a sword, so Samson killed without conventional arms as mentioned in Judges 16, 30: “those who were slain by him (when he made the pillars of their temple collapse) outnumbered those whom he had killed while he was alive.” 
    Bereshit Rabbah 99,11 relates that just as a serpent is vengeful so Samson was vengeful. This is based on Judges 16,28: “O, Lord give me strength once more to take revenge of the Philistines, if only for one of my two eyes.” Thus far the Midrash. Know that in order to fully understand this Midrash we must remember that the very name Dan and what Yaakov predicts here reflects what is only hinted at in the name Reuven. This is the deeper meaning of “Dan will judge his people.” [The author had explained on Genesis 29,32 that the name Reuven was employed by Leah as an acknowledgment by her of the attribute of Justice which is concentrated in the final letter of the Ineffable Name. Yaakov had, of course, accepted that the names the mothers gave to his sons had been divinely inspired. Ed.]
   שפיפון עלי ארח, “a viper by the path.” The smallest variety of snakes was called שפיפון. According to Sotah 10, Samson was lame on both feet, something derived from Bileam (Numbers 22,8) of whom the Torah reported that his she-ass squeezed one of his feet against a wall after which the Torah reports him as וילך שפי, “he walked with a limp”(Numbers 23,3). Seeing the word שפי implies limping on one foot, שפיפון  implies being lame on both feet.
    
    49,18. לישועתך קיויתי ה', “For Your salvation I do long, O Lord!” According to Nachmanides this verse is a prayer by Yaakov to G’d (not part of a blessing). This prayer came to Yaakov spontaneously when he foresaw that in spite of Samson’s deeds of valour it was not he who would be Israel’s redeemer. Yaakov’s blessing for Dan concluded with the words ויפל רוכבו אחור. 
    It is however possible to explain this verse as a prayer offered by Samson. Yaakov foresaw the death of this judge of Israel and how G’d had responded to his final prayer (Judges 16,28). Samson was content to die together with his enemies as long as G’d would help him to revenge himself on them as he himself said in Judges 16,30. 
    Know that experts in names and their meanings derive from this verse a name which by itself is designed to be a defense against one’s enemies. We find that it is written (Judges 16,30) concerning Samson who was able to kill so many of his adversaries:
     ויט בכח, “he pulled with (his) might,” though we would have expected the prophet Samuel to write: ויט בכחו, “he pulled with his might.” The implication is that the word בכח refers to G’d’s strength. Samson “co-opted” G’d’s strength to that of his own in order to bring about this impressive result, i.e. that 3,000 Philistines died as a result of his uprooting two pillars of the temple. The name of G’d which emerges from this verse  is to be read in an unusual order. [The author refers to the custom of reading the words לישועתך קיויתי ה' in three different sequences. He bases this on the fact that the mystique of the כח which assisted Samson lay in the re-arrangement of these three words in different permutations, קיויתי ה' לישועתך, לישועתך ה' קיויתי as well as ה' לישועתך קיויתי. When a prayer containing these words is offered in that manner it is liable to be effective. Ed.] By reversing the words, the enemy “falls ”backwards,” so to speak.
    
    49,19. גד גדוד יגודנו, “Gad will recruit a regiment.” Yaakov praised Gad’s prowess, predicting that he would be involved in many military encounters and that troops would flock to his banner. 
   והוא יגד עקב, “and he will retreat on its heel.” Yaakov meant that ultimately, after having helped his brethren to conquer the land from the Canaanites, its soldiers would return to their families on the East Bank of the Jordan. An alternative meaning is that Gad would vanquish the forces opposing him only in the end. We would then have to understand the word יגד as related to the Aramaic גדו אילנא in Daniel 4,11: “chop down the tree.” 
    Actually, Moses explained this verse when he said in his own blessing of the tribe of Gad (Deut: 33,20) “blessed the One Who broadens Gad; he dwells like a lion  tearing off arm and even head.” When Yaakov realised that in spite of Samson’s deeds of valour he was not to be Israel’s redeemer, Yaakov now expressed the hope that Gad would produce the redeemer. The word עקב refers to the tribe that “follows” that of Dan in the sequence of his blessings. He based it on Maleachi 3,23: “Here I will send you Elijah the prophet,” etc. The prophet Elijah reputedly is from Gad. Thus far Bereshit Rabbah 71,9. [The prophet Elijah was a resident of Gilead, in the territory of Gad. This does not mean that he was not also a כהן, a priest. Ed.]
    
    49,20. מאשר שמנה לחמו, “From Asher- his bread will have richness.” His food will contain much fat seeing that olives grow in his territory in abundance. He will extract the oil from these olives. Moses alludes to the same thing in his blessing of Asher in Deut. 33,24: “he will dip his feet in oil.” Actually we would have expected Yaakov to address Asher directly, saying: “Asher’s bread will be fat.” Perhaps the letter מ at the beginning of the word אשר was intended to allude to the super-abundance of that oil. There would be so much oil that Asher would even export it to other countries, i.e. “from Asher.”
    
    49,21. נפתלי אילת שלוחה, “Naftali is a hind let loose.” According to the plain meaning of the text Yaakov describes Naftali as exceedingly fleet-footed. His services are used to convey happy tidings. According to Tanchuma Vayechi 13 the words refer to the valley of Ginosaur, situated in its territory which produced excellent and early ripening fruit. This speed is compared to the speed of a hind.
   הנותן אמרי שפר. “delivering beautiful sayings.”  The people of Naftali used to  honour the kings with gifts of their fruit and in the event the Kings had any complaints against them they had the facility to respond and disarm these complaints with pleasant words.
    Another approach to this verse based on Bereshit Rabbah 95,22 and cited in Sotah 13: Naftali sprinted to Egypt when Esau made difficulties about burying Yaakov in the cave of Machpelah. He brought back the document proving Yaakov’s ownership. He did not return however until Chushim, son of Dan, had killed Esau who held up the burial.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word אילה שלוחה is an allusion to the concept of צדיק, the truly righteous. The word is reminiscent of a messenger, שליח, the word אילת, is an allusion to the כנסת ישראל also known as אילת השחר. Naftali brings the prayers of the Jewish people to the throne of G’d with his exceptional speed. We have support for this from Shemot Rabbah 21,4 where we are told that a certain angel awaits the prayers of the Jewish people and weaves all of them into a crown to be placed on the head of G’d. This is based on Proverbs 10,6: “blessings rest on the head of the righteous.” The “righteous” par excellence is G’d, of course.
    
    49,22. בן פורת יוסף, “Joseph is a charming son.” According to the plain meaning the word בן in this context means “a plant producing many offshoots.” Compare Psalms 80,16 בן אמצתה לך, “the stem You have adopted as Your own.” It would refer here to the fact that Joseph produced two tribes, Ephrayim and Menashe. This would also account for the fact that the word בן appears twice in this verse. The term בן פורת compares to Moses referring to Joseph in his blessing of him in Deut. 33,17 as both שור and ראם, two different animals. Moses there continues by speaking respectively of the myriads of Ephrayim and the “thousands” of the Menashites.
    The reason Yaakov begins by extolling Joseph before even naming him, something not the case in the blessings of any of the other sons, is probably due to the fact that he was forced to refer to Joseph by name twice, seeing he was to become two tribes. The first בן פורת refers to Menashe, Joseph’s senior son, the second בן פורת to Ephrayim. Seeing that Ephrayim was the more promising of the two Yaakov added the words עלי עין, “appealing to the eye.” 
    Nachmanides understands the words בן פורת as related to a statement by our sages in Baba Metzia119  אפריון נמטייה לרבי שמעון, “an accolade is due to Rabbi Shimon.” The word also occurs in a similar sense in Ketuvot 54, i.e. פורנא ליתמי.
   בנות צעדה, “each of the girls climbed the walls.” The girls of the most eminent families of Egypt climbed the walls in order to catch a glimpse of Joseph. Joseph, however, did not look at even one of them. This is why Yaakov added immediately: “but his bow was firmly emplaced,” i.e. he did not allow himself to get aroused by any of these alluring girls.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bereshit Rabbah 99,11: the words בן פורת, בן פורת mean that Joseph attained his outstanding greatness due to two sets of cows which Pharaoh had dreamt about.
    The words עלי עין  should be understood as if the Torah had written: עולי עין, “they were climbing the walls,” i.e. the boughs of Joseph’s vine developed prolifically. The verse is a reference to Joseph’s descendants which were not subject to the damaging influence of the evil eye.
      According to a kabbalistic interpretation the words בן פורת  are an allusion to the glory of Israel, the word פרת, being a derivative of תפארת. The words עלי עין,  refer to the origin of the river Euphrates, i.e. פרת, which is one of the four rivers originating in גן עדן, in Paradise. Joseph gets his vital input directly from גן עדן. Seeing that the emanations נצח and הוד respectively appear left and right of the emanation תפארת in our usual diagrams, it is logical that he, Joseph, would produce two tribes instead of merely one.  This is why Yaakov continued with בנות צעדה עלי שור which Onkelos translates as “two tribes will emerge from him.” This is what caused Moses to speak of both שור and ראם, in his blessing of the tribe of Joseph (Deut, 33,17) the former representing the emanation נצח, the latter the emanation הוד. 
    
    49,25." מאל אביך ויעזרך, from the G’d of your father, and He will help you.” According to the plain meaning  the attribute אל will provide help, i.e. when you are in trouble, whereas G’d’s attribute שדי will be the source of the blessings you will experience. The blessings will include both input from the heavens and input from the תהום, the depth of the earth.
   ברכות שדים ורחם, “the blessings of breasts and womb.”  According to Onkelos this is an allusion to the combined blessings of Joseph’s father and mother. In Exodus 15,4, on the words ירה בים, Onkelos  translates this as שדי בימא, “as something ‘flung’ into the sea.” He appears to understand the word שדים as related to an activity by the male, i.e. the ejaculation of sperm which is expelled like an arrow from a bow.
    A kabbalistic approach:  The word אביך is a reference to אביר יעקב, the attribute of G’d which protected Yaakov. It is this same attribute which Yaakov invokes when asking that it also protect Joseph after he had already received the heavenly blessings. The heavenly blessings are alluded to in the word שדים, the earthly ones by the word רחם.  In mystical terms, “father and mother” are  viewed here as symbols of heaven and earth.
    
    49,26.  ברכות אביך גברו על ברכות הורי, “the blessings of your father have surpassed the blessings of my parents.” According to the plain meaning of the words the word “my parents” refer to Avraham and Yitzchak (not to Yitzchak and Rivkah).   Yaakov meant that his blessings were additional to the blessing which had already been bestowed by Avraham and Yitzchak on his offspring.
    A kabbalistic approach: Yaakov meant that the emanation from which his own blessing would originate is more powerful than the emanation in which Avraham and Yitzchak and also their blessings were at home. Avraham and Yitzchak had primarily represented the emanation  חסד and גבורה respectively. Yaakov’s emanation, i.e. the aegis under which he modeled his life was תפארת, harmony, a blending of the two emanations which each formed Avraham’s and Yitzchak’s guiding light. The reason the patriarchs are called הורי, “my parents,” is that they were the principal carriers of the שכינה, the “benevolent Presence of G’d on earth,”  as we have explained repeatedly  [the word הורי may be read as without the letter ו, i.e. הרי, “my mountains,” i.e.. the ones I look up to. Ed.]. We find that David also refers to  the patriarchs as mountains when he said in Palms 121,1 “I will raise my eyes to the mountains.” Midrash Tehillim  on these words understands them as David raising his eyes to the spirits of the patriarchs.
   עד תאות גבעת עולם, “to the utmost bounds of  the eternal  hills.” Until the emanations will have played their parts in full. At that time G’d and His Name will be One, [there will no longer be a dichotomy between man’s ideals and his realising them. Ed.] The הורי of which Yaakov has spoken will then be identical with גבעות עולם.  These “mountains” may then serve as “crowns”. The word גבעות has much in common with מ-גבעות, the headgear (Exodus 28,40) worn by the priests. The welfare of the whole world depends on the priests, and their garments are the זרועות עולם ”the arms of mankind.” Just as warriors wear a medallion on their arms as a charm of good luck, so the priests when the carry out their function suitably adorned, are the medallion of mankind (or at least of the Jewish people). The author quotes more verses showing that the word גבעות is used in that sense and linking the words פתחי עולם and שאו שערים to the same concept.
    
    49,27. בנימין זאב יטרף, “Binyamin is a predatory wolf.” According to the plain meaning, Yaakov compares Binyamin  to a predatory wolf seeing that in the future the surviving young men of Binyamin would kidnap girls and make them their wives. (Judges 21,21)  Rashi there translates the words וחטפתם לכם איש אשתו,  “grab yourselves each one his wife-to-be.”
    A Midrashic approach: Binyamin had ten sons, a number which corresponds to the numerical value of the letters in the word זאב.
   בבוקר יאכל עד , “in the morning he consumes a foe.” This is a reference to King Saul (of the tribe of Binyamin) the first king of Israel  who defeated numerous enemies of Israel   ובערב יחלק שלל, “and by evening he would distribute the spoils.” Even after the sun had set over Israel when Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed the Temple, i.e. Israel’s fortunes were like an “evening,” Mordechai (Saul’s descendant) still triumphed over Haman when Esther made over Haman’s house to him (Esther 8,7).
    A kabbalistic approach:  Binyamin combined within him the two “great” emanations  (attributes)  גדולה וגבורה. This is why the Temple, i.e. the home of the שכינה stood on its territory. The שכינה, of course, is representative of all the emanations (all the ten attributes) Binyamin is compared by Yaakov to the altar which consumes a sheep in the morning and in the evening [the daily communal offerings in the Temple]. It is therefore not difficult to accept the simile of his being like a preying wolf, a predatory animal. Seeing he is so representative of all the ten emanations he was granted ten sons to symbolise this. The words יחלק שלל,  are reminiscent of Psalms 68,13 ונות בית תחלק שלל, “the soul in the house would share out the spoils.” The soul of the house, is, of course, the שכינה. This is also why Onkelos translates our verse asבארעיה תשרי שכינתא  “in his land the Shechinah will dwell.”
    Having explained that the name of Binyamin (or Yaakov’s definition of his name) corresponds to celestial attributes and reflects either one or several emanations, let me just say that the same holds true for the names of each one of Yaakov’s sons. If you examine the Torah with your eyes open, you will discover that the colour of the gemstones which had these names engraved in them and which formed a part of the High Priest’s breastplate, reflects the respective attribute and emanation of that particular tribe. For instance, Reuven, whose name symbolised the attribute of Justice  had his name engraved on a red-coloured gemstone called אודם, whereas the gemstone on which Binyamin’s name was engraved was called ישפה to reflect the fact that it was a multi-coloured stone. I will get back to this subject when we discuss Exodus 28,15.
    
    49,28. כל אלה שבטי ישראל שנים עשר, “all these are the twelve tribes of Israel.” We would have expected the Torah to write אלה שבטי ישראל. Why did the Torah add the word "כל?"  Seeing that Yaakov had severely criticised Reuven, Shimon, and Levi, I might have thought that the fact they were not given a blessing placed them outside the fold. In order to prevent us from making such an assumption the Torah had to add the word כל to show that all of Yaakov’s sons qualified for becoming founders of the twelve tribes of Israel (Rashi).
    Personally, I believe that this verse is an allusion that all of existence is due only to the merit of the twelve tribes of Israel. This is the true meaning of the words כל אלה, “all of these.” The same expression has been used by the prophet Isaiah to describe the entire universe (Isaiah 26,2) “all of these My hand has created.” This is also what the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 1,4 had in mind when they said that prior to creating the universe G’d planned the creation of the Jewish people. This may be why the number 12 is so prominent in all three parts of the universe. In the “highest” part of the universe, the throne of G’d is “surrounded” by 12 angels just as Solomon’s throne which represented G’d’s throne on earth was guarded by 12 lions  which faced each other on the 6 steps leading up to that throne (Kings I 10,20). Jeremiah added that no such throne was ever made for any other Kingdom. The central part of the universe contains 12 horoscopes which symbolise the forces which govern that part of the universe; finally, in our terrestrial part of the universe the twelve tribes of Israel represent the forces without which this part of the universe would cease to exist. This is the deeper meaning of what Solomon meant when he said in Kohelet 7,14 “the one no less than the other was G’d’s doing.” 
     וזאת אשר דבר אליהם אביהם, “and this is what their father spoke to them.” According to the plain meaning these words mean: “this is the blessing Yaakov gave to his sons.” A kabbalistic approach:  the word זאת is a reference to כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of “the people of Israel.” Of that concept it is written in Song of Songs 7,7: זאת קומתך דמתה לתמר, “such is your stature, likened to the  towering palm tree.” the word זאת mening that  Israel is G’d’s heave-offering to the world, so to speak. The words וזאת התרומה in Exodus 25,3 are being understood as the covenant. Both the covenant and the Torah itself have been described with the word זאת in Genesis 9,12 and Numbers 19,14 respectively. The Torah had been given by the  Unique One, as the Torah said (Exodus 20,1) וידבר אלו-הים. (compare author’s commentary on that verse). This (the giving of the Torah) is also what the prophet Chabakuk 3,10 alluded to with the words נתן תהום קולו, “loud roars the deep.” We find this attribute in Leviticus 16,3 בזאת יבא אהרן, “equipped with the attribute זאת Aaron may enter the Holy of Holies.” The reason is that “this is the gate which (only) the righteous may enter” (Psalms 118,20). Yaakov had attained this virtue (attribute) called זאת which he employed to bestow the various blessings on his children.
    Tanchuma Vayechi 16 understands these words as follows: Yaakov told his sons that in the future there would arise a man not unlike him who will give them a blessing commencing with the words with which he had ended his blessing. Tanchuma meant that Yaakov had alluded to זאת as his ultimate achievement. This is why the author of that Midrash emphasises Yaakov speaking of where he “left off,” Moses, however, who had attained a higher level of insight than Yaakov could use the word זאת as a point of departure in his blessings of the Jewish people (Deut. 33,1 וזאת הברכה). Using that word he would ascend and penetrate ever deeper into holy domains. This may also be the reason that Moses alluded to all ten emanations, something which I hope to explain in more detail on Deut. 33,8.
   איש אשר כברכתו ברך אותם, “he blessed each one of them according to the blessing appropriate for him.” This seems peculiar; after all he had already bestowed the blessings on each of his sons! According to the plain meaning the words ויברך אותם apply to the collective blessing. The words איש אשר כברכתו apply to the individualised blessing he gave to each son. Alternatively, the words: “he blessed them,” referred to the blessing for the immediate future. The words: “each according to his appropriate blessing,” referred to individual blessings intended to meet specific requirements of that tribe in the future.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bereshit Rabbah 99,4: seeing that Yaakov had singled out Yehudah by describing him like a lion, and he had singled out Naftali describing him like a hind, etc., I could have thought that these sons were not part of the collective blessing. The Torah therefore said: “he blessed them (all),” to make certain we understand that all the sons were included in the collective blessing. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the words “he blessed each one of them, etc.” mean that the twelve tribes each represent one of the twelve lifelines from the celestial regions from which heavenly blessings are channeled to the creatures in this terrestrial universe. The number 12 in this respect is found in Psalms 122,4 “for there the tribes make pilgrimage, the tribes of the Lord who are testimony of Israel praising the name of the Lord.” David calls the “tribes” of the celestial regions שבטי ה', referring to them by the same appellation as the 12 tribes of Israel on earth. We have pointed out elsewhere that when these tribes are enumerated in the Torah, each name beginning with a prefix ה, and ending with the suffix י such as in הראובני, השמעוני, this is a clear allusion to the fact that parallel “tribes” exist in the celestial regions. When Yaakov said איש אשר כברכתו, he referred to the fact that each tribe received a blessing appropriate to his corresponding counterpart in heaven.
    
    49,33.  ויגוע ויאסף אל עמיו,“He expired and was gathered to his people.” The word מיתה is not mentioned in connection with Yaakov. This prompted our sages in Taanit 5 to say: “our patriarch Yaakov never died.” Seeing that we see from the reports of the Torah here that he was treated as if dead, i.e. embalmed, buried, etc., surely this is evidence that he did die!  We must therefore understand the statement of our sages who said “he did not die,” to mean that Yaakov’s soul remained hovering over his body  due to the degree of holiness he had attained. Whereas other righteous people who did not attain the level of holiness that Yaakov attained are forced to return their souls to celestial regions, and once they have returned there they do not return to earth, Yaakov’s soul was in a constant state of commuting between heaven and earth. Only extremely rarely did great men attain this degree of holiness in their lives, Rabbi Yehudah (the editor of the Mishnah) being one of those select few. it is said of this Rabbi Yehudah in Ketuvot 103 that his soul returned to his former residence on earth every Sabbath eve. It happened on one such Sabbath eve that a neighbour of his widow came to visit her calling to her from the doorway. Her maid said to the neighbour: “be still the Rabbi is sitting here.” As soon as Rabbi Yehudah (his soul) heard this he decided to stop visiting his former home on earth. He did this so that people should not say that previous scholars whose soul had not been observed as returning to earth had been inferior to him in piety. If this was true of Rabbi Yehudah, how much more so must it have been true of Yaakov who had acquired (almost genetically) three levels of holiness. 1) Yaakov had been equipped with the holiness of Avraham, i.e. he was sired by someone whose body had already been circumcised. 2) He had had the residue of the holiness of his father who had submitted his life to G’d at the Akeydah. 3) He had acquired holiness in his own right becoming the third pillar of the מרכבה, the “chariot” supporting G’d’s Presence on earth when G’d had told him that He would even descend to Egypt with him. The practical demonstration of Yaakov’s personal holiness was the fact that all his children followed in his footsteps and embraced his outlook on life. For all these reasons we find that G’d Himself is referred to as קדוש יעקב, (Isaiah 29,23) “the Holy One of Yaakov.”
    A kabbalistic approach to the statement that “Yaakov our patriarch did not die.” Yaakov’s attributes were not of the usual kind, i.e. that every virtue has its negative counterpart  Usually, the more extreme someone is in the practice of a particular virtue the greater the contrast with people practicing the opposite. When we look at scales we find that the more we depress one side, the higher the other side rises. This seems to be a law of nature. In human society there is a similar phenomenon. Extremes of one kind are usually counterbalanced by extremes on the opposite side. In a certain sense life therefore is the opposite of death. Yaakov who pursued the golden mean in his outlook on life and in his conduct, did not need to die as he did not need to “balance the scales.” The same did not apply to Avraham and Yitzchak respectively. The former’s life concentrated almost entirely on involvement on behalf of his peers, whereas the latter’s concentrated almost entirely of perfecting his own personality. As a result of this balance in Yaakov’s life there was no need for him to achieve such a balance of either his body or soul posthumously, as do the souls and bodies of ordinary people.
    This “body” of Yaakov which remained “alive,” was what is called the “second body,” something very diaphanous, not like the “body” that we normally think of. This “second” body serves as clothing for the soul and is therefore not something merely allegorical. According to tradition such a “second” body clothes the soul either once a week on Sabbath eve to the end of the Sabbath, or from the onset of the Day of Atonement until its end. During the rest of the year this “body” floats around in the atmosphere at the direction of G’d. It becomes visible to those whom G’d has taken a liking to. Yaakov’s “first” body, i.e. the kind of body he had in common with everyone else, was embalmed and buried  in normal fashion just as the Torah writes, and as the Rabbi in Sotah called out when he was told of the fact that Yaakov did not die. This Rabbi had referred to the “first” body, whereas his colleague had referred to Yaakov’s “second” body. The first Rabbi then told him that he had not come to his conclusion on his own, but had derived it from the verse (Jeremiah 46,27) “Here I am going to deliver you from far away, your folk from their land of captivity; and Yaakov again shall have calm and quiet, with none to trouble him.” The fact that Jeremiah addresses both Yaakov and his descendants in the same breath indicated to the first Rabbi that Yaakov was still alive. Jeremiah addressed the “second” body of Yaakov which I have mentioned.
    I believe that this is also what is alluded to in the Midrash Eycha Rabbati 2,9 where the verse in Lamentations 2,3: ”He has ravaged Yaakov like flaming fire, consuming on all sides,” is dealt with. The author says that when disaster struck the Jewish people only Yaakov “felt” it. Similarly, when the redemption comes only Yaakov will “feel” it. This is why the psalmist (Psalms 14,7) says: ”Yaakov will exult, Israel will rejoice.” You are aware that he expression מרגיש, “feeling something, experiencing a sensation,” cannot be used in connection with bodies which have been embalmed and buried. This term could only be applied to this diaphanous “second” body of which we spoke earlier. This is also the way we have to understand the passage in Ketuvot dealing with Rabbi Yehudah’s return to earth every Sabbath eve. The same applies to the passage in Shabbat 152 where Rabbi Acha remonstrated with grave diggers who had disturbed his peace  (he had long been dead and buried). If such people’s “second body” survived, how much more so is this plausible in the case of our patriarch Yaakov?
    This may be the mystical dimension of Proverbs 10,2  וצדקה תציל ממות, “that charity saves one from death.” Clearly, the meaning is not that people who give charity will enjoy eternal physical life in the normal sense here on earth. Rather, they may retain this “second” body as did Yaakov and Rabbi Yehudah. This may also be the meaning of what we recite daily in our prayers that G’d זוכר יצורים ברחמים, “remembers the creatures (human beings) in mercy.” Our sages who composed this line meant that an ongoing existence is due to G’d exercising His attribute of Mercy. Our  sages in Bereshit Rabbah 68,12 explain that even at the early stage of Yaakov’s life when he had the dream (vision) of the ladder (Genesis 28,12), the message of the angels “ascending and descending the ladder” is that they wanted to compare Yaakov’s features with the features of the face engraved under the throne of G’d.
    
    50,2. ויחנטו הרופאים, “the physicians embalmed.” The technique of embalming consisted of perfuming the body with a variety of spices, similar to what is written concerning King Assa of Yehudah in  Chronicles II 16,14: “he was laid in a resting place which was filled with spices of all kinds, expertly blended.” This took place after the body had been washed. The wording ויחנטו  which is transitive, indicates that the physicians ordered others  who had expertise in that science to perform this task whereas they themselves did not touch Yaakov’s body.
    
    50,3. שבעים יום, “for seventy days.” Forty days embalming followed by thirty days of mourning.
    
    50,4. ויעברו ימי בכיתו, “when  the days of weeping for him passed.” This verse teaches that one must not spend more than thirty days mourning for the loss of even the greatest leaders of Israel. We certainly did not have a greater leader than Moses and he too was mourned for thirty days, no more (Deut. 34,8). There is a tradition that the sages at the time of the death of Rabbi Yehudah Ha-Nassi first wanted to observe a whole year of mourning until they found these verses and deduced that this would be excessive and disrespectful to both Yaakov and Moses (compare Ketuvot 103).
    
    50,5.  בקברי אשר כריתי לי, “in the grave which I have hewn for myself.”  According to the plain meaning of the text, the word כריתי is the same as in Exodus 21,33  כי יכרה איש בור, “if someone digs a pit.” According to Shemot Rabbah 31,16 the meaning of the word כריתי is related to כרי, “a big heap,” and means that Yaakov  took a great heap of silver and gave it to Esau to ensure that he, as the senior son of Yitzchak, would not demand to be buried in Machpelah. The word then means “I have legally acquired my grave by paying a lot of money for the site.”
    
    50,7. ויעל יוסף לקבור את אביו, “Joseph went up in order to bury his father.” We find that nine groups of people traveled to Canaan to bury Yaakov and to eulogise him. These nine categories of people are hinted at in the text as follows: 1) Joseph went up to bury his father (verse 7). 2) All the servants of Pharaoh went up with him, i.e. the ministers; 3) the elders of Pharaoh’s palace. 4) The elders of the land of Egypt; 5) the whole household of Joseph, (verse 8) his wife and her servant maids and the children. 6) Joseph’s brothers; 7) his father’s household; 9) a military escort (verse 9) traveling in chariots. 9) A cavalry escort.
    
    50,9. ויעל עמו גם רכב גם פרשים, “also chariots and horsemen went up with him (Joseph).” This was a security escort aimed at Esau and his sons. Joseph was well aware of the wickedness of Esau and his family. Already Flavius Josephus recorded in his history of the Jewish people (chapter 2) that Tzefo, (Genesis 36,11) a son of Eliphaz, oldest son of Esau began a quarrel regarding Yaakov’s right to be buried at Machpelah. This quarrel erupted into open warfare with Joseph and his troops emerging victorious. He captured this Tzefo and brought him to Egypt where he and other supporters of his remained incarcerated until Joseph died. When Joseph died, this Tzefo escaped from prison and migrated to Campagne, ruling over certain Roman tribes until eventually he ruled over all of Greece and Italy. He became the first king in Rome and built the first temple there. This is why the Torah reported here that apart from all the entourage who traveled all the way to Canaan to bestow honour on Yaakov there was a also a sizable military contingent whose purpose was defensive.
   ויהי המחנה כבד מאד, “it was a very imposing camp.” Perhaps the Torah also alludes to a parallel camp in the celestial regions, angels that came to guard Yaakov in death just as they had stood watch over him in life. They were the angels previously mentioned in Genesis 32,3 where they had been called “the camp of G’d.” This may be why the Torah described this entourage as כבד מאד, (in two separate words) so that the first letters in the line ויהי המחנה כבד מאד yield both the number 26 (numerical value of י-ה-ו-ה ) using the letter ו from ויהי, and the letter כ  from כבד  as well as the letter ה from המחנה and the letter מ from מאד to allude to the name of G’d amounting to 45 (when you write the letters in the Ineffable Name as words, i.e. יוד-הא-ואו הא.)
    
    50,10. גרן האטד, “Goren ha-Atad.” “The threshing floor of thorns.” This obviously does not make any sense as no one requires a threshing floor for threshing thorns. We must assume that the place was called such, just as we find that  there was a place called גורן כידון, “the threshing ground of a spear” (Chronicles I 13,9). This too does not make sense in terms of the purpose of that threshing floor. Perhaps that threshing floor was surrounded by a large number of spears seeing that David said to Goliath: “you are confronting me with the sword, the spear, and the lance” (Samuel I 17,45). 
   ויספדו שם מספד גדול וכבד מאד, “they held there a very great and solemn eulogy.” There were nine types of eulogies (corresponding to the nine categories of mourners who had come from Egypt). In Hebrew they are known as מספד, נהי, צעקה, הילל, נידה, מרזה, קינים, הגה, והי. [The author proceeds to quote verses from Scripture showing that these various terms for “eulogy” occur scattered throughout the Bible. Ed.] The point made by the author why so many different expressions exist for the word “eulogy” is that eulogies must take into consideration how the one eulogising the dead related to him. 1) He must acknowledge how he benefited from the deceased’s being alive. 2) He must explain what he has lost through the death of the departed, etc. 3) He must list how the deceased enriched other people’s lives while he had been able to-do so. 4) If the deceased was a scholar, the eulogy must mention how his scholarship was unique and how the world has sustained a loss in terms of its absence forthwith. These and (5)  more aspects of Yaakov’s life all formed part of the eulogies delivered on that occasion. [I have abbreviated here somewhat as the reader may surmise. Ed.]
   אבל שבעת ימים, “a mourning period of seven days.”  These seven days of mourning were observed prior to Yaakov’s burial. We know this from verse 13 which follows and tells us: “his sons carried towards the land of Canaan and buried him there in the field of the cave of Machpelah, etc.” The mourning which we observe as a Biblical commandment always takes place after the funeral.
    
    50,12. כאשר צום, “as he had commanded them.” Yaakov had told his sons (compare Tanchuma Bamidbar 12) “be careful with my bier and do not allow any of the Canaanites to touch it. You should carry my bier according to the following procedure: ‘Yehudah, Issachar and Zevulun to the east; Reuven, Shimon and Gad from the south; Ephrayim, Menashe and Binyamin from the west; Dan, Asher and Naftali from the north.” Joseph was not to carry the bier as he was a king. Levi was not to carry the bier as in the future he was slated to carry G’d’s Holy Ark, and it is not fitting that anyone who carries the Ark of G’d should carry the ark of a dead person. Yaakov added that if his sons were to abide by his instructions G’d would reward them with flags in the desert. This is what our sages (Rashi on verse 13) referred to when they said that this is why the Torah reports: “his sons carried him;” his grandsons did not participate in that task.
    
    50,14. וכל העולים אתו, “and all those who had been going up with him.” This verse contains an allusion to the fierce fighting which preceded Yaakov’s burial in the cave of Machpelah. This is why it was necessary for the Torah to report that all of Joseph’s family returned to Egypt in peace. Not a single person who had engaged in honouring Yaakov by traveling to Canaan to bury him came to any harm. When the brothers had fought against Shechem and had subsequently been engaged in a battle with the Emorites they also did not sustain any casualties. To make this point, the Torah had written (Genesis 35,6) “Yaakov came to Luz which is in the land of Canaan,...he and all those with him.”  The addition of these words at the end of the verse were also meant to hint that the family had not sustained any casualties.
   אחרי קברו את אביו, “after they had buried his father.” Why did the Torah suddenly mention Joseph’s part in the burial when the Torah had already stated earlier that Joseph had gone up to bury his father? Moreover, when the Torah reported that “Yaakov’s sons carried his bier,” surely this included Joseph? The reason that the Torah reports Joseph’s return from that journey at this point is so that people should not have any doubts about Joseph discharging his oath to his father. In order to make this point quite clear the Torah here describes the return of Joseph in terms which makes it sound as if the entire procession was Joseph’s doing exclusively. To make this point clear the Torah used the singular when reporting that Joseph קברו את אביו, as if to say: “Joseph personally and single-handedly buried his father.”
    
    50,17. ויבך יוסף בדברם אליו, “Joseph wept when they were speaking to him.”  As soon as the brothers merely mentioned the name of their father Joseph already started weeping. This was due to the great love he had for his now departed father. This stirred his sense of compassion, especially seeing that his brothers asked his forgiveness. The Torah does not spell out that Joseph actually forgave his brothers. Our sages (Baba Kama 92) point out that if a person has wronged his fellow man and regrets this wrong and determines not to act in the manner which had offended his fellow man he is not forgiven by G’d until after he has made an effort to obtain forgiveness by the aggrieved party first. At any rate, the Torah is not on record anywhere that Joseph did forgive his brothers. This was the reason why the sin committed against Joseph resulted in the ten martyrs being executed by torture at the hands of the Romans (see our discussion page 642-3)
    I tend to think that of the word פשע in this verse contains an allusion. This sin could be divided into two parts. 1) the sin of the brothers including the unwitting part of it in their capacity as Joseph’s brothers. 2) The sin in their capacity as servants of the Lord G’d whom their father Yaakov revered. Had the Torah not wanted to hint that part of those sins had not been forgiven it should have written merely ועתה שא נא לפשעם, “and now, please, do forgive their sin (sing.).” The wording before us  appears to make G’d’s forgiveness conditional on Joseph’s forgiveness. In other words: “if you Joseph forgive the sin of the brothers against you, then I G’d, will be able to forgive their sin seeing they are servants of the same G’d as your father Yaakov.” The concise meaning of the verse is: “the sin of the servants of your father’s G’d is the one they committed against their brother.”
    
    50,19. אל תיראו כי התחת אלוקים אני, “do not fear! For am I instead of G’d?” He meant that the reason they did not have to be afraid of him was that he himself was a G’d-fearing man. He implied- as explained by Onkelos-who uses the word חלא, “real fear” that even if he were bent on retaliation this would only backfire as G’d would punish him in turn. The letter ה at the beginning of the word התחת must not be understood as introducing a question but as part of Joseph conception of “fear of the Lord.” If one “fears” the Lord it is because one knows that He returns tit for tat. We have other examples where such letters ה which at first glance appear to introduce a question do not in fact do so. Compare Samuel I 2,27 הנגלה נגליתי אל בית אביך. The translation of these words is clearly not: “did I appear in the house of your father?” Rather these words need to be translated as: “I revealed Myself to your father’s house.” Joseph repeated the words “do not be afraid,” in both verse 19 and 21. The first “fear” he spoke of was the brothers’ fear of him; the second fear he spoke of was the fear of the famine which had started again. This is why he added immediately, (concerning their second fear) “I will provide for you.” (compare my comments on  Genesis 47,14)
    
    50,21. וינחם אותם  וידבר אל לבם, “he comforted them and spoke to their heart.” Rashi has this to say about these words of comfort: Joseph demonstrated to the brothers how his own status had been made more secure by their very existence. As long a they had not come to Egypt he had been suspected of being a slave who by a quirk of fate had risen to power. Ever since the arrival of his brothers such an accusation could not be sustained. If he were to revenge himself on them now these same people would conclude that they had not really been his brothers at all but had been hired by him to play that part in order to legitimise himself as a free man. After all, who would believe that he killed his actual brothers!? Moreover, from a logical point of view, if the ten of them had been unable to extinguish his light, how could he single-handedly hope to extinguish their collective lights? 
    
    50,23. וירא יוסף לאפרים בני שלשים, “Joseph lived long enough to see three generations of his son Ephrayim.” The true meaning is that whereas Joseph saw three generations from his son Menashe, he saw four generations from his son Ephrayim (Ephrayim plus his great grandson). This is based on the word בני being a possessive of the word שלשים. [However, according to the cantillation, the tipcha under the word בני means it belongs to the word אפרים, Ed.] There is some allusion to this fertility of Ephrayim in Yaakov’s blessing who foresaw greater things for Ephrayim than for Menashe. Concerning the latter Yaakov had said that “he too would develop into a nation,” the implication being that it would take him longer, i.e. more years to do so The word גם in the line גם בני מכיר בן מנשה indicate that Menashe also lived in Joseph’s home; however, seeing that Joseph loved Menashe better than Ephrayim, the Torah mentions the fact that Menashe’s grandchildren were born on Joseph’s knees rather than those of Ephrayim..
   יולדו על ברכי יוסף, “were born on Joseph’s knees.” The מכיר named here was actually Gilead, son of Machir, son of Menashe. He was the grandfather of Tzelofchod (Numbers 27,1). The Torah wanted to show that Joseph raised righteous people in his own home, people who in turn produced daughters of outstanding caliber such as  the daughters of Tzelofchod.
    
    50,25. וישבע יוסף את בני ישראל, “Joseph made the children of Israel swear an oath.” Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write: “Joseph adjured his brothers.” However, he made even later generations take this oath as he did not know precisely when the opportunity would come to keep this oath. This is why Moses felt duty-bound to raise Joseph from his grave before the Israelites left the country and to take his bones with them (compare Exodus 13,19). The meaning of the verse there is that Moses felt that unless he located Joseph’s remains and took them with, the entire nation would be guilty of not honouring their oath. Joseph had the extraordinary merit that 600,000 men all functioned as his pall bearers throughout the many years they were in the desert until finally they laid him to rest at Shechem (Joshua 24,32). It is a well known tradition that the righteous are buried when they have been accompanied by a mass funeral cortege. Our sages (Ketuvot 17) elaborated  saying: “as his arrival  so his exit.” [the arrival refers to the Torah being given in the presence of 600,000 people. It is fitting that when someone who personifies the Torah leaves this earth that he should also be accompanied by a similar number of people. Ed.].
   והעליתם את עצמותי מזה, “you will bring my bones up from this. ” He meant “from this place.” Some commentators claim that each tribe took with them the remains of their respective founders, i.e. that the remains of all of Yaakov’s sons were eventually buried in ארץ ישראל. (compare Pessikta de Rav Kahane in Beshalach)
    
    50,26. וימת יוסף בן מאה ועשר שנים. “Joseph died at the age of one hundred and ten.” According to Sotah 9 Joseph, who had buried his father, received his reward in that someone greater than either he or his father, namely Moses, took care of his earthly remains. Exodus. 13,19 relates that Moses took the remains of Joseph. This was not as simple as it seems and our sages (Tanchuma Beshalach 2) describe how Moses lowered a plate or piece of parchment on which he had written “arise ox” into the river Nile. He called out: “Joseph, Joseph, your brethren are about to be redeemed and your absence is delaying the Presence of G’d from moving with us. If you want to be redeemed and to join our journey, arise! If you fail to arise now, we will be free from the oath you have made us swear to take you along.” All of this had become necessary because the Egyptians had placed Joseph’s body in a metal coffin and had hidden it by lowering it into the river Nile to prevent the Israelites from having access to it. This is the deeper meaning of the final words of the Book of Genesis ויישם בארון במצרים, “he was placed in a coffin in Egypt.” 
    Moses also received a reward for having performed these rites on Joseph by Someone greater than he when G’d Himself buried him (Deut. 34,6). This teaches us that anyone who engages in the performance of מצות can look forward to great reward. Such a reward may accrue to him many years after he performed the good deed in question. If he did not receive his reward for the מצוה while alive on earth, he may be sure that his deed has been recorded by G’d and he will receive the appropriate reward in the hereafter. These considerations are another reason for encouraging people to perform מצות with eagerness instead of dragging their feet while doing so. However, one must be careful not to perform these מצות in order to become known as a pious individual or in order to reap the benefit in terms of honour received by one’s peers. The performance of מצות should only be designed to confer honour on G’d and His Holy Name. The psalmist (Psalms 131,3) expressed it best when he said: ”O Israel wait for the Lord now and forever.” We also have a verse in Psalms 31,25: “be strong and of good courage, all you who wait for the Lord.” A third verse conveying a similar message is found in Jeremiah 17,7: “Blessed is he who trusts in the Lord, whose trust is in the Lord alone.” Finally, Isaiah 26,4 conveys the same message when he wrote: “Trust in the Lord forever and ever, for in The Lord G’d you have an everlasting Rock.”


