    
    
    
    
    
    
   אלה  הדברים
    
    
   מוכיח אדם אחרי חן ימצא ממחליק לשון, “He who rebukes a man (after me) will find favour eventually; [more so] than he one who flatters with his tongue.” (Proverbs 28,23) Solomon was in the habit of rebuking everybody (through his writings) and he warned everybody who was fit to rebuke others to follow in his footsteps and to take his place. Seeing that the person who has been so rebuked had tended to relate to earth (rather than heaven) when he committed deeds which provoked the rebuke, Solomon uses the expression מוכיח אדם instead of מוכיח איש, i.e. that the rebuke was provoked through the rebuked person having identified too closely with אדמה. 
    It is well known that most rebukes are directed at the average person, the masses; the masses have different views, are not homogeneous. If they would all be of one mind and had similar outlooks they would be known as יחידים and not masses (common people). [I believe that our author distinguished between people who have a mind of their own whom he calls יחידים, individuals, i.e. people with a mind of their own, whereas he calls the people to whom we attribute a herd instinct המון עם, masses. Ed.] Seeing that all these people do have minds of their own they do not easily accept rebukes seeing that what one person likes another dislikes. What is pleasing to one person is unacceptable to others. This is what prompted Rabbi Tarfon to say (in Erchin 16) “I am convinced that there is hardly a person nowadays willing to respond positively to rebukes. If one tells one person to remove the splinter in his own teeth the person told this would retort that the rebuker should first remove the wooden beams  which blocked his own vision.” It was typical of the people of his time that if one pointed out that someone wore a soiled garment, he would respond that the rebuker’s garment was even dirtier. People like to be flattered and not to be criticised. This recalls a statement in Ketuvot 105 according to which the reason that young scholars enjoy more popularity than their senior colleagues is the fact that the former refrain from rebuking people’s  religious misconduct.
    Keeping all this in mind, Solomon said that, eventually, he who rebukes a man will find favour more so than the flatterer. Solomon was not unaware of the psychology of the people enduring rebukes; rather he spoke in terms of what is favoured by G’d. He meant that the fact that people do not like to be rebuked is not decisive in the eyes of the Lord. He wanted to encourage people, especially leaders, who would live after him not to commit the error attributed to the young scholars in Ketuvot 105 by complimenting their parishioners rather than pointing out areas in which they should improve. Ultimately, only severe rebukes will have an effect on habitual sinners and save them from the results of their errors. G’d appreciates people who respond positively to rebukes; He accepts repentant sinners seeing that these people responded to rebukes and changed their ways. Ultimately, even the person who has been rebuked realises that this is preferable to losing his life or even his soul by not being called to order and continuing in his wicked ways.
    When Moses rebuked the Jewish people with harsh words, he found a favourable echo in the eyes of G’d. Moses invariably used tough language when rebuking the people as we know already from Kadesh (Numbers 20,10) when he called the people “rebellious.” Even as early as Exodus 16,7 Moses criticised the people for accusing Aaron and himself for leading them into the desert as if it had been Moses’ idea to do so.
    We are told in Devarim Rabbah 2 that when Solomon above spoke of the flatterers he referred especially to Bileam  (who had flattered the Jewish people as opposed to himself) and pointing out that as a direct consequence of Bileam’s flattery the Israelites suffered 24,000 dead at Shittim. Solomon portrayed Moses as the opposite of Bileam when he encouraged leaders to rebuke people for their shortcomings. This is what prompted him to say in Proverbs 27,6: “wounds inflicted by a loved one are long lasting; the kisses of an enemy are profuse.” He meant that discipline administered by a well-meaning father is effective, whereas the compliments of someone who hates you evaporate into thin air. Moses would rebuke the people every time they sinned and would pray for them thus endearing them to their father in heaven for tolerating the rebukes. This is why now, a few weeks before leaving the people permanently, he recalls to them all the sins they had committed while under his care. Moses listed some of the names where the more fateful sins had been committed.
    
    1,1. אלה הדברים אשר דבר משה אל כל ישראל בעבר הירדן במדבר  בערבה מול סוף בין פארן ובין תפל ולבן וחצרות ודי זהב, “These are the words which Moses addressed to the whole of the people of Israel, on the east bank of the Jordan, in the desert, in the wilderness of Moav, opposite Suf, between Paran and Tafel; at Lavan, Chatzerot, and Dee Zahav.” The reason the Torah writes the word במדבר, is not to repeat that the people were in the desert, but to tell us that Moses rebuked the people for sins committed in the desert. Compare Psalms 78,40: “How often did they defy Him in the wilderness, did they grieve Him in the wasteland!” Concerning the expression בערבה, Rashi comments that the word is to be understood as בשביל הערבה, that on account of being in the wilderness they sinned at Baal Peor, Shittim, sins which occurred in the area described as ערבות מואב. The word מול סוף was meant as a reminder of the Israelites having said sarcastically at the ים סוף, the Sea of Reeds: “did you take us here to die because there was a shortage of burial places in Egypt?” The people again complained when moving away from the Sea of Reeds as we know from Psalms 106,7: “they rebelled at the sea, at the Sea of Reeds.” The words בין פארן is an oblique reference to the episode of the spies; the words ובין תפל ולבן are references to the complaints uttered against the manna (Numbers 21,5) and the word חצרות is a reference to what occurred when Korach and his supporters rebelled, as well as to the inappropriate comments made by Miriam against her brother Moses. The words די זהב are a reference to the sin of the golden calf, a sin which was possible because they had a surfeit of gold. Compare Hoseah 2,10 who attributes sin to excess material wealth, “I who lavished silver on her and gold, which they used for the Baal.”
    Midrash Devarim Rabbah [not found in regular editions of Midrash Rabbah, Ed.] concerning the meaning of the words ודי זהב, says that the word ודי is an acrostic of the 6 days in which G’d created the world, the four directions of the globe, and the Ten Commandments. Moses meant that if the comments of the Israelites had been restricted to these three subjects they would not have been guilty of any misdemeanour, they would have been as pure as gold.
    All the words mentioned in this verse, which appear as if relating to locations, are only allusions to occurrences as these places do not exist (are never mentioned by these names). At the time when Moses made the speeches which form a large part of the Book of Deuteronomy, the people had already left the desert and were encamped on the fringe of civilisation near the banks of the Jordan. It follows that these descriptions must refer to sins committed in the desert. This is the opinion of Onkelos who explains these names as being oblique references to where the Israelites sinned, i.e. Moses was concerned with the image of the people and did not want to sound too harsh.
    Seeing that this Book is the fifth and last of the five Books of the Torah I want to explain to you the reason why the Torah has been divided into 5 separate Books and why the sequence is that which we find in front of us. You are aware already that although this fact has already been alluded to (Midrash on Genesis 1,3 on the words “let there be light”) these “Books” are essentially all closely tied to one another. The reason that the Torah commenced with the Book of Bereshit is that the record of the world coming into existence is a basic foundation of our faith. Without this knowledge the concept of G’d supervising and taking an interest in all life on earth would not exist and all of us would consider ourselves as being no more than “accidents” on earth. Once we have established that G’d the Creator takes an interest in what He has created, and especially in the human beings, it follows that there is such a thing as “reward and punishment.” Seeing that these concepts are critical to the Torah they have all become part of the Book of Genesis. The Book of Bereshit therefore had to include some basic commandments, else, the fact that a system of reward and punishment for obedience to the Creator exists could not be demonstrated. These command-ments must include positive as well as negative commandments.
    As far as the reward for observing the commandments is concerned, the expulsion of Adam from Gan Eden illustrates punishment on a personal level, whereas the deluge demonstrates punishment on a collective level. Noach’s being saved demonstrates reward on a personal level. The prediction of both this reward and punishment demonstrated to both the victims and the survivors that G’d must be Master of the universe, i.e. of nature, ergo its Creator. What befell the people concerned proved that He (unlike a painter who completes a painting) did not sit back and leave His universe to self-destruct but made sure that it would endure (even while allowing man free will). After conclusion of the Book of Bereshit, the second Book of the Torah commencing with the names of the sons of Yaakov is the corollary of the story of the patriarchs who imbued their descendants with this faith in G’d and His Justice. 
    Once a person possesses faith in the fact that G’d was the Creator, it is only a small step to believe that He is Unique, and the Only G’d. The second Book of the Torah which contains so many examples of the Uniqueness of the Creator, and His revealing Himself to the people of Israel is a natural sequence to the Book of Bereshit.
    The Book Vayikra, the Book dealing with the sacrificial service, follows next seeing that the sacrifices represent the bringing closer together and unifying the various forces in this universe until they ultimately reach the Original Cause. The righteous person succeeds in unifying these apparently different and heterogeneous forces through his devotions. Once the unifying force of these sacrifices has been demonstrated the next Book is that of Bamidbar Sinai which contains the story of Eretz Yisrael. It is the logical corollary of the Book of Vayikra, to point out that the sacrificial legislation applies only to the land of Israel. As soon  as the Israelites had received the Torah, and the legislation concerning the sacrifices, they were meant to proceed directly to the land of Israel. Had it not been for the sin committed by the spies (and the people who accepted their estimate of their situation), the people’s progress would not have been delayed for 40 years by their wandering in the desert. After the Book of Bamidbar has been concluded and the people’s unity with G’d had been restored we come to the fifth Book, אלה הדברים. Seeing that the principal residence of the Jewish people in Eretz Yisrael was not the period during which the two Temples stood, but commences only with the final redemption which is not followed by another period of exile, the Torah wanted to conclude with a Book in which the ultimate redemption is discussed or alluded to. This will be an event comparable to a renewal of the universe itself (compare author’s comments on Deut. 30,3). This event will represent the true purpose and culmination of the creation of the universe, i.e. essentially another Book of Bereshit.
    We need to understand still why this Book opens with the words אלה הדברים, [traditionally a term which separates from the foregoing. Ed.] instead of ואלה הדברים, just as the Book of Shemot had commenced with the words ואלה שמות in order to demonstrate that it was the logical continuation of the Book of Bereshit. The reason is that although the fifth Book is a continuation in the sequence of the five Books, it is at the same time something unique, just as the etrog, although part of the four species over which we recite benedictions on the festival of Tabernacles is in a class by itself and therefore not bound together with the other three plants, the lulav, the hadass and the aravah.
    The second letter ה in the tetragram, i.e. the name י-ה-ו-ה, although part of that name, is nonetheless not quite an integral part of the name which basically represents the attribute of Mercy, as this very letter ה at that point represents the element of Justice. We have explained many times that neither attribute ever appears in a pure form, i.e. the attribute of Justice is always accompanied by at least a small proportion of the attribute of Mercy, and vice versa, the attribute of Mercy is always accompanied by a small proportion of the attribute of Justice. The letter ה at the end of the tetragram represents that portion of the attribute of Justice. It is described by Kabbalists as the “weak,” i.e. diluted form of the attribute of Justice. It is perceived as disciplining Israel for seven specific sins. In our case, the Book of Devarim, the fifth Book of the Torah, is better known as משנה תורה, “a second” version, repetition, of the Torah. This is why Moses commences with severe words of rebuke, recalling seven sins committed by the people under his stewardship of them. The seven sins are: the complaints in the desert, the sin of Baal Peor, the rebellion at the Sea of Reeds, the sin of the spies, the belittling of the heavenly food, the manna; the revolt of Korach, and the sin of the golden calf. “Tofel and Lavan,” are two references to the same sin. The seven sins are also alluded to in the Tochachah Leviticus 26,18: “therefore I will punish you further seven ways for your sins.” Keeping this in mind, you will find that Moses, instead of speaking in the name of Hashem, as he did generally in the other Books, uses the attribute ה' אלו-הינו, i.e. a deliberate combination of the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice when he refers to what G’d has commanded in this Book. The most pronounced example of this is Devarim 4,24: כי ה' אלו-היך אש אכלה הוא א-ל קנא, “for the Lord your G’d, He is a consuming fire, a jealous G’d.” This is a reminder of the manifestation of G’d’s Presence the people had experienced at Mount Sinai.
    
    1,2. אחד עשר יום מחורב, “eleven days’ journey (distance) from Mount Chorev.” These words are also part of the rebukes. Moses reminded the people that the traveling time from Mount Chorev to Kadesh Barnea is normally eleven days. The people had traversed this distance in only three days. This very fact should make them understand that the reason they had remained in the desert for so many years was only due to their sins. Had they not sinned G’d would have shortened their travel time instead of lengthening it.
    How did the people travel during the three days we just mentioned? The Torah tells us that the people broke camp after having remained around Mount Sinai since the 1st of Sivan in the first year of the Exodus (10 days short of a full lunar year). The cloud lifted on that day as we know from Numbers 10,11. One month and nine days later, i.e. on the 29th of Sivan, Moses sent the spies on their mission from Kadesh Barnea. If we count backwards to the 20th of Iyar, we have to consider that during these 39 days at least 30 days were spent at a place named  Kivrot Hataavah, where the people gorged themselves on meat  (Numbers 11,21). In addition, they were stuck at Chatzerot, waiting for Miriam to be cured from her tzoraat (Numbers 12,14-16). You will note that there were only a total of three days left during which the people could have traveled between the 20th of Iyar and the 29th of Sivan. It follows that they must have covered the entire distance from Sinai to Kadesh Barnea in three days.
    According to Devarim Rabbah (an edition by Lieberman, according to Rabbi Chavell), the words אחד עשר יום מחורב, “eleven days from Chorev,” must be understood to mean that for only eleven days after leaving Mount Chorev could the people of Israel be described as perfect vis-a-vis G’d. The Midrash speaks of the 40 days that Moses was on the Mountain. During the last 29 days they were already contemplating making the golden calf. Another opinion quoted in that Midrash claims that the people remained completely loyal to G’d for only two days out of the 40 days that Moses had absented himself. The author of that view bases himself on Isaiah 58,2: ואותי יום יום ידרשון “As to Me, they seek Me out one day, one day.” A third opinion quoted in that same Midrash claims that the people remained completely loyal only for a single day basing itself on Deut. 4,10: “the day you stood before the Lord your G’d at Mount Chorev.” Yet another opinion expressed in that Midrash claims that the people were not even totally loyal for an entire day, but committed idolatrous acts even on that very day. The source quoted for such an extreme view is Isaiah 17,11: “on the morning you sow, you see it bud but the branches wither away on a day of sickness and mortal agony.” [the author of the Midrash presumably searched for the source of the corruption as the thought that a people perfectly loyal to G’d could not have committed the sin they did just because they saw that Moses was six hours late returning from the Mountain. Ed.]
    Another approach to these words: the word אחד and עשר are not to be understood as “eleven,” but have to be read separately, i.e. “one,” “ten.” The first of the Ten Commandments, the אנכי ה' אלו-היך was the theological problem the people could not deal with satisfactorily. Moses reminds the people that the anger they caused G’d stems from their not accepting that commandment properly.
    
    1,3. ויהי בארבעים שנה בעשתי עשר חודש, “It was in the fortieth year, during the eleventh month, etc.” Moses rebuked the people when he was already close to death; you find that our patriarch Yaakov also waited until he was close to death before rebuking those of his children whom he wanted to rebuke (Genesis chapter 49). Joshua also waited until he was close to death before he rebuked the people (Joshua chapter 24). The prophet Samuel was also close to death when he challenged the people to tell him if they had any complaints against him (Samuel I 12,2-3). King David also waited with telling his son Solomon who needed to be rebuked (Kings I 2,1).
    
    1,4. אחרי הכותו, “after he had defeated, etc.” a reminder of how G’d had been on the side of the Israelites and had defeated the mighty kings Sichon and Og using Moses as His agent. Moses now decided the time had come to rebuke the people for past errors. [Moses reminded them that if anyone had the right to do so he possessed those credentials. Ed.]
   אשר יושב בעשתרות באדרעי, “who was dwelling in Ashtarot at Edre-i.” We find that the Bible uses the term Ashtarot to describe three totally different phenomena. The term is used to describe 1) mountains, 2) flocks of sheep; 3) a form of idolatry. In this instance the Torah tells us that Og lived in mountainous country. The reason the Torah tells us this is that not only was Og, the giant, personally powerful and awe-inspiring, but the terrain in which he had his capital was easy to defend and most difficult to conquer. The same applied to a place called עשתרות קרנים which the Torah mentioned in Genesis 14,5 when it described Kedorlaomer defeating the giants residing there. The reason that place was called not just עשתרות, but עשתרות קרנים, is that the sheep which have horns קרנים, used to graze in those mountains just as did the mountain goats and gazelles.
    The flocks, sheep, are referred to as Ashtarot in Deut. 7,13 where the Torah writes עשתרות צאנך, when referring to flocks of sheep and goats. The word’s root is עשר, “wealth,” i.e. these flocks provide wealth for their owners through their milk, their wool and their young. We have been told in Chulin 84 that one should make a practice of selling land (a field, but not ancestral land in the land of Israel) and buy עתודים, he-goats with the proceeds, based on Proverbs 27,26: ”the he-goats, the price of a field.” We also have a verse making a similar point in verse 27 of the same chapter, i.e. “the goat’s milk will be sufficient for the food of your house, and for the vital needs of your maids.”
    The term Ashtarot is used to describe idolatry in Judges 12,6 ויעבדו את הבעלים ואת העשתרות, “they served the Baalim and the Ashtarot.” The reason this term is used is that the image representing the deity was a sheep (and the fertility it represents).
   באדרעי, “in Edre-i.” This is the name of a province in which the king’s capital was located. They used to build it at the edge of a mountain in the flat land, and there would be assembled his entire army. This is the meaning of that word in Numbers 21,33, where the Torah describes where the battle took place.
    
    1,5. הואיל משה באר את התורה הזאת, “Moses began explaining this Torah.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses wanted to explain to the people at this time all the commandments and the fact that the essence of the Torah is contained in the Ten Commandments. Seeing that the parent generation of the people assembled had heard the Ten Commandments ,directly from from G’d, Moses repeated the text so that at least they would hear it from his mouth. Even though the people were already familiar with the Ten Commandments, having heard them from their fathers, and they believed in the divine origin of these commandments, the fact that Moses was an accredited prophet in their eyes made hearing them from him equivalent to hearing them from G’d Himself.
    A Midrashic approach: Moses commenced explaining the Torah in the land of Moav explaining 49 facets of the Torah in a way that would yield authentic exegesis, [our sages call it טהור, ritually pure] and also demonstrating that one can pervert Torah exegesis by 49 ways and obtain 49 inadmissible, “ritually unclean” ways of exegesis. The number 49 corresponds to the numerical value of the word מואב. [This explains that the words בארץ מואב are not to be translated as “in the land of Moav,” seeing the people of Israel had been forbidden to violate the borders of Moav. Ed.] We have a similar explanation on Song of Songs 5,10: דודי צח ואדום, where these words do not mean “my beloved (simile for Hashem) is clear-skinned and ruddy,” certainly not an appropriate description for G’d. The word דודי is a simile for the 24 Books of the Bible, seeing that its numerical value is 24. We have an allusion to this kind of exegesis in Proverbs 2,4 כמטמונים תחפשנה, “search for it as you would for treasures.” The word מטמונים is understood as מ'ט טמונים, that the Bible or Torah contains 49  (מ'ט) “hidden meanings.” The word מונים as “times” appears already in Genesis 31,7 when Lavan changed Yaakov’s wages עשרת מונים, “ten times.”
    
    1,6. ה' אלו-הינו דבר אלינו, “the Lord our G’d spoke to us, etc.” You have to remember that throughout this Book Moses always refers to G’d with both attributes, i.e. Hashem and Elokim. I have already mentioned this at the end of verse 1.
   בחורב, at Mount Chorev. This is the same as Mount Sinai.
    
    1,7. ואל כל שכיניו, “and to all its neighbours,” i.e. Ammon, Moav, and the Mountain of Se-ir.
   והחוף הים, “and at the beaches of the Sea.” This refers to the coast of Ashkelon, Azzah, and Caesaria and other coastal towns along the Mediterranean.
    
    1,8. לתת להם ולזרעם אחריהם, “to give to them and to their descendants after them.” Our sages in Yalkut Shimoni 801 understand these words to mean: “to the people who took part in the Exodus and to their descendants,” i.e. the ones who took part in the Exodus from Babylonia. The additional word אחריהם, “after them,” refers to the people alive at the time of the final redemption, the ingathering of the exiles from the present Diaspora. It appears that the reason the Midrash had to interpret the text in this way is the fact that the Torah spent 3 verses on the subject. Each verse adds a new dimension not stated previously. The next verse on the subject is Deut. 11,21; in verse 9 of the same chapter the Torah repeats this message but without the words: “as long as there is a heaven over earth.” This prompted our sages to understand Moses as referring to three separate inheritances.
    
    1,9. ואומר אליכם בעת ההיא לאמור, “I spoke to you at that time, saying:” the word לאמור here refers to Yitro, Moses’ father-in-law who had given this advice. When G’d indicated His approval, Moses accepted this advice in practice (Exodus 18,23).
    
    1,10. ה' אלו-היכם הרבה אתכם, “the Lord your G’d has multiplied you, etc.” Moses referred to the increase of the Jewish people during their sojourn in Egypt. They had arrived there comprising only 70 persons, whereas by the time they left Egypt they numbered over 600,000 fighting men. As of the time when Moses was addressing them they were so numerous they could not be counted. It is also possible to understand the words הרבה אתכם as not referring to quantitative increase in the people of Israel but to the qualitative increase; they had developed into a powerful nation. The word רבי המלך in Jeremiah 39,13 means the distinguished people of the King, גדולי המלך.
   והנכם היום ככוכבי השמים, “and here you are to-day as the stars in heaven.” Moses compared the people to the stars from a quantitative perspective; this is why he added the word לרוב, “in quantity.”
    A Midrashic approach, found in Devarim Rabbah (Lieberman edition 16 only)  the words “and you are as the stars in heaven” are a reference to the encampment of the Jewish people, and are similar to when G’d showed Avraham that all the zodiac signs in heaven surrounded the Shechinah. Similarly, the flag of the Jewish people, three tribes and their flag in each direction is perceived with the Shechinah in the centre of the camp (the Tabernacle). G’d had told Moses: “just as the zodiac signs surround Me and I am in the centre, so your children will multiply and encamp according to their respective flags while My Presence will dwell in their midst. In other words: “your encampment as of this day (on earth) is similar to My camp in heaven.”
    
    1,11. ככם אלף פעמים, “like you, one thousand times.” According to Devarim Rabbah, 13, quoted by Rashi, Moses explained that this blessing was his personal one, and therefore limited. G’d, however, would bless the people without placing a limit on His blessing. This is the meaning of Moses’ rider “as He has said to you,” i.e. “you will be like the dust of the earth (Genesis 28,14).
    
    1,12. איכה אשא לבדי טרחכם, “How am I able to carry alone the trouble of you, and the burdens, etc.”  The “trouble” Moses was referring to was that he had to explain the meaning of the commandments to foolish people. Our sages in Sifri Devarim 12 explain that the Israelites were bothering Moses with a great deal of litigation and the loser in litigation would never be content with the judgment but would claim that he had witnesses whom he had not presented, arguments which he had not used, etc., all in order to reopen the matter. Moses would have to add more judges to  review the case.
   משאכם, “your burden.” A reference to the demands for meat and water. We know that in Numbers 11,11 Moses had asked G’d to relieve him of משא כל העם הזה עלי, “the burden of this whole people.” וריבכם, “and your bickering.” This teaches that the people had a habit of quarreling with one another. 
    
    1,13. ואשימם בראשיכם, “I shall place them as heads over you.” Moses gave these people positions of honour so that the people would respect them. Our sages (Rashi) point out that the word ואשמם is written defectively, the letter י being missing after the letter ש. This converts the word into אשם, “guilt.” The spelling teaches that the sins of the people of Israel are largely blamed on their leaders if these had been in a position to stop the people from committing these sins and they had failed to exert their authority. (In our version of the written Torah the letter י described by the author as missing is part of the text.)
    
    1,15. אנשים חכמים וידועים, “wise men, knowledgeable ones.” Moses does not mention נבונים, “men of insight,” one of the criteria suggested by Yitro that he look for. He had not found people who possessed this quality (Sifri Devarim 15).
   שרי אלפים, “chiefs of thousands.” This means that one such “chief” would be in charge of 1,000 Israelites. Similarly, there would be judges in charge of 100 Israelites, judges in charge of 50 and judges in charge of 10 men.
   ושוטרים, “and law enforcers.” Men who would enforce the judges’ decisions by physical force.
    
    1,16. ואצוה את שפטיכם, “I commanded your judges.” This refers to the judges being cautioned that although they might feel that similar cases had been judged by them many times, each case has to be addressed as if it were the first of its kind.
   שמוע בין אחיכם ושפטתם צדק, “listen among your brethren and judge righteously.” This means that the judges should attempt to settle conflicting claims by getting the litigants to agree to arbitration. Technically, the wording suggests: משפט, “judgment,” which is the result of צדק, “charitable attitudes” by both litigants.
   ובין גרו, “and his litigant.” Our sages (Sanhedrin 7) derive the word from לגור, to sojourn; they mean that even if the dispute concerns minor matters such as arguments about use of a dwelling, a stove, between people who live in the same house.
    
    1,17. לא תכירו פנים במשפט, “Do not show favouritism in judgment.” This is a warning to a judge not to display a stern attitude versus one of the litigants and a mild attitude versus the other party.
   כקטון כגדול תשמעון, “listen to claims involving minor sums of money as if it concerned major sums.” Do not relate to disputes involving pennies as a waste of the court’s time.
   לא תגורו מפני איש, “do not display fear before any man.” The warning is addressed particularly concerning litigants who enjoy a reputation of being violent.
   כי המשפט לאלו-הים הוא, “for the judgment is G’d’s.”  This is a reminder to the judges that they are not representatives of man but of G’d. If they base their decisions on what pleases man instead of on what pleases the Lord, G’d will find other ways to repay them for their sin. If they convict an innocent party, thus enriching the guilty, G’d will redress the imbalance in His own way. We find this sentiment expressed by King Yehoshaphat in Chronicles II 19,6: “Consider what you are doing, for you judge not on behalf of man, but on behalf of the Lord, and He is with you when you pass judgment.”
    A kabbalistic approach: the words כי המשפט לאלו-הים הוא,“for judgment is G’d’s,” emphasise the connection between שופט  and דין, “judge” and “justice.” The judge receives his input, inspiration from the attribute of גבורה, also known as the attribute of Justice,  מדת הדין. This is the reason why the judge of the universe is known as אלו-הים, seeing He draws on that emanation גבורה situated on the left side of the diagram of the emanations. Seeing that G’d, i.e. the attribute אלו-הים is described by Assaph (Psalms 82,1) as both G’d and judge, it is not surprising that the attribute אלו-הים is applied by the Torah to judges who perform G’d’s work. משפט=דין הנחתך, “Justice= the result after the “discussion of the legal points, לדון, have been concluded.” It is the finished product, “cut and dried,” i.e. separated from the theoretical discussion. When the Torah (Exodus 22,8) speaks of עד האלו-הים יבא דבר שניהם, the meaning is not that the dispute has to be submitted to G’d, but that it be submitted to mortal judges. Seeing the judge performs G’d’s function, he is accorded this title. If such title is accorded to man, on occasion, it is most certainly also accorded to angels who, by definition, always perform G’d’s work as His agents. Both the angels and the mortal judges receive their input from the attribute of Justice, the emanation גבורה. 
    You should appreciate that seeing the emanation is situated on the left side of the diagram of the emanations, as we know from Ezekiel 1,10 “and the face of the ox was on the left” (of the chayot), the Great Sanhedrin was also known as שררך (Song of Songs 7,3). Rashi explains that its seat was at the navel of the earth, in the centre, at the Temple. The office where the deliberations were held was known as לשכת הגזיז, the office of “cutting,” i.e. where definitive judgments were made, where after deliberations the judgment became (in colloquial terms) “cut and dried” (compare Midot 5,4).
   תקריבון אלי ושמעתיות , “submit (bring close) to me so that I can hear it.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 8 considered that these words of Moses were words for which he was punished. The reason the law of inheritance which the daughters of Tzelofchod submitted to him was concealed from him was because he had given the impression that he could deal with the most difficult cases unassisted. I commented on this in connection with Numbers 27,4.
    We must nevertheless wonder what sin did Moses commit here against Hashem, and why he should be punished for it? How do the words תקריבון אלי, express arrogance on Moses’ part? How else was he to have phrased the message that matters which the chiefs of thousands had been unable to resolve should be brought to him as the Chief Judge so that he could attempt to resolve them? Perhaps the fact that Moses, who had already said in the first half of this verse that “judgment belongs to G’d,” now made it seem as if he equated his own knowledge with that of G’d  is the reason why our sages felt that Moses was punished for this. 
    
    1,19. ונלך את כל המדבר הגדול, “we went through this great desert.” This refers to the wanderings after the eleven days of which Moses spoke earlier. והנורא ההוא, “and that awesome one.” This is a reference to the dangerous reptiles inhabited by this desert.
    
    1,21. ראה, נתן ה' אלו-היך לפניך את הארץ. עלה רש, “See, the Lord your G’d has given the land before you. Ascend and take possession!”  Instead of the word ראה at the beginning of this verse we would have expected the words הנה נתן ה' אלו-היך לך את הארץ, “Here the Lord your G’d has given you the land.” Why did Moses change the usual syntax? He wanted to indicate to the people that seeing the protective angel of these people had already been dealt with by G’d, the people themselves should certainly not present any obstacle. All the Israelites had to do was ascend and take possession. The word עלה is to be understood as “climb on to, or over the protective angel of these people who had already been brought low.” The word ראה here refers to the mental eye of the people, their ability to understand the situation of the Canaanites after  the Lord your G’d has already given the land “before you,”
     
    This is also what prompted the sages of the Midrash (Tanchuma Massey 4) to write concerning the above words: “did then G’d literally place the land of Canaan at the feet of the Jewish people?” They answer that the meaning is that G’d made their protective angel fall to earth in front of the Jewish people. This is why we find similarly worded verses in verse 8 of our chapter, and a similarly worded report in 2,33: “go and take possession of the land” had been used in verse 8; the Torah, at this point should have written only: “take possession of it,” instead of  repeating the words את הארץ. The apparent repetition means that an obstacle which had existed in verse 8 had meanwhile been removed; the obstacle was the protective angel of the Canaanites. Rashi makes a similar point in explaining the wording of Deut. 2,31.
    As to the word החל רש used by G’d in 2,31 as compared to the word רש without the preamble החל in our verse here, G’d meant that seeing He had commenced giving possession of the lands of Sichon to the Jewish people (at the time), it was now time to complete the work of taking possession of all the lands of the Canaanites and to complete the process. This is why in our verse the word החל, “begin!” would have been out of place. There was  no reason to add the word גמור, “finish, complete,” in our verse because as soon as the Israelites would have commenced to do their part (if the report of the spies had been uniformly favourable) the whole campaign would have ended almost as soon as it started. When G’d commences a war, it does not last long.
    We have a Midrash Rabbah in Exodus 21,5 in which the same point is made concerning the demotion of Nevuchadnezzar of which Daniel speaks in Daniel 4,28 when a heavenly voice announced that the king had already lost his kingdom (although he still occupied the throne and bragged about his accomplish-ments). Rabbi Joshua ben Avin interprets the words  קל מן שמיא נפל in that verse as “an angel named קל, i.e. Nevuchadnezzar’s celestial counterpart, had fallen from heaven.” This is why the verse in Daniel did not speak about a voice from heaven being heard, or calling, but “falling.” It was not “a voice” but that angel. Immediately after that, heavenly voices saying: “your kingdom Nevuchadnezzar has departed from you, (and much worse)” were heard.
    
    1,22. ותקרבון אלי כלכם, “and all of you approached me;” the people did not come to Moses as a delegation in an orderly fashion but they mobbed him. (Sifri Devarim 20).
   ויחפרו לנו את הארץ, “so that they will spy out the land on our behalf.” The reason that the Torah uses the term חפר for what was really רגול, spying, is that digging is designed to uncover hidden objects; spying is also designed to reveal hidden things.
    
    1,23. וייטב בעיני הדבר, “the matter appeared good (worthwhile) in my eyes.” Moses felt that seeing the entire people were in agreement it was probably all right. The word בעיני, “in my eyes,” makes it clear that the suggestion did not find favour in G’d’s eyes. This is why, when G’d related to the project He told Moses: שלח לך, “send for yourself,” i.e. “not on My behalf. I am not ordering you to do this.”
    
    1,36. הארץ אשר דרך בה, “the land on which he walked.” A reference to the city of Chevron, seeing the Torah had specifically mentioned that Calev came to Chevron (Numbers 13,22). Calev is mentioned first before Joshua, here and everywhere when G’d speaks of him.
    
    1,40. ואתם פנו לכם, “and you, -turn yourselves around.” A 180 degrees turn in the direction of the Sea of Reeds
    
    1,41. ותהינו, ”then you were ready.” The word is derived from הן. It is as if the people had said הננו ועלינו, “here we are ready to ascend” (Rashi). Onkelos renders the word as ושריתון למיסק לטורא, “you started to ascend the mountain.” If someone prepares himself to commence a project, an undertaking, he usually signals this by saying הנני, “I am all set to go.”
    
    1,44. כאשר תעשינה הדבורים, “just as the bees would do.” They chase anyone who touches their hives putting such people into mortal danger. The verse also alludes to the fact that at least some of the pursuers died while pursuing the Israelites. The reason is that when bees sting they themselves die as a result of emitting their poison.
    
    1,46. ותשבו בקדש ימים רבים, “you remained in Kadesh for many years.” A total of 19 years. The words כימים אשר ישבתם mean as the total number of years you stayed in all the other locations. The subject is repeated in chapter 2 verse 14, where the number of years it took to get from Kadesh Barnea to the river Zered is given as 38 years. This number is confirmed in the Book called Seder Olam.
    
    2,3. רב לכם סב את ההר הזה, “you have spent enough time being around this mountain.” G’d prevented the people from harassing the Edomites out of regard for the fact that their  patriarch Esau had shown much honour to their mutual father Yitzchak. G’d does not shortchange a single creature of the reward due to it. The reason is so that such a creature would not have an argument in the world to come and G’d could say to it that it had already received all the reward due to it for the merits it had accumulated while on earth.
   פנו לכם צפונה, “turn yourselves northward!” Devarim Rabbah 1,19 comments on this that when the time arrives for Esau to be supreme, it behooves Israel to move north. Another comment from the Midrash: G’d said: “I have only one Altar and he (Esau) is going to destroy it.” [It is seen as a concealed warning not to make common cause with the people who in the end will destroy the Temple. The Israelites (Hyrcan and Antipater) who called in the Romans for political reasons lived to suffer the consequences. The word צפון is understood as something hidden, exclusive; in other words: “do not share your exclusive and direct ‘hotline’ to G’d.” Ed.]
    
    2,4. אתם עוברים בגבול אחיכם בני עשו, “you are passing through the boundary of your brethren the descendants of Esau, etc.” G’d reminds the people that although these people are descended from Esau they are still to be considered as “your brethren.” 
    The word בגבול is an allusion to the fact that even Edom/Esau’s ascendancy (the Roman Empire) will have a limit גבול, although all the people of the earth are eager to join that Empire and they stream from all sides to join that culture. The Midrash uses a verse in Ovadiah 7 to prove this. The prophet writes: “all your allies turned you back at the frontier;” the second part of the verse reads: “they have duped you and overcome you.” The prophet describes how the one-time fair-weather friends of Rome have abandoned it and worse. The first half of the verse describes Edom/Esaua’s ascent, the second half its decline.
   וייראו מכם ונשמרתם מאד, ”they will fear you; but you shall be very careful.” In what way can you be careful? By not harassing them and provoking them.”
    Rabbi Eleazar in Devarim Rabbah reflected on this verse by saying: “woe to the ears who have to listen to such instructions! If we have to be worried about the Edomites even while they are afraid of us, what is it going to be like under conditions when we are afraid of the Edomites seeing we are in exile, under their sovereignty!” Rabbi Joshua ben Levi preferred to read the words as the following message: “if you want them to be afraid of you, what can you do to ensure this? Be very careful with Torah observance, i.e. ונשמרתם מאד.” This expression has been used by the Torah also when warning us to protect our lives through maintaining our physical health (Deut. 4,15).
    
   עד מדרוך כף רגל, “even the right to set foot.” G’d forbade the Israelites to set foot in the territory of the Edomites unless specific permission had been obtained.
    A Midrashic approach mentioned by Rashi: the word עד is understood as indicating a time in history, i.e. until the day comes when the Lord’s “feet” are described as standing on the Mount of Olives ushering in the redemption and the destruction of Edom and all it stands for (Zecharyah chapter 14). Another view expressed in Devarim Rabbah, (Lieberman edition 24) also understanding the word עד as a reference to a certain point in time, links setting foot on Edom’s territory to Isaiah 63, a chapter in which the prophet deals with G’d returning from making war against Edom. In verse 3 of that chapter we read (G’d speaking) “I trod out a vintage alone...their life-blood bespattered My garments and all My clothing was stained.”
   כי ירושה לעשו, “for it is an inheritance for Esau.” This claim goes back to Avraham. G’d said that He had allocated the territory of 10 nations to the descendants of Avraham, seven to the Israelites, whereas the territories of the Keyni, the Kenizi, and the Kadmoni were given to Ammon, Moav and Se-ir. One of these territories was allocated to Esau, the other two to the descendants of Lot (Rashi).
    
    2,6. אכל תשברו מאתם, “You may purchase food from them;” Our author understands these words as a question: “Do you need to purchase food from them? Are you short of water?” In other words: “seeing that all your needs are taken care of why would you be interested to set foot on the soil of these people?” This is also why the Torah immediately continuous with: “for the Lord your G’d has blessed you in all your handiwork during all these forty years.”
    
    2,8. ונעבור מאת אחינו בני עשו היושבים בשעיר מדרך הערבה מאילת ומעציון גבר, “we moved on away from our kinsmen the descendants of Esau, who dwell in Seir; from the way to the Aravah, from Eylat and from Etzyon-gever.” We turned away from (ערבה) from the paths of the Lord and Torah; this is why the Edomites were not given to us to conquer at this time. (a Midrash found in Lieberman’s edition of Devarim Rabbah, not the standard printed text) [The implication of the words עציון גבר in this Midrash is that instead of honouring the נעשה ונשמע the Israelites had pledged at Sinai, they regressed to man-made counsel, the result being a reduced- size Eretz Yisrael. Ed.]
    
    2,11. רפאים יחשבו אף הם כענקים, “the Rephaim were also considered as similar to giants.” According to Rashi, Moses says to the Israelites: “you thought that this is the land of the Rephaim which I have allocated to Avraham, seeing that the Eymim who are identical with the Rephaim used to live there. However, this is not correct; the territory of those Rephaim I have allocated to the descendants of Lot and I have made the descendants of Lot settle there. The reason that these Rephaim were considered as identical with the Eymim, fear-inspiring like the giants was that although they themselves were not giants, they nonetheless succeeded in making everyone afraid of them as if they had been giants. We find a similar construction in verse 12: ובשעיר ישבו החורים, “and the Chorim who had lived in Seir.” This is a reference to the inhabitants of that land before Esau took over that territory allocated to him by G’d.
    
    2,16-17. ויהי כאשר תמו כל אנשי המלחמה  למות ...וידבר ה' אלי לאמור, “It was after all the arms-bearing men had finished dying, the Lord spoke to me, etc.” According to the plain meaning of text Moses is telling the people that as soon as the Israelites had become aware that all the men who had been 20 years old at the Exodus had died, G’d communicated once more with Moses and commanded the people to march past the territory of Moav.
    According to our sages in Taanit 30 G’d had not spoken (individually) with Moses since the time the spies had died and the generation of the adults who had been redeemed from Egypt had been condemned to die in the desert. This proved that Moses’ elevated position was entirely due to the people he represented. When these people were in disgrace, Moses was made to feel this. This condition remained static for 38 years until the 15th of Av of the fortieth year. This day became a day of great rejoicing as the fact that G’d commenced His dialogue with Moses indicated that the people were once again in a state of grace. It was also a special day for Moses personally as it signaled the return of his prophetic powers. The reason that the prophetic powers did not already return to Moses on the 10th of Av, i.e. precisely after the anniversary of the debacle with the spies,  was because at that time, in the second year when the decree against the people had been promulgated, Moses observed 7 days of mourning for the decree, a period when he would not have been the recipient of prophetic insights, seeing that a state of joy is required for a person to possess such powers. Now, on the 15th of the month of Av, both Moses and the people could rejoice simultaneously.
    If you will peruse the text of the Torah starting with the debacle of the spies’ mission, you will not find that G’d addressed Moses, i.e. the words  וידבר ה' אל משה. You will only find ויאמר ה' אל משה, i.e. a level of communication reserved for prophets of lesser stature, people who receive an “indistinct message,” the kind G’d referred to when He rebuked Miriam and Aaron in Numbers 12,6 (compare Baba Batra 121). This will also help you understand Jeremiah 1,6 who had said to G’d: “here I am only a lad, and I do not know how to speak, דבר.” He did not mean that he had a speech impediment, but that due to his low level of prophetic insight he could not communicate his message with the appropriate degree of clarity. He alluded to this by adding the wordאהה  before saying א-ד-נ-י אלוקים, The fact that G’d communicated with Jeremiah on the lower level of prophecy is confirmed by verse 7 in that chapter, i.e. ויאמר ה' אלי. [incidentally, seeing that in Korach, etc. we do find the formula of וידבר ה' אל משה, this may be proof that the uprising of Korach had occurred prior to the debacle with the spies. This editor has always felt that Korach’s bid for power made little sense seeing that all the people who joined him were bound to perish in the desert, ignominiously, so why risk your life for such positions? Ed.] 
    
    2,24. החל רש, “commence to take possession;” according to Jerusalem Talmud Sheviit 6,1 the word is not derived from ירושה, inheritance., but from חולין, “profane, not sacred.” G’d told Moses that as far as the Israelites were concerned He had made the land of the Emorites no longer “sacred” i.e. out of bounds to the Jewish people. It was permitted to conquer that land seeing that it belonged to an idolater, Sichon. [I suppose this means “as opposed to the Moabites who had owned most of it at one time and whose territory G’d had declared out of bounds to the Israelites.” Ed.]
    
    2,25. אחל תת פחדך, “I shall begin to put the fear of you, etc.” This verse contains a hint that the sun stood still for Moses during the battle against Og just as it stood still in Joshua’s time. This is the opinion of the sages in Taanit 20 who say that there were three people on whose account the orbit of the sun was arrested. They were: Moses, Joshua, Nakdimon son of Gurion. The latter case is testified to by the Talmud. [The miracle was performed in order for Nakdimon not to have to pay a huge sum pledged to the Romans in exchange for water from their stores for the Jews in the event it would not rain by a certain date. Ed.] We know that the sun was arrested in its orbit in response to a prayer by Joshua when he asked in Joshua 10,12: “let the sun remain still at Givon and the moon at Ajalon.” This is followed in verse 13 by: “the sun stood half way up in the sky.” How do we know that something similar occurred  for Moses? Rabbi Eliezer points to the word אחל in our verse, and the same word in Joshua 3,7 where G’d promises Joshua to display his greatness to the people. G’d adds that “just as I was with Moses I will be with you.” The implication is that the performance of the miracle of the sun standing still for Joshua will prove that he, just as Moses for whom the sun had also stood still, is great.
    Rabbi Yochanan brings a different proof from the word תת. In our verse G’d says that He will begin to put the fear of Moses into  the nations surrounding the Jewish people. In Joshua 10,12 that word תת also appears in connection with “silencing, or arresting” the sun. Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmeni in Avodah Zarah 25 feels that the whole text of the verse is sufficient proof. Seeing that G’d promises to put the fear and dread of Moses into all the people under the sky, how was this to be accomplished simultaneously? By some manifestation of something supernatural in the sky, visible to all. What was it? The arrest of the orbit of the  sun. This is the reason the Torah referred to היום הזה, i.e. all the nations of the world would become aware of this phenomenon on the same day. Seeing that the continued existence of the terrestrial universe depends on the functioning of the orbits of the sun, this miracle was as great as the acts of creation described in Genesis. Even a brief interruption of the movements of the sun could lead to serious ecological damage to parts of the earth exposed at the time. The fact that both Joshua and Moses caused the sun’s orbit to be arrested (for several hours in the case of Joshua) without negative fallout for the inhabitants of the earth caused people to become overawed by the power of Moses and Joshua respectively.
    This miracle cannot be compared to that which occurred when King Chizkiyah of Yehudah asked that the hands of the sundial be reversed; this is why that King was not mentioned as in the same category as Moses, Joshua, and Nakdimon (compare Tossaphot Avodah Zarah 25). In that miracle the sun never stood still; it only traveled backwards for the appropriate amount of time, but it remained in motion. The word נקדה used by the Talmud in Taanit to described what happened to the sun for the sake of the three people mentioned is the same as the word נקודה, a stationary spot. That very word already makes it clear that what happened in those three instances was different from what happened at Chizkiyah’s request  (compare Kings II 20,10-11).
    Tanchuma Acharey Mot 9` focuses on the word דום “be silent,” rather than עמוד, which appears in Joshua chapter 10. The sun is perceived as constantly praising the Almighty, i.e. its motion is the way in which it praises the Lord. If it stands still, this results in its temporarily ceasing to praise the Lord. It therefore cannot proceed when it remains silent. Its function is aptly described by David when he said in Psalms 113,3: “from the east (where it rises) until it sets the name of the Lord is praised by means of it.” Seeing that this is the sun’s function, i.e. to praise the Lord, Joshua commanded it to be silent, i.e. to cease to function. Arrest of its motion is simply a corollary. The Midrash there elaborates that the sun did not simply accept Joshua’s command but demanded to know how it could be that a “minor” could command a “major?” It meant that seeing it had been created before man, how could man presume to issue orders to the sun? Joshua replied to this argument: “why should not a free (willed) person, even though junior, be able to give orders to a senior who has no freedom of choice?” Upon hearing this, the sun was silent and as a result its orbit ceased. This is the meaning of: “the sun stood in mid-heaven” (Joshua 10,13).
    
    2,28. אכל בכסף תשברני, “sell me food in exchange for money!” The meaning is “in the event that I need to buy supplies.” Similarly, מים בכסף תתן לי ושתיתי, רק אעברה ברגלי, “water in exchange for money give me so that I may drink it,; only let me pass through on foot.” Moses referred to the armies marching though Sichon’s territory. From this verse you can deduce that when the prophet Zecharyah had depicted G’d as standing on the Mount of Olives (Zecharyah 14,4) this was a reference to the heavenly hosts and soldiers. (The author discussed this in detail on Genesis 6,6).
    
    2,29. כאשר עשו לי בני עשו, “as the children of Esau have done for me.” It is quite impossible to understand these words to mean that the Edomites had provided the Israelites with bread and water seeing that Moses includes the Moabites in his statement and we know for a fact that the Moabites had done no such thing. After all, one of the reasons that a Moabite may not become a proselyte is precisely because that nation had not offered bread and water to the passing Israelites when they were in need of it (Deut. 23,5). The words  must refer to the request to be allowed to march through their lands without causing any damage. Verse 4 in our chapter means that the Edomites were quite amenable to the Israelites traversing the mountain of Seir at the border of their country. The king of Edom only refused the Israelites to travel through the built up area of his country, the fastest route to the land of Canaan. This is why he had said לא תעבור בי (Numbers 20,18) i.e. “not through my capital.” Neither he nor his people had any objection to the territory of their land being used as a passage for the Israelites. I explained it there. 
    
    2,30. כי הקשה ה' אלו-היך את רוחו ואמץ את לבבו, “for the Lord your G’d hardened his spirit and made his heart stubborn.”
    This kind of language is employed only when the people concerned are wicked in the extreme and beyond redemption. Pharaoh was another example of such a person whom G’d deprived of his free will as a penalty for abusing it so grossly. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Teshuvah 6,3). Seeing that these people’s sins were not outgrowths of an overpowering urge, but were based on a deliberate attempt to thwart G’d, they are denied the opportunity to repent at a certain stage in their lives. Even when they are emotionally ready to repent, G’d causes some event which make their minds resist such attempts. You will find that the Torah does not mention such an attempt by G’d to prevent Pharaoh from true repentance until after he had already failed to repent and his promise four times (compare  Exodus 7,13; 8,11; 8,28; 9,7;). We find something similar in Kings I 18,37 where Elijah refers to G’d having caused the hearts of the people of Israel as turning away from Him as a punishment for their many and repeated sins (Maimonides Hilchot Teshuvah 6,3).
    
    3,4. כל חבל ארגוב, “the whole district of Argov;” according to Rashi the word refers to “a province;” other commentators believe that Argov is the name of an individual who used to own this strip of land, having inherited it, and that it had been measured with a rope to determine its boundaries, hence the word חבל ארגוב. Onkelos translates it as בית פלך טרכונא, “the resi-dence in a district by that name, i.e. a famous palace.” Our verse then would refer to the province in which the palace was situated.
    
    3,5. לבד מערי הפרזי, “apart from the ‘open’ cities;” the ones scattered throughout the countryside, not protected by a wall. The word occurs in connection with Jerusalem in Zecharyah 2,8 where the prophet suggests that in the future Jerusalem will not need a wall around it to protect it against invaders.
    
    3,9. צידונים יקראו לחרמון שריון והאמרי יקראו לו שניר, “The people of Tzidon would call Mount Hermon Siryon, whereas the Emorite would refer to it as Senir.” We find here three separate names seeing that in Deut. 4,48 Mount Hermon is also called Siyon. Why did the Torah have to record all these names of Mount Hermon? It was to give us an idea of the prominence and esteem in which the land of Israel was held. Everyone of these respective nations (their kings) would refer to his own land by a name reflecting a location in the land of Israel. [by calling his capital Mount Hermon in their language, they would pay tribute  to that Mountain in Israel and to their own standing in Israel. Of course, in their arrogance, they would make believe that the Israelites had named their mountain to correspond to the capitals of their own respective countries. Ed.] (Sifri Eykev 37).
    
    3,11. כי רק עוג מלך הבשן נשאר מיתר הרפאים, “for only Og, King of Bashan, was left of the remnants of the giants” whom Amrafel and his colleagues had killed, as we read in Genesis 14,5: “they killed the Rephaim in Ashtarot Karnayim.” Og had escaped from the battle; this is why the Torah reports “the escapee” as reporting to Avram that Lot had been taken captive (Genesis 14,13). Our sages in Tanchuma Chukat 25 identify this “fugitive” as having been Og.
   באמת איש, “by the standard measure “cubit” applied to everybody else.” Onkelos translates this as אמת מלך, “by the measure known as “cubit” in the country under control of that king.” The measure was called after this king who had established it.  The word מלך when used by Onkelos is a defective spelling for the word  מלכא, King, in Aramaic. Onkelos alludes to the fact that Og was the only survivor of the descendants of Kayin whose giants had been introduced to us by the Torah in Genesis 6,2 as בני אלוהים (compare author’s comments at the end of Numbers, 21,34 this Editor’s translation pages 2186-88)
    
    3,13. ההוא יקרא ארץ רפאים, “the land called ‘the land of the Rephaim,’” i.e. the land G’d allocated to Avraham.
    
    3,18. ואצו אתכם בעת ההיא, ”I commanded you at that time, etc.” Moses was now speaking to the tribes of Gad and Reuven. Seeing that they were part of the people of Israel, Moses used the pronoun אתכם, “you,” as if his commandment applied to all the tribes. Actually, it would have been less misleading if he had used the pronoun אותם, “them.” (compare Ibn Ezra).  We find something similar at the end of the Torah where Moses “officially” addresses the Levites (Deut. 31,25-27) commencing with “Moses comman-ded the Levites ... to take the Torah scroll  and to place it at the side of the Ark;  “I have known your rebelliousness and stiff neck, etc.” Although Moses is reported as speaking to the Levites, he addresses the whole people. [the Levites most certainly did not have an exclusive on being rebellious, rather the reverse. Ed,] 
    
    3,21. עיניך הרואות את כל אשר עשה ה' אלו-היכם לשני המלכים האלה, כן יעשה ה' לכל הממלכות., “your eyes who have witnessed all that the Lord your G’d has done to these two kings, thus will the Lord do to all the kingdoms.” Moses reinforced the people’s confidence regarding the battles ahead by recalling to them what they had themselves experienced in the war against Sichon and Og. This would give them the necessary faith in G’d that they would easily overcome the 31 kings who would be defeated before the Israelites under the leadership of Joshua. Also Joshua’s heart was strengthened by these reminders of Moses that it would be he who would  enter the land that Moses himself had not been allowed to enter.
    A Midrashic approach (Midrash Tehillim 136) Sichon and Og were more difficult to overcome than Pharaoh and his armies at the time. Seeing that the people had celebrated their victory over Pharaoh by reciting a song of thanksgiving to the Lord, they should most certainly have done so also after their victories over Sichon and Og. Since they failed to do so, David made up for this omission in psalm 136, 17-20: “Who struck down great kings, His steadfast love is eternal; Sichon, king of the Emorites, Og king of Bashan, and gave their land as an heritage to His servant Israel for His love is eternal.”
    
    
    
   ואתחנן
    
    
    
   מלוה ה' חונן דל וגמולו ישלם לו, “G’d is a lender to him who is gracious to the poor; He will recompense him.” (Proverbs 19,17) In this verse Solomon explained to us the usefulness (on a functional level) of practicing charity and the great reward in store for performance of this commandment both in this life and in the world to come. It is a well known fact that the eyes of the wealthy person are turned inwards towards his wealth or to the many people whom he believes to be his friends. Solomon himself said in Proverbs 14,20 that the rich have many friends. The poor on the other hand, has no one to focus his eyes on except Hashem. He cannot rely on his personal wealth, seeing he does not have any. He cannot turn to his friends either, seeing that the poor do not have many friends. Even if he had friends from before he became poor, they will likely abandon him as they do not want to be associated with “a loser,” a person whom they now perceive as a failure. Solomon already taught us this piece of human psychology in Proverbs 19,7: where he said: “all the brothers of a poor man hate him; how much more is he shunned by his one time friends. He pursues them with words but they are not to be found.” In verse 4 of that same chapter Solomon had already said that a poor man finds himself separated from his friend. Solomon means that even if he had one solitary friend left, this one too soon turns his back on him. Seeing the poor is shunned by his peers, G’d loves him instead. 
    This point is made succinctly in Isaiah 14,32: “in it (Zion) the needy of His people shall find shelter.” Seeing that the Jewish people (Zion) act as lenders to Hashem in supporting the poor when they perform charity, Hashem in turn is indebted to them and has to repay them both in this life and in the hereafter. It is not the custom for the Book of Proverbs to mention commandments explicitly written in the Torah unless a new dimension of that commandment is added to our understanding of it thereby. When Solomon speaks about חונן דל instead of מרחם, in Proverbs 19,17 “granting grace to the poor, instead of extending mercy to the poor,” the reason is that the word חונן suggests חינם, extending help for free, without demanding any sort of recompense from the recipient. Even when the recipient did not have a claim on such largesse, G’d extends it “without strings attached.” He had explained this as being one of His attributes when He told Moses at Mount Sinai וחנותי את אשר ארחם, “I reserve the right to extend My grace to whomsoever I will extend My mercy” (Exodus 33,19).
    We are commanded to emulate this attribute of Hashem when the Torah writes in Deut. 28,9: והלכת בדרכיו, “you shall walk in His ways,” i.e. just as G’d extends His mercy not asking for anything in return, we too must relate to the poor without asking anything in return. When someone practices this commandment and he makes certain requests from Hashem in the course of his prayer, his prayer will be favourably received. We have proof of this In Psalms 30,9 where David says: “I called to You my Lord, to my Lord I made appeal.” The repetition is an explanation of why David thinks he has a right to make such an appeal. Moses did something similar in the first verse of our portion when he describes himself as having pleaded with G’d, i.e. ואתחנן. He was busy for 40 days and 40 nights praying and none of his prayers was responded to positively until he used the תחנה prayer.
    3,23. ואתחנן אל ה' בעת ההיא לאמור, “I pleaded with the Lord at that time, saying:” the words בעת ההיא, “at that time,” refer to the aftermath of the defeat of Sichon and Og, whose lands were given to the Israelites. At that time Moses had dared hope that maybe the decree that he would not be allowed to enter the Holy Land had been canceled. This verse is a continuation of verse 21 when the Torah mentioned ”these two kings.”
   לאמור, “to say.” This expression is strange as who was G’d to say this to? The fact is that the word לאמור here refers to the movement of the lips of Moses during prayer. We have encountered a similar construction in Numbers 12 13: ויצעק משה אל ה' לאמור, “Moses cried out to Hashem saying.” On hat occasion I already commented on the meaning of the word לאמור at that juncture.
    
    A Midrashic approach to the words ואתחנן אל ה' בעת ההיא לאמור; Moses said to G’d: “You have called me ‘servant,’ seeing You have said to Miriam and Aaron: “not so My servant Moses” (Numbers 12,7). I am Your servant and Leviathan is Your servant. I am pleading with You and Leviathan is pleading with You.” We know that Leviathan is pleading with You from Job 40,27: “Will he plead with you at length? Will he speak soft words to you?“ You have accepted the pleadings of Leviathan [why else would Job be unable to catch the Leviathan unless G’d had responded to its pleas? Ed.]  Moses continues: “Leviathan apparently has made a covenant with You to remain Your lifelong slave.” Moses argued that seeing G’d had also said to him that He had made a covenant with him (Exodus 34,10) why should G’d listen any less to his entreaty than to that of the Leviathan?” Moses added that apparently G’d did not mean to keep this covenant with him else why did He tell him that he would die on the mountain he would ascend (Deut. 32,3)? There is another verse in Exodus 21,6 that if the slave does not want to leave the master and go free that he will have his ear pierced and serve the master forever? Moses claimed this right for himself in his prayer. He complained that G’d did not apply that rule to him. G’d answered him: רב לך, meaning: “as far as you are concerned Your adversary, i.e. Adam, the first human being, already caused the decree that you or any human being cannot live forever seeing he had eaten from the tree and he and his descendants have been condemned to become mortal. The very Job whom you have cited as discussing the fate of Leviathan  already said (Job 31,35) concerning Adam: ‘O that I had someone to give me a hearing; O that Shaddai would reply to my writ; or my accuser draw up a true bill!’” Which was the book he talked about? The ספר תולדות אדם, the Book of the descendants of man (Genesis 5,1). Thus far the Midrash.
    
    3,24-25. אדוני אלו-הים אתה החילות להראות את עבדך את גדלך...אעברה נא ואראה,  “My Lord, G’d You have begun to show Your servant Your greatness...please let me cross so that I may see, etc.” There are a number of puzzling points in this entreaty by the foremost prophet that ever lived. How does the fact that G’d showed Moses some of His greatness relate to his desire or entitlement to cross the river Jordan into Eretz Yisrael?
    According to the plain meaning of the text the words: “You have begun,” refer to the giving of the Torah, the performance of which is man’s purpose on this earth. This was the reason Moses injected the words את עבדך, “Your servant,” to point out his function on earth to keep the laws of the Torah, [some of which he could most certainly not keep if denied entry into Eretz Yisrael. Ed.] The word את גדלך, “Your greatness,” Moses chose seeing that in connection with the giving of the Torah, the Torah itself spoke about את כבודו וגדלו, “G’d’s having manifested Himself in His glory and greatness” on that occasion (Deut. 5,21). The words את ידך החזקה are also a reference to what occurred on that occasion at Mount Sinai as we know from that same verse where the Torah writes: ואת קולו שמענו מתוך האש as well as 4,36: מן השמים השמיעך את קולו ליסרך ועל הארץ הראך את אשו הגדולה אשר יעשה  כמעשיך; all these quotations of G’d’s attributes Moses mentioned, the Torah had mentioned in connection with the revelation at Mount Sinai. The word מעשיך refers to G’d manifesting Himself in the heavens, the word גבורותיך, to G’d manifesting Himself on earth. This is the reason that Moses addressed two attributes of G’d at the beginning of his plea when he said “Lord-G’d.” When G’d commenced the decalogue He  introduced Himself as אנכי י-ה-ו-ה- אלוה--יך
    You may best understand the sequence of the verses to which Moses referred as follows: “seeing that You G’d have begun to give the Torah through me, and the Torah in the main cannot properly be observed except in the land of Israel, and we have a principle that if someone commences to fulfill a commandment he is given an opportunity to complete it, it follows that I should be allowed to cross the Jordan in order to complete fulfilling the commandment which I began fulfilling when You G’d gave us the land of Sichon under my leadership”. This is the way my great and revered teacher Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet explained Moses’ prayer.
    It is possible to view Moses’ prayer as a plea to allow him to translate into terrestrial reality his spiritual accomplishments in understanding the structure of the emanations. The words אתה החילות להראות are a reference to the enlightenment in these matters he had been granted; by saying אעברה נא ואראה, Moses asks to be allowed to relate all these insights to what needs to be done on earth to bring these two spheres, the celestial and the terrestrial, into tandem. [I have paraphrased this paragraph and condensed  it. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach, based on Devarim Rabbah 2,8: the words אתה החילות are a reference by Moses to G’d Who was the first One to refer to the Israelites as rebellious when He said in Numbers 17,25 למשמרת לאות לבני מרי, “as a sign for the rebellious ones,” (the Israelites who had challenged the appointment of Aaron). Seeing that G’d had decreed Moses’ punishment on account of his having addressed the Israelites as שמעו נא המורים, “listen please you rebellious ones,” (Numbers 20,10) and immediately thereafter G’d had decreed that Moses could not enter the land of Israel, Moses now argues that he had been entitled to use this word seeing G’d Himself had already called the Israelites by that adjective.
    A kabbalistic approach: with the words ”you have begun to show me Your greatness, etc.,” Moses refers to his first encounter with G’d at the burning bush. When he goes on to describe G’d’s attributes, he means that it had been his privilege to acquaint the Jewish people with these attributes of G’d and His accomplish-ments in his capacity as His prophet. (David uses similar language in Psalms 86,8) Seeing that this has been so, Moses begs to be allowed to see the Holy land with his own eyes. The reason the name of G’d is spelled א-ד-נ-י in his plea here is that Moses alluded to Psalm 114 7-8 in which G’d is called  אדון חולי ארץ, in connection with turning the rock into a lake of water. That verse referred to the incident at the rock where Moses had become guilty of this punishment. He now begs forgiveness by alluding to his sin in this indirect way. The word י-ה-ו-ה with the vowels of “elo-him” are an aspect of the attribute of Justice which contains a large measure of the attribute of Mercy. The word ואתחנן is used  next to the attribute of Justice by Moses as when one asks forgiveness one does not address the attribute of Mercy but first has to assuage the attribute of Justice. We also learn this from Job 8,5: אם אתה תשחר אל א-ל ואל שדי תחנן, “if you want to pray to the Lord (to forgive your sins) first plead with the attribute Shaddai.”
   הארץ הטובה,ההר הטוב, “the good land, the good mountain.” Tanchuma Va-etchanan 1 explains Moses’ words by means of a parable. A king who wanted to marry a certain lady sent some of his trusted messengers to look over the prospective bride. When the messengers returned they reported that the bride was the most ugly woman they had ever seen. A friend of the king who overheard this report by the king’s emissaries upbraided them by saying: “how can you have the nerve to give such a report seeing that the girl in question is extremely beautiful, unmatched in fact!” When it came to the wedding, the father of the bride told the king’s emissaries that none of them would be allowed to participate in the wedding feast seeing they had slandered the bride. When the friend of the king was about to enter the wedding feast the father of the bride told him that he too was not welcome. To this, the friend of the king said: ‘how can you deny me entrance seeing that I have praised your daughter without even having seen her whereas the other messengers of the king described hers as indescribably ugly!’ Now I want to see her to see if perchance the messengers had spoken the truth or if I have been right all along!” This is what happened when  Moses prayed to cross the Jordan. As long as the spies who had been sent to evaluate the bride (the land of Canaan) had issued a negative report saying that this land ate up its inhabitants, and Moses had been full of praises to the people of Israel concerning that land, he had done so merely on faith. Now he asked G’d for a chance to see if he had been right all along. This is why he said: “please let me cross the Jordan so that I can see the good land and the good mountain with my own eyes.”
   ההר הטוב הזה והלבנון, “this good mountain and the Lebanon.” These words are similes for the Temple which “whitewashes,” מלבין, the sins of the Jewish people (Sifri Va-etchanan 28).
    
    3,26. ויתעבר ה' בי למענכם, “the Lord was angry at me on your account.” According to the plain meaning of the text G’d became filled with anger on account of your many complaints. We have a similar verse in 4,21 where the wording is והתאנף ה' בי על דבריכם, “the Lord was angry at me on account of your words. Moses’ own reaction to some of the Israelites’ complaints was described in similar language, such as in Psalms 106,32: “and Moses suffered on their account.” [his error had been caused by the Israelites’ annoying G’d. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach to these words: The word ויתעבר is basically the same as ויעבור in Exodus 34,6 ויעבור ה' על פניו, “the Lord passed in front of Moses.” Moses refers to the time after the sin of the golden calf when, seeing that G’d had endowed him with greatness on account of the Jewish people whose leader he was, he pleaded with G’d to forgive the sin of the people, “G’d passed before me,” i.e. did not accept my plea.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word ויתעבר contains an allusion to the mystical dimension of calculating the lunar calendar. This idea is reinforced by Moses using the word בי instead of the word עמי, “with me.” On other occasions when the word התעבר is used as an expression of G’d’s anger such as in Psalms 89,39 the preposition used is עם, i.e. התעברת עם משיחך, “You were angry with Your anointed.”
    It is common knowledge that the expression סוד העבור, is chosen as it depicts an element of עברה, זעם, i.e. Divine anger. The mystical dimension of all the orbits, the constant revolutions of celestial bodies which are a feature of this present imperfect universe (עולם הזה), are manifestations of the attribute of Justice. This is also the mystical dimension of Exodus 34,20 that G’d is פוקד עון אבות על בנים, that He remembers and punishes the sons if the sins of their fathers have not been expiated I have alluded to this principle when I discussed that verse and subject (editor’s translation  page 1401-1402).
    Another meaning of the expression פרשת העבור is that offered in Berachot 29, where Rav Chisda says that even when G’d is angry the needs of a pregnant woman, עוברה, are constantly part of His concern. Moses prayed that G’d should not allow His anger to blot out any other consideration. Some commentators in the Talmud there read instead of באשה עוברה, “at,” or “of” a preganat woman,” כאשה עוברה “like a pregnant woman.” This error is responsible for these people misunderstanding the Talmud, as they thought G’d’s anger is compared to a pregnant lady. There can be no doubt that the correct text is באשה עוברה. This is also the view of the famous Kabbalist of Gerona, Rav Yitzchak the blind. [incidentally, his house is the only trace of a Jewish presence ever in Gerona. This editor visited Gerona].
    The reason that the science of calculating the time when the moon renews itself month after month is known as סוד העבור is that G’d knows all developments in human history long before they occur as well as the dates on which they will occur, as we know from Isaiah 41,4 קורא הדורות מראש, “He Who announced the generations from the start (of history).” [If the sages who calculate our calendar would err with the date the new moon is to appear and fix our calendar according to their faulty calculations this would cause confusion and play havoc with G’d’s plans seeing He authorised the Jewish sages to determine the calendar. Ed.] This is why the סוד העבור is also known as כח הדורות, “the force determining human development.” All manifestations of trans-migrations of souls derive from the concept that G’d has foreseen all developments and finds ways of achieving His objectives in spite of man’s freedom of choice.
    The word עבור is also closely related to the word רבוע, “square, divided into four equal parts,” (same letters differently arranged), an allusion to such transmigrations of souls being limited to a total of four such lives i.e. the original and a maximum of three transmigrations.  Another mystical dimension of the word עבור is that such transmigrations do not occur outside, (beyond) the original family of the body the soul lived its original life in [if I understand the author correctly. Ed.]
   רב לך אל תוסף, “enough for you; do not carry on.” According to our sages (Sifri Pinchas 135) G’d meant: “what has been reserved for you as reward in the hereafter is sufficient.” The word רב is understood by Sifri in the same sense as Psalms  31,20: “how abundant is the good that You have in store for those who revere You.”
    A Midrashic approach by Tanchuma Va-etchanan 6: when G’d said to Moses רב לך אל תוסף, Moses replied: “not only did my mother have to gnash her teeth when she had to throw me in the river, but now she even has to gnash her teeth in death (when I die).” G’d answered that this is the way He had decided in His מחשבה, and this is the way of the world, i.e. everyone has to die. [If I understand this, the Midrash refers to the word אל תוסף, interpreting these words as G’d saying to Moses: “do not add new rules to the way the world is run.” Ed.] 
    
    3,27. ימה וצפונה ותימנה ומזרחה, “westward, northward, southward and eastward.” We do not find that the Bible describes the four directions of the wind in a uniform manner. Sometimes the Bible commences by mentioning the direction “east,” such as in Job 23,8-: הן קדם אהלך ואיננו ואחור ולא אבין לו שמאל בעשותו ולא אחז יעטוף ימין ולא אראה, “but if I go (forward) East- He is not there; and backward (West)- I still do not perceive Him; “on the left hand (North) where He does work- since He is concealed, I do not behold Him; on the right hand (South) He is hidden, and I cannot see Him.” This is the appropriate order in which the directions should be referred to seeing they represent  two straight lines, East to West and North to South. The sequence we find in Job also corresponds to the promise G’d made to Yaakov in his dream (Genesis 28,14) “you will spread out West and East, North and South.” On other occasions such as Genesis 13,14, North is mentioned first, such as when G’d said to Avraham: “raise your eyes please and look from the place where you are standing, to the North, to the South, to the East and to the West.”
    It is possible that the reason that in the case of Yaakov and Moses the reason why the Torah commences by mentioning West first is that the Shechinah which descended with Yaakov to Egypt (Megillah 29) is perceived as being in the West (Baba Batra 25). Here too, Moses addresses the Shechinah in the first instance and mentions תימנה as “southward,” instead of the more customary נגבה. The reason may be that in this way he was able to include one half of the Holy Name, i.e. either י-ה, or ו-ה in each of the four directions he made mention of. Had he said ונגבה, the second י-ה would have been missing. We must remember that Moses had previously exalted G’d by calling Him א-ל אלו-הי הרוחות, “the Lord G’d Who presides over the winds (directions of the earth).
    The reason why G’d used the words עיניך twice when He responded to Moses’ prayer and why He told him to “raise” his eyes before looking and to physically ascend the summit is because from that location he would be able to behold the four corners of the land with his physical eyes and at the same time understand by means of focusing with his mental eyes on the four-lettered name of Hashem which symbolises the highest מרכבה, on all directions of the world.
    You should appreciate that the four directions of the world, i.e. מזרח, מערב, צפון, דרום, are known by three names each. מזרח, (East) is known as מזרח, קדם or פנים. West is known as either מערב, ים or אחור. South is known as דרום, נגב or ימין. North is known as צפון, אסתן or שמאל. the meaning of these various terms for these directions is as follows: The reason the Hebrew word מזרח means East, is that the sun “shines” זורחת in the morning from the East. The reason it is also called קדם is because it proceeds in a forward direction from the East as it spreads its light over more parts of the globe. It is also called פנים (face) as when G’d created man he made him face East after completing him. His back faced westward, his right side southward, and his left side northward.
    The name מערב for West, i.e. “mixing,” derives from the fact that the sun sets in the West; it is a time when the shadows merge, become confused and indistinct. It is also called ים as the great Sea, the Mediterranean, is the western boundary of the Holy Land. It is also called אחור, “rear,” seeing its counterpart, East, is also known as קדם, “front.” Incidentally, Onkelos calls the Mediterranean the ים האחרון, “the Sea of the rear,” or “the ים המערבאה, the Sea of the West.” The word אחור,  meaning “West” occurs in the verse from Job 23,8-9 we quoted earlier. The South is known as דרום, seeing that at its highest point at midday the sun is high in the sky. The word דרום is a combination of the two words דר רום, “residing on high.” Alternatively, we may view the word as an acrostic of דרך רום from Chabakuk 3,10 רום ידהו נשאת ”lifted up his hands on high.” 
    The reason South is called נגב, is that that direction is very dry, exposed to extreme heat of the sun which  spreads out over that region more than on any other. This is what Solomon referred to when he said (Kohelet 1,6) “it travels toward the South and then describes a turn moving northward.” Solomon uses the verb הלך in connection with the sun’s motion while shining, whereas he uses the verb סבב, “turning,” when describing the sun’s motion when out of view of man’s eyes. We have been told by the “scientists” that it happened once that someone living in the South forgot  a wooden bowl outside and left it lying outside in the midst of the sun’s rays in the middle of the summer. When he returned to pick it up in the evening he found it completely dried out, shrunk as if it had been burned by the fire. This is why the South is called נגב i.e. ”dried up.” We know this from Judges 1,15  where Calev’s daughter complains to her father that the land she was given was parched, dried out, deprived of water, and she  requested sources of water to offset it. The Targum there renders the words ארע דרומא, normally translated as “southern land,” as ימין, the right side, seeing that it is on the right of man as he was when first created, i.e. facing East. It is also possible that the reason for this translation is that the sun always has the south on its right. We have a verse in Daniel 1,5 וימן להם המלך, “the king provided for them.” This is the reason the provisions the Israelites received in the desert from heaven were called מן. The word reflects the fact that it was ready for them on a daily basis, i.e. available like “provisions.” The North is also called צפון because the sun is perceived as “hiding” in that region while invisible to man at night. Furthermore, the northern extremes of the globe are known to be unfit for human habitation. Our sages in Baba Batra 25 interpret Job 26,7 נוטה צפון על תהו to mean that ”He stretches Tzafon over chaos” means that the north wind does not operate there.
    The word אסתן is not a Biblical term but one coined by our sages occurring as a proverb in Ketuvot 23 and meaning that when someone’s witnesses are in an inaccessible, “hidden” region, how can they be relied on? Rashi understands the word as meaning “north.” The author quotes some sources showing that the north wind is associated with therapeutic qualities. [maybe freezing kills the bacteria. Ed.] At any rate, this would agree with the tradition that the Israelites did not circumcise their children while in the desert due to the absence of this North wind and its therapeutic effects on wounds.
    The reason North is also known as שמאל, left, is that when man faces East, as we said, North is always on his left. It may also be due to the fact that it is on “the wrong side” of the sun, i.e. the sun never shining in that direction. The “left,” basically is associated with negative connotations, something inferior. The word, phonetically speaking, is related to סומא, “a blind person.” When we speak about something hidden, the Talmud uses the term סמוי מן העין, “hidden from the eye.”
    According to a Midrash quoted in Tossaphot Baba Batra 25 the reason that David spoke about Adam describing himself as having ben created “both forward and backward” (Psalms 92,8), was because he faced forward toward sources of light, whereas his rear faced darkness, an absence of light, i.e. the rear of the sun being perceived as having no light to radiate. His right side, the one always exposed to the light of the sun was called “right,” his left, the northern side, always out of reach of the sun was called שמאל. This is the side with which man does not perform his work.
   כי לא תעבור את הירדן הזה, “for you are not going to cross this Jordan.” G’d meant that even Moses’ remains would not cross the river Jordan (Sifri Pinchas 135). This is what Moses had in mind when he said in 4,22: “I am going to die in this land, I will not cross the Jordan.” Seeing that if he were dead he could not cross the Jordan, the last part of the verse means that even his bones would not be put to rest in Eretz Yisrael. If Moses had not previously been informed of this decree, surely he would have commanded Joshua and Eliezer to  bring his remains for burial in the Holy Land. Or, he could have commanded the entire Jewish people to see to it that he would be buried in Eretz Yisrael, just as Joseph had done, and just as he must have done seeing he had carried Joseph’s coffin with him all these 40 years in the desert.
    Yaakov, the last of the patriarchs, one of the supports of the מרכבה, was afforded burial of his entire body in Eretz Yisrael. Joseph only had his bones buried there. Moses, who surpassed both Yaakov and Joseph in his relationship with G’d, did not merit to have any part of his body interred on holy soil.  It was G’d’s wish that none of Moses’ body be interred in Eretz Yisrael as a form of respect for the entire generation of Jews who had died in the desert and whose remains had also not been interred in Eretz Yisrael. Also, it was a consolation for all the many hundreds of generations of Jews throughout the Diaspora who died and were 
    
buried in exile. The souls of all these people are in G’d’s care pending the resurrection, at which time not only Moses but the vast majority of them will also be resurrected
    
    3,29. ונשב בגיא מול בית פעור,  “We stayed on in the valley across from Bet-Peor.”  We had already been encamped there, as this was the ראש הפסגה Moses had mentioned in verse 27; seeing this was where the people had committed idolatry and adultery. Moses warns them once again concerning the sin of idolatry in the following paragraph.
    
    4,1. ועתה ישראל שמע אל החוקים ואל המשפטים אשר אנכי מלמד אתכם לעשות למען תחיו; “and now Israel hearken to the statutes and social laws I will teach you to perform in order that you shall live.” This verse teaches that learning, studying the Torah is not the main purpose of the Torah but performing the commandments one has studied. Our sages in Avot 1,17 stated this succinctly when they taught לא המדרש הוא העיקר אלא המעשה, “not the study is of the essence but the performance, the  deed.” Only performance of deeds is a guarantee of life (both here and in the hereafter).
    
    4,2. לא תוסיפו על הדבר אשר אנכי מצוה אתכם, ולא תגרעו ממנו “do not add to the words which I command you, nor subtract from it.” This is a warning for man not to try and be smarter than G’d by saying that he will do more than G’d commanded, by thinking that the addition will be considered part of his serving the Lord. This is why Moses had to point out that the Torah is perfect. Not only does it not need additions or subtractions but any addition is in fact a subtraction (Sanhedrin 29). Our sages in Sifri Re-ay 82 quote examples of what the Torah means by additions or subtractions. If someone were to take five paragraphs from the Torah and place them inside the phylacteries of the head, doing so deliberately as an addition to what the sages said, or if he were to present G’d with five species of plants on the festival of Sukkot, instead  of the four species mentioned in the Torah, or if a priest were to add a fourth verse to the three verses which form the priestly blessing, such a person would be guilty of violating this commandment.
    On the other hand, if someone adds to the various Rabbinic “laws” instituted to protect Biblical laws against infringement and violation by the ignorant, such additions do not qualify as a violation of the commandment Moses speaks about here. Any Rabbinic ordinance introduced for the sole purpose of ensuring the observance of the Torah law as it is and protecting it against violation is not  called “an addition.” It is in  the nature of a fence around a vineyard, something that does not contribute to or enlarge the vineyard but merely protects it against thieves, marauders, etc. The classic Talmudic example for this is found in Shabbat 13 where the sages are quoted as encouraging a Nazirite to detour around a vineyard. It is not forbidden for a Nazirite to walk through a vineyard. However, if he does not walk through it it will be easier for him to resist the temptation of taking and eating from its grapes, something absolutely forbidden to him by Torah law. In fact, not only does observing the Rabbinic ordinances not constitute a violation of the commandment  not to add to the Torah’s laws, but violating Rabbinic ordinances violates a specific Torah commandment of “do not depart from the word that they tell you right or left.” The “they” are the duly authorised Rabbis (Deut, 17,11).
    
    4,5. ראה למדתי היום חקים ומשפטים כאשר צוני ה’ אלו-הי, “See, I have taught you this day statutes and social laws in accordance with what the Lord my G’d has commanded me.” Moses stresses that he never initiated any thing by himself claiming G’d had told him so. Our sages in Nedarim 37 see another dimension in Moses’ statement, namely that just as he did not charge a fee for teaching G’d’s laws so teachers of Torah must be prepared to teach it gratis, not demanding payment.  G’d did not charge Moses for teaching him the Torah either. This is also what Solomon meant in Proverbs 23,23 when he said: “buy the truth, never sell it.” When dispensing Torah knowledge the purpose must never be to turn a profit.
    
    4,6. ושמרתם ועשיתם כי היא חכמתכם ובינתכם לעיני העמים, “You shall safeguard it and perform it, for it (the Torah’s laws) are what the nations perceive as your wisdom and diescernment.” The verse teaches first and foremost that all the commandments only come into their own when being performed. Their integrity has to be safeguarded (against reformers) and their substance has to be carried out (when they are positive commandments) or performed by not violating them (in the case of negative commandments). All the worthwhile activities in the world are automatically part of one or more of the Torah’s commandments. The discipline of healing is part of a commandment seeing the Torah tells us that if we listen carefully to its commandments and perform all its statutes and refrain from violating them we will not experience disease, etc., (compare Exodus 15,26) “seeing the Lord is your Healer.” The message is clear: Torah observance=preventive medicine. The same applies to all other scientific disciplines.
    Our sages in Shabbat 75 understand the words לעיני העמים in our verse as a reference to the people (astronomers, mathema-titians) who can calculate the movements and timing of the stars in their respective orbits. They go so far as to say that if someone possesses this knowledge and neglects to use it (for the benefit of mankind) he becomes the target of the verse in Isaiah 5,12: “they refuse to acknowledge the work of the Lord and refuse to see His accomplishments.”
   את כל החקים האלה, “all these statutes.” We would have expected Moses to say את כל המצות האלה, “all these commandments.” Why did he mention only the statutes? The fact is that not only do the Gentile nations not praise the Jewish people for these statutes they observe but they make fun of us for performing laws the value of which we do not comprehend. However, when the nations observe that by performing the commandments which do make sense to us the Jewish people have achieved a position of great prominence and success in the world, they reason that there must also be hidden values to the statutes even though such meanings defy our logic. They realise that the Torah does not contain any meaningless laws, כי לא דבר רק הוא, “it is not something empty, devoid of meaning and value.” This is why the Torah quotes the nations as saying: “this must be a wise and learned discerning people.” The words רק, “only,” are their admission that the Jewish people are the only people qualifying for such a compliment.
    
    4,7. כי מי גוי גדול אשר לו אלו-הים קרובים אליו, “for who else is a great nation to whom G’d is so close!”  Moses hints in this verse at the superior status of the Jewish people who, when praying, are answered seeing they focus in their prayers on the supreme Power in the universe, the only Power able to fulfill their requests. This is why they are answered each time. Moses  describes the Jewish people here as גוי גדול, “a great nation,” instead of either as גוי קדוש, a “holy nation,” or גוי צדיק, “a righteous nation.” The reason is that גדולה, “greatness,” is the equivalent of the attribute (emanation) חסד, the highest attribute usually associated with Hashem such as in Chronicles I 29,10 לך ה’ הגדולה, והגבורה, והתפארת, “Yours O Lord is “greatness, mightiness and harmony.” The meaning of the verse then is: “who is a great nation so close to the attributes of G’d such as the Lord our G’d whenever we call upon Him!?” It was important for Moses to add “when we call upon Him, so that one should not think we address our prayers to the attributes instead to the essence, to Hashem. 
    This explains why our sages (Avodah Zarah 3) describe G’d as switching from being seated on the “chair of Justice” to the “chair of Mercy,” in order to avoid rendering verdicts which could be destructive. On the other hand, on occasion G’d has to switch from the “chair of Mercy” and seat Himself on the “chair of Justice,” in order to deal with certain situations in His universe. Everything in accordance with the need of the party who addresses Him in prayer.
    Concerning these various attributes of G’d the prophet Chabakuk 3,8 said: “is Your rage against Yam (the Sea) or against Neharim, (rivers) that You are driving Your steeds, Your victorious chariot?” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah (68,10?) comment on this that the rider is never secondary to the horse, but the horse is secondary to the rider. They are prompted to make this observation in connection with this verse as the prophet described G’d as venting His rage at the forces of nature which have no will of their own. Seeing that neither the sea nor the rivers are the prime causes of evil but man who abuses them, what is the point of G’d venting His anger at the secondary phenomena
    ?
    It is well to note that in our verse the usual order of ה’ אלו-הים is reversed in that Moses first refers to אלו-הים before referring to ה’. [Perhaps this describes G’d on the chair of Justice moving to the chair of Mercy as the result of the prayers of the Jewish people. Ed.]
    Our sages in Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 9,1 observe that the plural in the word קרובים in the sequence אשר אלו-הים קרובים אליו when we would have expected אשר אלו-הים קרוב אליו means that G’d is close to the Jewish people in more ways than one.
    4,8. ומי גוי גדול אשר לו חקים ומשפטים צדיקים , “for what great nation possesses statutes and social laws which are fair, etc.?” After having told us in verse 7 of things which are praiseworthy about Israel, Moses now praises the Torah; when using the expression ככל התורה הזאת, he reiterates a point made previously that Torah contains the sum-total of all that is worth knowing.
    4,9. רק השמר לך ושמור נפשך מאד פן תשכח את הדברים, “Only beware for yourself and be very much on guard lest you forget the thing;” Rashi understands the injunction in this verse as a corollary to the previous verses. Israel will be considered as wise, discerning, etc., on condition that it lives up to these laws so much admired by the Gentiles. If they were to forget them and not observe them they would soon be considered fools instead of wise people. It appears from the syntax that the words רק עם חכם ונבון, “only a wise and discerning nation,” refer to what Moses said previously, i.e. that “only if you observe all these G’d-given laws will you be considered as deserving the description “a wise and discerning people.”
    It is also possible to see in the word רק which always points to something or someone in the minority, a hint that if the nations indeed consider themselves as inferior to you  this is only as long as you perform the commandments. If you were to forget them willfully, or otherwise, the nations would soon stop considering themselves as inferior to you. Your advantage stems from the revelation at Mount Sinai when the Torah testified: “and all the people saw the sounds and the lightning, etc.” (Exodus 20,18). The moment you forget this experience, you will tend to deny it, and subsequently the whole foundation of Judaism will crumble. Both your body and your soul will then be at risk.
    Our sages  in Avot 3,8  who said that anyone who forgets part of his learning is considered as if he had made his soul subject to perdition, referred to this verse where Moses warns us not to forget, i.e. not to do things which result in our forgetting any part of the Torah. When reading our verse here one might come to the conclusion that even if one forgot due to illness one would be guilty. This is why Moses added ופן יסורו מלבבך כל ימי חייך, that 
guilt occurs only if one erases these commandments from one’s heart, i.e. deliberately. We have another severe warning by our sages in the Sefer Mitzvot Gedolot 38,13 that if someone forgets part of what he has learned he violates three negative commandments all of which are derived from this verse, i.e. the words פן, תשכח, and השמר לך, are three separate injunctions.
    
    4,14.ואותי צוה ה’ בעת ההיא..ללמד אתכם חקים ומשפטים , “and the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes, social laws, etc.” These are the other commandments of the Torah, the ones in addition to the Ten Commandments which were commanded at Mount Sinai (Ibn Ezra). Rashi understands the words ואותי צוה as referring to the oral Torah.
   לעשותכם אותם בארץ, “for you to perform in the land, etc.” This does not mean that these commandments are not a personal obligation anywhere in the world. It means that the principal purpose of all the commandments is that they be performed in the Holy Land.
    
    4,15. ונשמרתם מאד לנפשותיכם כי לא ראיתם כל תמונה, “But you shall greatly beware for your souls, for you did not see any likeness.”  Seeing that you know clearly that you did not see any phenomenon, image, at the time when G’d revealed Himself, you must take care in the future never to make such a likeness, no molten image or sculpture; there are nations which serve and worship some domestic animal or free-roaming beast, whichever they encounter first on that day. The astrologers have written that the zodiac sign cancer places some of its power on such animals and causes them to bite or otherwise cause damage. [the point of worshipping these animals would be to neutralise their destructive power against the person worshipping them.]
    
    4,19. ופן תשא עיניך השמימה, “not to raise your eyes skyward.” There is a difference between the wordהשמים  and the word השמימה, just as there is a difference between מצרים and מצרימה. The name of the political entity, the state, is מצרימה, whereas the word מצרים includes the entire country, region. We have proof of this distinction in Numbers 20,15 where Moses describes the descent of the family of Yaakov from the land of Canaan as וירדו אבותינו מצרימה, ונשב במצרים, “our forefathers descended to the state of Egypt and they settled in “greater Egypt.” Similarly here. When the Torah describes השמים, this includes any part of the sky visible to the eye anywhere. All parts of the sky are the same for that purpose. This is why the Torah also writes תחת כל השמים at the end of this verse. However, when the Torah speaks of השמימה, it refers to specific areas of the sky, areas known for certain constellations of stars, etc. They are areas where certain patterns of stars always appear at intervals that are subject to human calculations. Seeing that certain such constellations appear to presage certain happenings at certain times, some people err in ascribing powers to these constel-lations. This is why the Torah warns the Jewish people not to raise their eyes to such parts of the sky and the constellations visible there. The “seeing” the Torah speaks of is not with the physical eye but with the mental eye, i.e. the conclusions derived from this “seeing.” This is why G’d told Avraham in Genesis 15,5: הבט נא השמימה וספור הכוכבים, “take a look at the sky and count the stars, etc.” He took him to a place from which he could look down at the stars (Bereshit Rabbah 44,12).
   וראית את השמש ואת הירח, “and you will see the sun and the stars.”  The words ואת הכוכבים do not refer to the multitude of the stars in the sky but to the 7 basic planets (pre-Copernicus astronomy) The word כוכבים (pl) means the minimum plural i.e. 2; the letter ה at the beginning adds another 5, making a total of 7 stars or planets. Add the words צבא השמים, and you have the 12 zodiac signs, the horoscopes. The word כל includes the ministering angels. The reason the Torah adds the words ונדחת before writing והשתחוית להם, “you will bow down to them,” is to remind us that anyone doing that will automatically be נדחה, cast out,  much as one casts out a person from a certain location so that he falls and dies.
   אשר חלק ה’ אלו-היך אותם לכל העמים תחת כל השמים, “which the Lord your G’d allocated to all the peoples under the whole sky.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word חלק means: “He gave it to them as their share.” [They have the choice of serving the Lord directly or by means of these astrological manifestations] The word is not to be understood to mean that these people have been “assigned” these phenomena in the sky. If the latter meaning were correct then these people would have an ironclad argument accusing G’d of preventing them from wor-shipping Him directly or indirectly, seeing He had made their fates dependent on the correlation of these stars to one another. Idolatry would then have been decreed upon them. Seeing that the word חלק lends itself to misunderstandings, the seventy sages who had been assigned by King Talmai to translate the Torah into Greek, were forced to translate this as “which the Lord allocated to  them to provide light for them” (Megillah 9).
    A Midrashic approach: the word חלק is connected to the word חלקות, something smooth, slippery. G’d flattered the nations with words in order to eventually drive them out of the world (Pessikta Zutrata ). Our sages had interpreted the words משגיא לגוים ויאבדם in Job 12,23 as meaning precisely this (according to Shemot Rabbah 15,11). They suggested that the letter sin  in the word משגיא in that verse be read as a shin to mean “mislead,” instead of  “exalts”. [the end-effect of the verse, i.e. that G’d destroys the Gentiles is the same; the difference is only the immediate cause. Ed.]
    We have a similar statement by the sages in Avodah Zarah 55: Rabba bar Yitzchak said to Rabbi Yuda: “there is an idol in our town, and whenever there is a drought with us it appears to a priest in a dream and says: ‘sacrifice a human being to me and you shall have rain.’ When the people of the town offer a human being as a sacrifice to this idol it really does begin to rain.” Rabbi Yuda commented: ‘if I had already died I would not have been able to explain the matter to you.’ Rav explained  the words of the verse אשר חלק ה’ אלו-היך אותם לכל העמים, to mean that G’d misled these idol-worshippers (who had already forfeited their claim to the hereafter) by letting them think that their idols had some power. By making them fall victim to that illusion He expedited their disappearance from this world. This is also what Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish meant when he explained Proverbs 3,34, אם ללצים הוא יליץ, “at the scoffers He scoffs.” The principle by which G’d operates in this world is that if someone wants to do the right thing he enjoys heavenly assistance. If he insists on doing the wrong thing, (seeing he possesses free choice) one lets him be without interfering. As a result, i.e. of G’d “playing along,” these idolaters dig their own grave.” G’d does not actively “help” them to dig their grave, He just does not restrain them from doing what they set out to do.
    
    4,23. ועשיתם לכם פסל תמונת כל אשר צוך ה’ אלו-היך, “and you make yourselves a carved image, a likeness of anything, concerning which the Lord your G’d has commanded.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word “image of anything the Lord your G’d has commanded you,” is a warning not to make such images. Alternatively, it may be a warning not to duplicate the cherubic figures which were part of the kapporet on the lid of the Holy Ark. They were a cast likeness. This was something unique, permitted only in the Temple (where it was placed in a pitch dark section, the Holy of Holies, a cubicle without lighting or windows, so that no one, including the High Priest, ever could see it).
    A kabbalistic approach: the words ה’ אלו-היך are a description of the attribute כבוד, i.e. כבוד ה’ כאש האוכלת בראש ההר, “the attribute of glory which manifests itself like fire consuming the mountain” (Exodus 24,17). This was the attribute against which Moses had sinned, and this is why the Torah wrote in verse 21 “and against me the Lord was angry on account of your words forbidding me to come into the land.” The verse is a warning of the awesome attribute of Justice when it manifests itself in that manner. Moses warns the people that they themselves had seen this attribute at work on the occasion of the revelation at Mount Sinai.
    The reason that Moses adds once more that G’d is a jealous G’d, adding the word הוא, is because הוא is one of the names of G’d. Moses wants to point out that seeing that G’d’s essence remains forever invisible to man, the word הוא, even when used as a name for G’d, simply means that it is a pronoun, substituting for His essence which is never manifest to us. The prophet Elijah was taught this lesson when he was at Mount Chorev and experienced a number of divine manifestations. G’d explained to him that when he thought a particular manifestation, even אש, fire, represented G’d’s essence he had been wrong (compare Kings I 19,11). Certain manifestations of an attribute have only one objective, i.e. to demonstrate that G’d is a jealous G’d, has an attribute called “jealousy.”
    
    4,25. כי תוליד בנים ובני בנים, “When you will beget children and grandchildren, etc.” The reason this paragraph adjoins the passage warning the Israelites against becoming guilty of idolatry is because Moses foresaw that in the future the Jewish people would become guilty doing precisely this on holy soil in the land of Israel. Proof that this paragraph is a prediction, not a mere theoretical discussion of what might happen, is that the paragraph does not commence with the conditional word אם תוליד,” if you will beget,” but Moses says כי תוליד, “when you will beget, etc.” Seeing that it is the prophet’s task to rebuke his people, and at this time Moses was the prophet, it was up to him to react to what he foresaw in his prophetic vision.
   
   ונושנתם בארץ, “and you are long established in the land;” our sages in Gittin 55 find in these words an allusion to the length of time the Israelites would enjoy independence in the land. The numerical value of the letters in the word ונושנתם is 852. Solomon’s Temple was completed 480 years after the Exodus as we know from Kings I 6,1. The Temple stood for 410 years before it was destroyed by Nevuchadnezzar King of Babylon. This gives you  a total of 850 years after deducting the 40 years the Jewish people were in the desert before they gained their own land. The reason that G’d allowed the Temple to be destroyed 2 years prior to the time allotted to it was to ensure that the decree of absolute destruction [no rebuilding] would not have to be kept, seeing that the people had not been allowed to enjoy the full number of years allotted to their independence. We read in our verse the words כי אבד תאבדון מהר, which mean “you will perish utterly and quickly.” G’d in His mercy, accelerated the destruction of the Temple so that He would not be bound by this prediction. We find an allusion to this in Daniel 9,14: “Hashem hastened the calamity and brought it upon us, for Hashem is righteous in all His deeds which He has done.” Daniel means that the very premature destruction of the Temple was an act of righteousness enabling the Temple to be rebuilt 70 years later.
    
    4,26. העידותי בכם היום את השמים ואת הארץ, “I have called as witnesses against you this day heaven and earth, etc.”  Ibn Ezra quotes an opinion according to which Moses meant the angels and people on earth when he said that he called heaven and earth as witness.  It is also possible that the reference was to rain. Moses meant that if the people kept the covenant rain would be forthcoming, whereas if not the heavens would be like iron, i.e. the behaviour of heaven would reflect whether the Israelites kept the commandments of the Torah. Similarly, seeing that the Torah had also stated that if the people did not keep the Torah that the earth would be like copper, whereas otherwise it would yield its produce, this too could account for Moses mentioning heaven and earth as witness. (compare Leviticus 26,19) Ibn Ezra understands the fact that Moses appointed heaven and earth as witness to Israel’s performance of the Torah’s commandments as due to no one else being able to watch such developments around the clock. Any other kinds of witnesses would have to take time off their duties as witnesses. This is not the only time inert objects have been cited as witness; compare Joshua 24,27: “and this stone (monument) shall be as a witness for us.”
    
    4,28. ועבדתם שם אלוהים מעשה ידי אדם, “and there you will serve (worship) a god which is the work of man.” This is not a prophecy that the Israelites when in exile in host countries will themselves worship idols, G’d forbid. The meaning is that once you have been exiled you will become slaves to people worshipping idols, so that indirectly you will be serving such idols (Onkelos).
   אשר לא יראון ולא ישמעון ולא יאכלון ולא יריחון, “deities which are neither able to see, to hear, to eat or to smell.” In this verse Moses mentions only four of the basic five senses of man, omitting to mention the sense of touch. There was no need to mention that sense separately as it is included in the statement “who cannot eat.” There was no need to mention more than one of the two senses that serve as tools of perceptions by the body. The three senses, sight, hearing, and smelling are considered mental, spiritual senses and this is why we often find them associated with G’d. Examples are: “The Lord saw” (Genesis 6,5 and many others) “G’d heard” (Numbers 11,1 and others). “The Lord smelled” (Genesis 8,21). When David describes the impotence of the idols in Psalms 115,7, he had to mention that the idols’ hands are unable to use the sense of touch, ידיהם ולא ימישון, seeing he had not mentioned the inability of the idols to eat.
    From this paragraph we can learn something about the importance of the five senses which are the principal tools man employs in all his activities. They are needed to fulfill the commandments of the Torah, and, inversely, they enable man to commit trespasses against the Torah. Man’s reward or punishment is due to the manner in which he employs these five senses. The reason that G’d provided man with five such senses is  that they correspond to the five Books of the Torah. They also correspond to the five occasions on which “light” is mentioned in the story of creation. They also correspond to the five names by which the soul is known. They represent the complement of the body, making it the residence of the soul. The soul displays its activities by means of these five senses This is why the Torah/Bible condemns idolatry by pointing out that these idols cannot use any of their senses. Any image, cast or otherwise, which is devoid of the means of experiencing the sensations we experience by means of our senses is a priori incapable of helping anyone. How can idolaters say to their deities in times of stress: “arise and save us!” These idols are unable to rise, much less save (compare Jeremiah 2,27).
    The infinite wisdom of the Creator made five different parts of the body the seat of these five senses and made them gateways to the spiritual, abstract soul. Even our “scientists” admit that the manner in which these senses have been “planted” in man is phenomenal and reflects the wisdom of the Creator. The sense of touch extends throughout the body of man, any part of man’s exterior feels, tingles, hurts, when coming into contact with other phenomena. The sense of smell extends beyond the boundary of our skin, outwards. We can perceive by means of it matters which are relatively distant. The sense of hearing covers a wider area than the sense of smell, enabling us to perceive things even further distant. The sense of sight enables us to perceive matters far further removed from us than most of the phenomena we can perceive by the sense of hearing. It is the sense which we need most of all.
    
    4,29. ומצאת, “and you will find.” Seeing that the previous verses addressed the people en masse, as a plural, we would have expected Moses to write this verse also in the plural instead of switching to the singular, “you (individually) will find.” Had Moses continued in the plural the impression would have been created that the needs of the Jewish people of which he speaks are due only to the fact that they are in exile. It would have sounded as if G’d responds only to communal prayer, communal requests and not to that of the individual. There would have been a precedent for this seeing our sages in Berachot 8 have said that G’d does not despise communal prayer, i.e. that the prayer of a congregation is more effective than that of a mere individual. The Talmud there quotes Job 36,5: “Surely He is mighty, is not contemptuous,” as the source of its message. 
    For these reasons Moses made a point of telling us that G’d does respond to individuals who seek Him out.
    4,32. כי שאל נא לימים ראשונים, “if you inquire into the first days of history,” Moses rationalises why G’d is unforgiving concerning the sin of idolatry if committed by the Israelites, seeing His relationship with the Jewish people is of a unique nature. He invites the people to research the annals of history as they will find that never since the creation of man has there ever been a people who had such close relations with its G’d. You will not find that G’d revealed Himself to any nation as He did to the Jewish people at Mount Sinai.
    A rational approach to these lines: every nation is obligated to serve its Creator but not in the same degree as the Israelites. G’d has extended Himself on behalf of the Jewish people as He has not done for any other nation. The Jewish people are the only ones who have an intimate knowledge of G’d as “Hashem.” Idolaters are not even allowed to praise G’d using that attribute as we know from David in Psalms 145,21 תהלת ה’ ידבר פי, ויברך כל בשר שם קדשו לעולם ועד ואנחנו נברך י-ה, “the praise of the Lord my mouth will proclaim, but all flesh will bless His holy name forever.” The psalmist distinguishes between how Israel and the rest of the nations relate to the Lord even while praising Him. The reason that at the end of that verse the Jewish people say ואנחנו נברך י-ה, “let us bless the attribute י-ה instead of the full tetragram, is that these two letters describe the terrestrial world which was created with the letter ה, and the celestial regions which were created with the letter י of the tetragram. Seeing that the psalmist says מעתה ועד עולם הללויה, “from now (on terrestrial earth) until forever (in the hereafter and the perfect world to come),” the letters י-ה were quite appropriate in this psalm.
   למן היום אשר ברא אלו-הים אדם על הארץ, “starting from the day G’d created man on earth;” at that point the doors of inquiry were slammed shut. We are not allowed to investigate what G’d did prior to creating man (Chagigah 11). Our sages phrased it thus: “investigation of what preceded the creation of man, what will occur after the earth as we know it ceases to function is prohibited.” Neither are we allowed to know what is “above” and “below” the visible universe. Even though the Torah preceded the creation of our visible universe the terms of reference for our investigation begin only with the creation of man.
   הנשמע כמוהו, “has anything like it ever been heard of?” These words belong to what follows, i.e. השמע עם, “has any nation heard?” In other words: “has it ever been heard that a nation as a whole hears the voice of G’d speaking out of the fire, etc., as you have done and remained alive?” Normally, man is not capable of hearing the voice of G’d until after his soul has departed from his body.
    Another meaning of the word ויחי, could be that such a people remains alive after death of their bodies as did the Jewish people? This would be a reference to the Midrash in Shabbat 88 that upon hearing the first of the Ten Commandments from G’d directly, the souls of the Jewish people flew off and the people had to be resurrected. The Talmud bases this on Song of Songs 5,6: “my soul departed when He spoke.” G’d resurrected the people by making dew descend upon them. As a result of this experience the Israelites turned to Moses and said to him: “if we have to continue to listen to the voice of the Lord our G’d any further we will die” (5,22). The word used by the people in that verse, i.e. ומתנו instead of נמות, suggests that they had already died once. They were afraid that they would have to experience this a second time. This proves that the first time there was a collective resurrection during the giving of the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai. The second time something similar occurred was when Joshua requested for the sun to stand still in its orbit (Joshua 10,12). Compare DevarIm Rabbah on this (Lieberman edition page 43). I have referred to this in my commentary on Exodus 19,17
    .
    4,34. או הנסה אלו-הים לבא לקחת לו גוי מקרב גוי במסות, Or, did G’d ever attempt to remove one nation from the midst of a nation with displays of power, etc.” the word מסות is the same as נסיונות, “display of power,” such as when Moses offered Pharaoh that he could determine when he wanted the plague of frogs to disappear (Exodus 8,5). באותות, “with miracles,” i.e.  certain signs on Moses’ staff. ובמופתים, “and with wonders.” This is a reference to the Ten Plagues. ובמלחמה, and with war, i.e. G’d fighting the Egyptian army at the Sea of Reeds. We read there that Pharaoh said: “for the Lord is fighting against Egypt” (Exodus 14,25). וביד חזקה, “and with a strong hand.” This is a reference to the Israelites leaving Egypt ביד רמה, with their hands held high.” ובזרוע נטויה, “and with an outstretched arm.” This is a reference to the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire in which G’d manifested Himself during the Exodus. ובמוראים גדולים, “and with awesome deeds.” This is a reference to the splitting of the Sea and the drowning of the Egyptians in it. במצרים לעיניך, “in Egypt before your eyes.” The word לעיניך is a figure of speech which occurs frequently after the Torah had first spoken in the plural and then suddenly reverts to the singular, i.e. the eyes of an individual instead of the eyes of the people collectively. A well known example of such a construction is found in Leviticus 19,9 where the Torah writes ובקצרכם את קציר ארצכם לא תכלה, “when you (collectively) will harvest the grain harvest of your lands, you (individual) must not completely cut, etc.”
    It is possible that Torah here wanted that our verse commenced with the letter א and concludes with the letter כ, seeing that the combined numerical value of the these letters is the same as the name of G’d אהיה, i.e. 21. It was this name with which Moses’ mission to the Jewish people commenced (Exodus 3,14) a form of the attribute of Justice contained within the attribute of Mercy. Seeing that the whole purpose of the Exodus was the acceptance by the Jewish people of the Torah at Mount Sinai, it is fitting that Moses continues after mentioning the degree to which G’d extended Himself to orchestrate the Exodus, אתה הראת לדעת, “you have been given visual knowledge that the Lord is the G’d, etc.,” a reference to the unforgettable experiences at Mount Sinai. In verse 36, מן השמים וגו’, you find all the letters of the aleph bet, just as in the Ten Commandments you also find all the letters of the aleph bet. The Ten Commandments also commence with the letter א and conclude with the letter כ, just as does our verse here.
    
    4,35. אתה הראת לדעת, “You have witnessed a clear demonstration, etc.” All the miracles you have witnessed are equivalent to your having first-hand knowledge of the greatness of the Lord and that there is none beside Him. Verse 39, והשבות אל לבבך makes the same point once more by asking the people to also open their mental eyes and draw the proper conclusions from what they had observed with their physical eyes. Incidentally, you will not find anywhere that when both attributes of G’d appear successively that they occur in any other sequence than Hashem Elohim. We never find the sequence  Ha-elohim Hashem. The two names when used successively sometimes refer to the manifest miracle on the one hand, and the “hidden” miracles, i.e. G’d’s interference in history which is not visible to our physical eyes.
    
    4,36. מן השמים השמיעך את קולו, “He let you hear His voice from the heavens.” The verse means that G’d’s voice emanated from heaven in order to be heard by you, but you did not hear any sound until G’d’s voice had reached the fire so that you appeared to hear His voice as coming out of the fire. If this were not the correct meaning of the verse, how could Moses first say: “you have heard the voice of G’d from the heavens,” and only afterwards: “you herad His words out of the fire?”
    
    4,37. ותחת כי אהב את אבותיך, “and on account of His having loved your patriarchs, etc.,” i.e. He allowed you to hear His voice because He loved your forefathers.
   ויבחר בזרעו אחריו, “and He chose “his seed” after him. Clearly the subject is Yaakov, the third of the patriarchs. This is why the Torah says: “his seed” instead of “their seed.” Had the Torah used the plural “their seed,” both Esau and Ishmael would heve been included in the “chosen people.” This is also the reason why the Torah wrote in Parshat Eykev, 10,15: “but the Lord your G’d was fond of your forefathers (pl) to love them, and He chose (of) their seed after them you from amongst all the nations, etc.” Seeing the Torah had written בזרעם “their seed,” which could have been interpreted as “all their seed, i.e. including Esau, etc.,” the Torah had to conclude that verse by saying “בכם” you, meaning “only you of all their seed.”
    Instead of using the preposition תחת, the Torah could have written more commonly used prepositions such as בעבור or למען. The reason the Torah chose the word תחת, a word which occurs on only two more occasions, once in connection with the מרכבה, the Divine “carriage,” may be an allusion to the מרכבה  which is supposed to be supported on terrestrial earth by the patriarchs and the Jewish people as a whole.
   ויוצאיך בפניו, “He took you out before Himself, etc.;” according to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is “G’d took you out Himself, personally.” The word is used in the same sense in Samuel II 17,11 ופניך הולכים בקרב, “and you yourself march into battle.” 
    A Midrashic approach based on Ibn Ezra: “the word represents “anger, כעס;” the word occurs in that sense in Exodus 33,14. “My face will go.” Also we find that expression in Samuel I 1,18 ופניה לא היו לה עוד, “she was no longer angry.” The reason for the use of this word here is that Moses tells the people that a major factor of the Exodus was G’d’s anger at the Egyptians.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word בפניו in the expression ויוציאך בפניו refers to the angel who was assigned to supervise all this. The angel is known as מלאך הפנים. He is featured in Isaiah 63,9 ומלאך פניו הושיעם, Our verse also refers to the contribution made by the patriarchs to the Exodus. The word בפניו reminds us of מבקשי פניך יעקב סלה (Psalms 24,6) “Yaakov who seeks Your presence.” The word בכוחו refers to Yitzchak whose primary attribute was גבורה, “Power.” The word הגדול is an allusion to Avraham. The reason Moses mentioned (alluded to) Yaakov first is that he formed the third link in the string of patriarchs, and once there was such a third link the principles the patriarchs stood for could be perceived as certain to endure. This is also why at the end of the Tochachah the Torah quotes G’d as remembering first His covenant with Yaakov and only afterwards His covenants with Avraham and Yitzchak (Leviticus 26,42).
    
    4,39. והשבות אל לבבך, “you will impress it upon your heart,” i.e. to know the Lord and to research the fact that He is unique, one of a kind. It is not enough to accept this merely as “something handed down by our forefathers,” but it must become something that is the result of our examining the plentiful evidence in our world which makes this quite clear. Knowledge of G’d by means of the deeds He has performed is absolutely possible even though knowledge of G’d’s essence is beyond our ability to comprehend. Concerning this latter knowledge (or attempt at knowing) Solomon said in Proverbs 25,2: “it is the glory of G’d to conceal a matter.” Seeing that acquiring this kind of knowledge about G’d cannot commence, as do other disciplines, with one’s seeing the object of one’s research and thereby trying to assess its constituent parts, the Torah used the term והשבות, something describing an end result, when discussing our study of theology-related subjects.
    We find that the prophet Elijah, after having experienced several manifestations of G’d’s attributes, discovered (with the help of G’d) that he had been wrong when at the first such manifestation he had thought that he had “seen” or “experienced” the essence of G’d (Kings I 19,11-12). We have been warned in the Sefer Yetzirah  (1,8) בלום פיך מלדבר ולבך מלהרר, “restrain your mouth from speaking and your heart from even contemplating.”
    Moses uses the word לבבך for “your heart” in our verse whereas the author of the Sefer Yetzirah uses the word לבך. Moses refers to two contradictory urges which each try to dominate our heart. One is called “the good urge,” (urge to do good) the other “the evil urge.” Moses urges us that if perchance the “evil urge” tries to make us deviate from the true path of Torah, suggesting hat there are at least two domains in the universe which compete with one another for supremacy, we are to use the “good urge” to resist such temptations and to tell the evil urge that there is only one domain. This is also why the verse ends with the words אין עוד, “there is no one else.”
    The expression השבת הלב, means that the subject matter is one that requires intensive study and considerable knowledge before one embarks on examining it. Isaiah 44,18 referred to people who  fail to come properly equipped for such research when he said: “they have no wit or judgment, their eyes are besmeared, and they see not.” The lesson that Moses wants us to appreciate is that  the Lord is also the G’d of nature, the captain of the universe; the word בשמים refers to the planets; the word ממעל refers to the celestial spheres, the habitat of the angels, the words על הארץ refer to our terrestrial earth; the word מתחת, refers to all that is hidden in the depths of the oceans or the bowels of the earth. All of this is summarised by Solomon when he says in Proverbs 25,3: “like the heavens in their height, like the earth in its depth.” The word אין עוד includes all the various layers of the universe, i.e. there are none which Moses had not already included  in our verse.
    
    4,41. אז יבדיל משה שלש ערים בעבר הירדן, “at that time Moses set aside three cities on the east bank of the Jordan.” This introduction is to inform us that when Moses set aside these three cities on the east bank of the Jordan he immediately proceeded  to renew the covenant G’d had concluded with the previous generation at Mount Sinai (chapter 5 which follows). Even though Moses was well aware that these three cities would not become operational as cities of refuge until the other three cities of refuge on the west bank of the Jordan had been set aside, he wanted to fulfill  at least half the commandment while he was still alive. This should serve as an important lesson to us how to relate to the commandments in general. There certainly could hardly have been anyone who had performed more commandments during the previous 40 years since the Torah was given than Moses, who had taught all these commandments to the people. If he was so concerned as not to leave even a half a commandment unfulfilled this should be our inspiration to emulate him. 
    Perhaps this gives us a better insight into the true meaning of a comment by our sages according to which Moses became personally wealthy from the chips of the second set of Tablets which he had been told to fashion himself before coming up the mountain. The sages use the wordsפסל לך , “carve out for yourself” as meaning that the left-overs of this raw material became Moses’ personal property and that we are speaking about a very precious kind of stone. (compare Exodus 34,1 and the comment in Nedarim 38). A more ethically inspiring approach would be that G’d chose the word פסל, an allusion to פסולת, rejects, left-overs, to teach that even seemingly inconsequential commandments are to be rated highly. The true measure of Torah and mitzvah-performance is not the attention we give the impressive commandments, the ones which command a high degree of visibility but the loving attention which we lavish on the apparently minor commandments, the ones frequently neglected as the person who performs them does not reap any recognition for them from his peers.
   מזרחה שמש,  “toward the rising sun.” Our sages have said that anyone who kills a person has to flee eastward in the direction of the rising sun. Mortality was decreed upon man who was placed by G’d in Gan Eden which the Torah had described as east, i.e. מקדם. Exile is a reminder of this tragic first (disobedience) error committed by man. We also know that Kayin, who had slain his brother Hevel, was exiled in an easterly direction as he is reported subsequently to have settled in the land of Nod, east of Eden (Genesis 4,16).
    
    4,43. את בצר במדבר, “the city Bezer in the desert;” In the next verse the Torah continues with the words וזאת התורה. It seems difficult to account for this sequence of subject matter. Our sages in Makkot 10 used this sequence to teach us that the words of Torah are equivalent to the refuge offered by the cities of refuge. They may even afford refuge from the angel of Death himself. The Talmud reports that the angel of Death wanted to take Rav Chisdah but he was so immersed in his studies hat he had no opportunity to snatch his soul until a diversion was created by a heavy beam in the academy falling down. The sound momentarily distracted Rav Chisdah so that the angel of Death could snatch his soul. Similar stories are told about David.
    Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said that the protective angel of the Roman Empire (Edom) will make three errors in the future. He bases this on Isaiah 63,1: ”Who is this coming from Edom, in crimson garments from Bozrah- who is this  majestic in attire?” The angel believes that Bozrah was also a city of refuge whereas only Bezer is such a city. Another error the angel of Edom will make is  that he thinks that these cities serve as refuge for both intentional and unintentional killers, whereas they only afford protection for unintentional killers. Thirdly, he thinks these cities protect angels and humans alike. The fact is that they only protect human killers, not angels.
   בארץ המישור לראובני, “in the land of the plain of the tribe of Reuven.” The reason this is mentioned first is that Reuven had tried to save the life of Joseph at the time when he prevailed on his brothers not to kill him (Genesis 36,21-22). This is why the first city of refuge was situated in Reuven’s part of the east bank. This is the meaning of Proverbs 28,17: “a man oppressed by blood guilt will flee to a pit, let none give him support.” The “pit” mentioned in that verse is a reference to the territory of Reuven of whom the Torah writes in Genesis 37,29: “Reuven returned to the pit.”
    4,44.וזאת התורה אשר שם משה , “And this is the Torah which Moses placed before the Children of Israel.” This is a reference to The Ten Commandments  which follow in chapter 5
    A Midrashic approach (Devarim Rabbah, Lieberman edition page 62 )  the letter ו in the word וזאת teaches that in addition to the cities of refuge providing safety for unintentional killers, the Torah does also. In fact Torah study and observance is even more effective than the city of refuge. The cities of refuge accept only unintentional killers, whereas Torah study and performance is freely available even to intentional killers. When the Children of Israel asked Moses where an unintentional killer can flee to when the cities of refuge would cease to exist for one reason or another, he told them: “to the Torah.” This is why it says here immediately after the passage of the cities of refuge: “and this is the Torah.” This thought is reinforced by Proverbs 3,18: “she (the Torah) is a tree of life for those who support it and support themselves by it.”
    
    5,1. ויקרא משה אל כל ישראל, “Moses called all of Israel;” this refers to the children i.e. the generation which had not heard the Ten Commandments first hand at Mount Sinai. This is why in verse three Moses makes the point that the covenant made between G’d and the people at the time did not only include the generation which was an eye-witness to the revelation but that it included all the subsequent generations of Jews throughout the ages.
    
    5,3. כי אתנו אנחנו אלה פה היום כלנו, “but with us we who are here all of us alive today.” Moses‘ point is that “the covenant was concluded with us.” Seeing that there were some survivors from the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai, Moses added: “G’d spoke with you face to face, etc.” In verse 5 Moses recalls to the survivors of that time that at that time they (their elders) had asked him to be the go-between between themselves and G’d as they felt unable to endure the voice of G’d directly any longer.
    
    5,4. פנים בפנים דבר ה’ עמכם, “the Lord spoke with you face to face.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is that there was no intermediary between G’d’s voice and the people’s ears.
    According to a Midrashic approach (Shemot Rabbah 29,2) G’d told the people that the fact that they had experienced a variety of manifestations of Him must not mislead them. The fact is  that sometimes G’d appeared to them in the guise of a young man, a warrior (Exodus 15,3), and other times as an old man (Hoseah 12,11), a sage, sometimes they perceived Him as seated, whereas other times as standing up. At Mount Sinai they perceived Him as an old man seated, dispensing the Torah. The words פנים בפנים then mean: ”I have spoken to you revealing many different facets of Myself.”
    A kabbalistic approach: compare author’s comment on Exodus 33,11
    5,5. אנכי עומד בין ה’ וביניכם, “I was standing between Hashem and between you.” According to Ibn Ezra this verse speaks about Moses being an intermediary between the Israelites and G’d ever since the revelation at Mount Sinai. However, the correct meaning is that described by Nachmanides, that Moses reverted to describe what happened during that revelation when Moses was speaking to the Israelites translating G’d’s words to them, i.e. making what they had heard intelligible to them. The Israelites had both heard and understood the first two of the Ten Commandments. They heard G’d’s voice saying the remainder but did not understand the words and their meanings. This is the meaning of להגיד לכם את דבר ה’, “to tell you the word of Hashem, i.e. the ones you did not understand.” You had become afraid of the fire and you had not ascended the mountain.
    
    5,12.שמור את יום השבת לקדשו , “safeguard the Sabbath day to keep it holy.” In the first recorded version of the Ten  Commandments, this commandment was introduced with the word זכור “to remember.” The reason for the variation is to obligate women to listen to kiddush and havdalah. Women are traditionally not obligated to observe positive commandments the performance of which is tied to a certain time frame. If the Torah had not written the word שמור here, the laws about a formal sanctification of the Sabbath, kiddush, and a formal termination of the holiness of the Sabbath, havdalah, would not have been applicable to women. By writing a formula applicable to negative commandments, i.e. שמור, in this version, the Torah made it plain that women are included in these aspects of Sabbath obser-vance. The technical halachic means of arriving at this is termed: “every person who is obligated to fulfill the שמור aspect of the Sabbath legislation is automatically also obligated to observe the זכור aspect, seeing the Torah once employs the one term and once the other.” (Berachot 20,2). This statement effectively covers the Sabbath from its commencement to its termination. Our sages committed this principle to memory by coining the phrase זכור ושמור בדבור אחד נאמרו, “the words זכור and שמור were said as a single utterance” (Shvuot 20).
    A kabbalistic approach to the concept of בדבור אחד נאמרו: We explained that normally G’d’s legislation appears under the heading of Hashem, i.e. the attribute of Mercy being predominant. In the Book of Deuteronomy, this norm is reversed and Moses almost always speaks of ה’ אלו-היך, “the Lord your G’d,” i.e. a blend (of equal proportions) of the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. According to accepted norms the first set of the Ten Commandments should have been introduced by Hashem whereas in fact the first set of the Commandments is introduced by the uncharacteristic וידבר אלו-הים, “G’d spoke” (Exodus 20,1).
    
    G’d had employed only the attribute of Justice when He began to create the universe. When it came to creating man who was subject to His commandments G’d co-opted the attribute of Mercy in His creation as we explained in our commentary on Genesis 2,4 ב-הבראם. The letter ה alludes to this attribute of  Hashem. We have explained that the universe was created by G’d employing 5 sounds. The universe was created in 6 days. The Torah was given on the 6th day of Sivan, and  you find the name אלו-הים 32 times in the course of the Torah’s report of the creation. The revelation comprises 10 commandments [10 commandments plus 5 sounds plus five Books of the Torah, plus  six days plus the 6th of Sivan add up to 32. Ed.] The Torah commences with the letter ב, concluding with the letter ל, another allusion to the 32 paths of wisdom of the Torah. All of these allusions are reminders of Who created the universe and Who gave us the Torah.
   כאשר צוך ה’ אלו-היך, “as the Lord your G’d commanded you;” at the revelation at Mount Sinai at which time the Torah commenced with וידבר אלו-הים, to remind us that the Creator spoke those words.
    
    5,14. למען ינוח עבדך ואמתך כמוך, “so that your male servant as well as our female servant may enjoy rest just like you.” The Torah here gave a reason for the work-prohibition on the Sabbath by your servants, i.e. that the Sabbath was not legislated to give the slaves a rest, but the rest enjoyed by the slaves is merely a by-product of their owners’ rest. In other words, seeing that G’d has had pity on you and instead of your having to serve Him for 7 days a week (the curse of earning one’s livelihood in the sweat of our brow) we in turn should display the same kind of consideration for our own servants and not assign them tasks on the days when we rest.
    5,15. וזכרת כי עבד היית במצרים, “you shall remember (on the Sabbath) that you used to be a slave in Egypt, etc.” just like the slaves that you own now. 
   ויוציאך ה’ אלו-היך, “and the Lord your G’d took you out;” with manifest miracles which attested that something like a rebirth of the universe had taken place, i.e. that it was your G’d who must have created the universe in the first place.
   על כן, “this is why;” He commanded you to observe the Sabbath day as reminder that G’d created the universe and it did not precede Him as proven by His orchestrating the Exodus.
    
    5,16. כבד את אביך, “honour your father.” In this version of the fifth commandment, Moses (the Torah) added the words למען ייטב לך, “so that it will be good for you,” i.e. that the person fulfilling this commandment will enjoy a quality of life on earth. This is an example of reaping the dividends of the reward for a mitzvah-performance in this life, whereas the principal is stored up in the hereafter. The author explained the significance of the letter ט which introduces טוב the first time it appeared in the Torah, in connection with his commentary at the end of Exodus 20,14. Similarly, you will find explanations about the letter ו which links several commandments to each other in this version whereas this letter is absent in his discussion of the first version in Exodus. 
    
    5,18. ולא תתאוה בית רעיך, “and do not covet the house of your fellow.” In the first version of the Ten Commandments the Torah described this coveting of one’s fellow’s house with the verb לא תחמוד. The difference is whether one is planning to pay for it or wants it even without contemplating paying for it i.e. not planning to translate his craving into action. Here Moses reminds us that even the mere thought of wanting it makes one liable for violating this commandment. The reason is that ultimately the desire to own what belongs to someone else (who has not offered it for sale) will lead to one offering money and pressuring the owner to part with it (compare Maimonides Hilchot Gezeylah 1,9)
    
    5,19. קול גדול ולא יסף, “a powerful voice not weakening;” the sound did not stop, did not exhaust itself. This is also how Onkelos understands the words ולא יסף. If you peruse the whole paragraph you will find the word קול “sound, voice,” occurring seven times. It occurs five times as referring to G’d’s voice (verses 19,20,21,22,23 and twice in verse 25 as the voice of the Israelites.) This is what the sages in Shemot Rabbah 28,4 meant when they said that the Torah was given with seven “voices,” i.e. that one voice was split into seven sounds. We have mentioned this already near he end of our commentary on Exodus 20,1.
    
    5,21. הן הראנו ה’ אלו-הינו את כבודו, “here the Lord our G’d has shown us His (attribute) כבוד.” This is a reference to the fire the people experienced at Mount Sinai which was totally aflame.
   ואת גדלו, “and His greatness;” this is a reference to the thunder and lightning which accompanied the giving of the Ten Commandments,
   ואת קולו שמענו, “and we have heard His voice;” a reference to the Ten Commandments.”
    
    5,23. כי מי כל בשר אשר שמע קול אלו-הים חיים...ויחי, “for whatever creature of flesh and blood has heard the voice of the Living G’d .....and remained alive?” The meaning of the words “the living G’d” is: “the G’d who is the source of all life.” [how could the Torah speak about a “dead” G’d? Ed.] According to the author, if the Torah had not added the word חיים I would have interpreted the word אלו-הים to be a reference to an angel. According to Ibn Ezra the word was meant to distinguish between Hashem,  and His army, His entourage, even the stars.
    
    5,24. ואת תדבר אלינו, “and you will speak to us.” The meaning of the feminine את for of אתה here is similar to the same word in Numbers 11,15 ואם ככה את עושה לי, where Moses even applied this feminine form of “you” to G’d.
    A kabbalistic approach: The people wanted to be addressed by the attribute of Justice rather than by the attribute Hashem. Hence the weaker form of אתה.
   את כל אשר ידבר ה’ אלו-הינו אליך “everything the Lord our G’d will say to you.” seeing that the Speaker is Hashem.
   ושמענו ועשינו, “as soon as we hear it we will carry it out.” They meant that as soon as they would hear it from Moses they would carry out G’d’s instructions.
    5,26. מי יתן והיה לבבם זה להם ליראה אותי, “who can assure that their heart should remain the same for them  to revere Me, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text  the reason that Moses quoted G’d as using the words מי יתן, “who could assure?” is that seeing that G’d had divested Himself of the right to control man’s heart by granting him free will, there is no authority in the world which could guarantee that His wish be fulfilled. This is why our sages in Berachot 33 coined the phrase “all is within the power of heaven except the fear of heaven.”
    A Midrashic approach (based on Midrash Tehillim 14) We must understand these words in the same vein as Psalms 14,7: מי יתן מציון ישועת ישראל, “O that the deliverance of Israel might come from Zion!” David records this same verse twice in the Book of Psalms (compare Psalms 53,7). Why did he do so? The verses have to be understood as respective wishes by teacher and student. The teacher expresses the wish that the students would remain on their spiritual high as evidenced at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai, whereas the student (Moses) expresses a similar wish regarding the teacher, i.e. מי יתן כל עם ה’ נביאים, “who could assure that G’d’s entire nation were gifted with the power of prophecy!” (Numbers 11,29 when Eldad prophesied and Joshua was upset) [the Midrash leaves open whether the “teacher” is G’d and the “student” is Moses, or whether the teacher referred to in the psalm is Moses and the student is David. Ed.] The fact is that in this terrestrial world there is no assurance that either the wish of the “teacher” or the wish of the “student” will be fulfilled. In fact, according to the Midrash it is certain that the wishes of both will not be fulfilled. However, in the life after the arrival of the Messiah the psalmist is convinced that such wishes will be fulfilled. He bases himself on Ezekiel 36,26 who describes the ushering in of that age with G’d’s promise to replace the heart of stone with a heart of flesh. This will result in the wishes of the teacher regarding the conduct of his pupil being fulfilled. He also finds an allusion to the wishes of the pupil being fulfilled in that new world in the prophecy of Yoel 3,1: “l will pour out My spirit upon all flesh.” The reason David repeated this verse then is to teach us that the time will come when both these types of wishes will become realistic and subject to realisation.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words מי יתן והיה לבבם זה, “these words were uttered by Hashem, meaning who would “inspire” the emanation of wisdom, the source of inspiration for reverence of the Lord, to be active in this regard on an ongoing basis!. Seeing that G’d has to wish that the emanation “wisdom” do or not do certain things is proof that G’d Himself is unable to do this. This is the true meaning of the statement by the sages we quoted that “all is in the hands of heaven except the fear of heaven.” The sages referred to the attribute known as heaven, an attribute which has great powers but whose powers do not include the ability to inculcate fear of the Lord in people. It is something “beyond” this particular attribute, emanation, as it has no control over inspiring reverence for G’d in people.
    We find a dialogue between Moses and the people described in Avodah Zarah 5 where Moses is described as having  harangued the Israelites for being ungrateful when they heard G’d express the wish that the people should always be on a spiritual high such as they attained at Mount Sinai. According to Moses they should immediately have asked G’d to grant that His own wish be fulfilled. Surely this dialogue described in the Talmud presupposes that G’d does have control over who would and who would not possess יראת שמים, “reverence for heaven!” Moses meant that the people should have asked G’d to address His prayer to an emanation higher than the one called שמים.
    This reflects something we learned in Taanit 25 in connection with Rabbi Eleazar ben Pedot who was in very depressed economic circumstances and it bothered him so that G’d asked him if he really wished that G’d should decree destruction on earth so that possibly on his next round of life he might be born under a more propitious horoscope? Rabbi ben Pedot was amazed to learn that even if G’d were to turn the universe upside down on his account this would still not be a guarantee that his personal fortunes would improve significantly. He therefore declined the “offer.” [The author mentioned only the gist of the story, and although I added some of what is found in the Talmud I suggest to the interested reader to read the whole story in the Talmud.  Ed.]
    In a different context the Talmud tells the story of how G’d showed Moses all the leaders of successive generations including that of Rabbi Akiva and his death through cruel torture by the Romans. When Moses saw with his mental eye that Rabbi Akiva’s flesh was being offered for sale in the store, he exclaimed: “is this the reward you receive for excelling in Torah?” G’d told Moses to keep silent, that He had seen fit to allow things to happen this way. (compare Menachot 29 and Nachmanides’ comment).
    The meaning of this comment by G’d (speaking as the essence) there is that the emanation “wisdom” decreed to delay punishment for the crime of the sale of Joseph by his brothers until over 1200 years later for the sake of the Jewish people as a whole. You find a comment in Midrash Rabbah on the first half of Proverbs 8,30  ואהיה אצלו אמון, “I was like an artisan with Him,” explaining these words as meaning that the Torah says about G’d that it was G’d’s artisan, i.e. He used it to fashion the world. Just as the King when he builds a palace does not do so with his own hands but employs the services of an architect, but the architect works according to plans provided by the king, not making his own designs, so G’d “looked” into the Torah to consult how best to implement His own plans for the universe. Thus far the Midrash.
    The meaning of all this is that the author of the Midrash compared the Shechinah to a king of flesh and blood and His great name to the “artisan” who carries out the various tasks assigned to him by G’d’s essence The חכמה, the emanation wisdom, is perceived as the textbook which serves the artisans as a standby for consultation to perform their work in the most efficient manner. This is why Moses of whom the Torah wrote in Deut 33,21 וירא ראשית לו כי שם חלקת מחוקק ספון, ”he chose the first portion for himself for that is where the lawgiver’s plot is hidden,” was called מחוקק [The reason this needs explaining is that this term normally translated as “lawgiver” suggests that the law is initiated by such a מחוקק. This would mean that Moses acted independently of G’d, an intolerable thought. The Midrash therefore introduces these parables to define Moses’ role within the hierarchy commencing at the top with G’d the essence, the emanation wisdom, the Torah as the textbook of wisdom, etc.Ed.] The Talmud elsewhere defines this word as similar to parchment which has been salted and treated with flour in order to make it ready for the writing on it to endure.
    We encounter such Midrashim (Tanchuma Va-eyra 5) in connection with Pharaoh, who, when told by Moses that he was sent by Hashem, is reported to have asked his magicians to take out all the books containing the names of any past and present deities to search for the name Hashem. The Midrash refers to these “books” also as דפתרא, the kind of parchment we just described. All of this merely proves that the king does not proceed to implement his plans without going “through channels.” When we keep this in mind we do not find some of our sages’ statements as so difficult to comprehend. Seeing that an artisan is not a robot and does not perform his work mechanically without employing his mental faculties it becomes clear that חכמה, the emanation wisdom, is pivotal to all of G’d’s activities. This then is the mystical dimension of Job 28,28: “See, fear of the Lord is wisdom,” i.e. ”wisdom, i.e. pure intelligence, pure thought equates with reverence of the Lord the Creator, the master of the universe.” This is also the mystical dimension of Isaiah 30,18: ולכן יחכה ה’ לחננכם ולכן ירום לרחמכם, “truly, the Lord is waiting to show you grace, truly, He will arise to pardon you.” Why does the prophet switch from the verb חכה in the first half of the verse to רום in the second half of the same verse? The first half of the verse describing G’d as waiting is similar to the wish expressed by G’d in our verse here where G’d waits for the Jewish people to maintain their spiritual high. The second part, i.e. the word ירום describes the result of such waiting at the end of which time G’d can endow the people with His חכמה. חכמה and אמונה, “wisdom and faith” are so closely intervoven as to make them almost inseparabable. [The author, quoting the Kabbalist Rabbi Yitzchok ben Harav suggests that psalm 143,1 באמונתך ענני בצדקך, Is to be understood as an oath to which David wants G’d to commit Himself. 
    
    5,28. ואתה פה עמוד עמדי ואדברה אליך  את כל המצוה והחקים והמשפטים, “and you, stand here with Me, and I will say to you all the ceremonial laws, the statutes and the social laws.” When G’d uses the term דבור as distinct from אמירה He refers to the written Torah; i.e. the area over which Moses’ prophecy extended. This is why G’d mentioned that He only “said” it to “you,” i.e. to Moses, seeing that the rest of the people would receive these messages in written form on a Torah scroll. When Moses refers to the people who had originally received these laws the wording is not אליכם but אתכם, i.e. “as the Lord your G’d commanded you at Sinai when you heard the words from His mouth” (verse 30). [the word את always describes some closer relationship than the word אל such as the difference between ואהבת לרעך and ואהבת את ה’, or וישק לרחל or וישק את “love what belongs to your fellow,” as opposed to “love your G’d,” or “he kissed Rachel (on the cheek),” or “he kissed her” (erotically).
   
   ועשו בארץ, “they shall perform it in the land.” This wording was now appropriate as the people were nearing their destination. Alternatively, the reason for adding the word בארץ is simply because the entire panorama of commandments is designed first and foremost for performance in the land of Israel. I have mentioned this previously (4,14). 
    
    6,2. כל ימי חייך “as long as you live;” on this terrestrial earth; ולמען יאריכון ימיך “and in order for you to enjoy long life;” in the hereafter.
    
    6,3. ארץ זבת חלב ודבש, “a land flowing with milk and honey.” The reason this paragraph concludes with the words “a land flowing with milk and honey,” whereas the next paragraph commences with שמע ישראל followed by והיו הדברים האלה, is to remind you that the purpose of your coming to the Holy Land is not to merely dwell there and for you to enjoy yourselves. The purpose that you come there is to enable you to keep G’d’s commandments. The enlarged letter ד in the word אחד alludes to both the goodwill of G’d which is the source of Mercy as well as to the attribute of Justice. The whiteness of the milk in the word חלב in our verse as well as redness of the honey respectively also point at the attribute of Mercy and Justice respectively. This same thought is alluded  to also in Deut. 8,8 ארץ חטה ושעורה “a land producing wheat and barley.” In that latter verse wheat is the “white” and the word דבש appears there also to depict the attribute of Justice.
    
    6,4. שמע ישראל ה’ אלו-הינו ה’ אחד, “Hear O Israel the Lord our G’d the Lord is One.”According to the plain meaning of the text the reason that Moses mentioned three names of G’d, i.e. Hashem elokeynu Hashem, needs explaining. Had he only mentioned ה’ אחד, there would have been a chance for the nations to understand the name Hashem as the way the Jews describe the god of the Gentiles in their language. This is why Moses had to add the word אלו-הינו, to make plain that Hashem is the name of our G’d, the G’d of the Jewish people. Conversely, if Moses had merely said ה’ אלו-הינו אחד, the nations might have said that while it is true that there is only a single national Jewish G’d, their own national god was also unique in his own right. Therefore Moses had to phrase this declaration of faith and acceptance in such a way that it unmistakably reflected our belief that 1) there is only one G’d deserving this name, 2) that He is the G’d of the Jewish people, 3) that He is unique in the universe, there is no other G’d deserving the title. He has no partners, is not an amalgamation of different powers working in tandem. His uniqueness is unmatched on earth, below it, or in the celestial regions. In the future He will be recognised as such universally as promised by our prophets, especially Zecharyah 14,9: “it will be on that day that the Lord will be One and His name will be One.”
    If Moses here said אלו-הינו, whereas so far throughout the Book of Deuteronomy he had almost invariably spoken of אלו-היך when addressing the Jewish people, this was because he wanted to include himself in the Jewish community who accepted the Oneness of the Lord.
    An interesting comment by Rabbi Eliezer from Germeize, (the author of the Rokeach, a pupil of Rabbi Yehudah Hachassid): he claims that the first time Moses mentioned Hashem he referred to the G’d who preceded the universe, the word אלו-הינו refers to G‘d as He is perceived while the present universe is in existence;  the third time Moses refers to Hashem he refers to the time when this universe as we know it will no longer exist. While there are people who relate to Him, He is perceived as אלו-הינו, whereas when there are no creatures to thus acknowledge Him He is simply known as Hashem.
    You should realise that the whole subject of G’d’s uniqueness relates to serving G’d with one’s heart. The Torah refers to this in 11,13 where we read the instructions “to serve him with all your heart.” Seeing that people who speak to another sometimes mean what they say, i.e. concentrate on what they are saying and sometimes they don’t, being distracted, the Torah writes “שמע,” which includes the mind and the ear being attuned to each other. One is not only to relate to G’d by hearing with one’s ear but by opening one’s heart to what one is about to hear with one’s ear. Whenever the subject of G’d’s Unity comes up it is an absolute requirement that it not be treated offhandedly, lightheartedly, without adequate concentration of one’s mind. When saying the above words one must not only make sure that one’s own ears hear them but one must be certain that one’s heart is attuned at the same time.
    Seeing that when one hears a person recite the שמע that person cannot be certain if at that moment the mind of the one reciting it is on the same wavelength as his mouth, or if his mind is on other matters altogether, the letter ע in this word is written in larger script as is the letter ד, at the end of the verse. When read together these two letters spell the word עד; in other words, we are warned that there is a witness, i.e. the Lord Himself, Who is aware if we have concentrated on what we are saying when reciting this commitment or if we have only been going through the motions. From all the above it is clear that a person must be very careful when reciting the קריאת שמע not to undo the good he plans to do thereby by performing the commandment in an offhanded manner. We were taught in Berachot 34 that one teaches a reader (in the Synagogue) to concentrate on what he is saying even if one has to physically abuse him to drive home the lesson.
    You should know that Gan Eden (after death) was not created except to reward the people who acknowledge G’d’s Unity not only as a platitude but by concentrating on what they are saying. Admitting G’d’s Uniqueness is the other side of the coin of denying the validity of any form of idolatry. On the other hand, anyone who acknowledges any form of idolatry automatically denies the Oneness and Uniqueness of the Lord. The principal reason that purgatory, gehinom, and its seven kinds of fires have been created was to repay the people guilty of idolatry. This is why you find the word גן thirteen times in Parshat Bereshit. (compare Genesis 2,8; 9; 10; 15; 16; 3,1; 2; 3; 8;9-10; 23;,24;) By way of contrast you find the word אש, fire, thirteen times in our Parshah here. This is to teach you that everyone who has had the right thoughts when saying the word אחד=13 in the line שמע ישראל ה’ אלו-הינו ה’ אחד will be saved from the fires of Gehinom, seeing that he will merit the thirteen levels of elevations available in Gan Eden. 
    We are told in Ketuvot 77 that Rabbi Joshua ben Levi once met Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai (in a dream) when the latter was seated on the thirteen golden mattresses. This is an allusion to the thirteenth and highest level in Gan Eden.
    A Midrashic approach: The reason that the verse שמע ישראל is written here after the Ten Commandments is to teach the people that when G’d used the attribute אנכי when introducing Himself at the beginning of the Ten Commandments, He referred to this אחדות of His, His uniqueness. Rabbi Nathan used the Ten Commandments (the text) to counter the claim of the heretics who believe that there are two separate and independent domains of authority in the universe. When the Lord stood at Mount Sinai and began the decalogue with the words “I am the Lord your G’d who has taken you out of Egypt,” this was equivalent to a challenge. Who dared oppose G’d at that time? Seeing that this verse שמע ישראל introduces our declaration of G’d’s Uniqueness, Moses saw fit to commence numerous verses in the Book of Deuteronomy with the words שמע ישראל. Some samples of such verses are found in Deut. 9,1; 20,3; 27,9. There are many others.
    We read in the Midrash (Devarim Rabbah Lieberman edition page 66) that the words שמע ישראל recall the time when Yaakov was worried that may be one of his sons was not whole-hearted in his loyalty to Hashem and he called in his sons and confronted them on the issue by saying ושמעו אל ישראל אביכם, (Genesis 49,2). What he meant was: “listen to the One whom your father Israel serves, i.e. to G’d.” Upon hearing this, the sons replied in unison שמע ישראל ה’ אלו-הינו ה’ אחד. Ever since the Jewish people have adopted the declaration made by the 12 sons of Yaakov as one of abiding faith in G’d also their own declaration of faith, pronounced every day. The formula has been amended to read: “שמע ישראל אשר במערת המכפלה ה’ אלו-הינו ה’ אחד “hear O Israel who is buried in the cave of Machpelah the Lord our G’d,  the Lord is One.” (compare Devarim Rabbah Lieberman edition page 67).
    Our sages also commented in Devarim Rabbah (Lieberman edition page 77) that when the people had stood at Mount Sinai they had vowed נעשה ונשמע, “we will do and we will listen.” Once they had made the golden calf Moses said to them that seeing they had already reneged on the first half of their undertaking they should at least honour the second part, i.e. the נשמע, by reaffirming their faith in the one and only G’d by saying the שמע ישראל on a daily basis. This matter can best be illustrated by a parable.  A king betrothed a wife by giving her two 2 pearls. When she lost one he said to her: “safeguard the remaining one.” Thus far Midrash Rabbah.
    A more rational approach to our line: we all know of many phenomena both above terrestrial earth and below in our world which exercise their influence  on our lives in one form or another. It stands to reason that above all of these phenomena there is a hand which directs them all. The proliferation of the phenomena we witness must have its origin in a single force (compare Shaar Hayichud Chovot Halevavot chapter 5). Just like the number 1 is the first in a string of numbers, so Unity is the first (in terms of time) of a number of phenomena. Seeing that we are all witnesses to so many and different phenomena in the universe, it is quite clear that all of them must be derivatives of an original phenomenon, the Ultimate Cause. Even though the name “one” is applied to many things this description is misleading and inaccurate. It is a habit of people to use terms which, strictly speaking, apply to only one phenomenon and to describe other phenomena as possessing such characteristics. For instance, even in the Torah we find the Tabernacle referred to as אחד, “one,”(Exodus 26,6) although we all know that it was composed of many different parts. The reason the Torah described it on that occasion as “one,” was that all its constituent parts had been joined together and placed in their correct positions so that the finished product appeared to be “one.” Nonetheless the Tabernacle was subject to being dismantled and to no longer appear as a single unit.
    We find that G’d told the prophet (Ezekiel 37,16) “take for yourself ‘one’ tree (or piece of wood).“ The expression אחד in that verse is a misnomer as there is only one phenomenon to which that definition can truly be applied, but the prophet describes it as such as he wants to portray a concept, i.e. the symbol of unity, something undivided. Although man is composed of 248 limbs the composite of these 248 limbs is called “one man.” Even the raw material man is made of is a composite of 4 elements; nonetheless we speak of “flesh” as if it consisted of a single raw material. All of the components of man will disintegrate at death proving that what was considered as “one” during his lifetime was in reality nothing of the kind. [Science may be defined as the search for the original single cause of the universe. Ed.] Even amongst the celestial beings, the angels which are made of a uniform raw material and are therefore not subject to disintegration the term אחד cannot be applied in the true meaning of the word, seeing that each angel is only one of many such angels, so where is his uniqueness? The same applies to our souls. Although it is not an amalgam of elements such as our body, there are thousands of souls so how could a soul be truthfully described as אחד, truly unique? In other words, none of the phenomena in the universe can accurately be described as אחד with the exception of the Lord G’d Who is truly one of a kind in the absolute sense of the word. This is what the prophet Isaiah 40,25 meant when he said, paraphrasing G’d: ואל מי תדמיוני ואשוה, “to whom do you wish to compare Me, to whom can I be likened?”
    A kabbalistic approach: the words שמע ישראל may be understood as “bend your ear and listen.” This verse comprises the subject of true uniqueness which is accepted by all the students of Kabbalah as the mystical dimension of the ten emanations. It is man’s task to unify these ten emanations and to ensure they are joined together not only in a descending but also in an ascending direction [it is a common perception that the concept of the emanations is intended to facilitate our understanding of how something totally abstract, disembodied, can be transformed into a physical, substantive universe. Kabbalists understand it as the task of man to transcend the physical universe they find themselves in and to strive for a union with the source, Hashem, by means of these emanations. Ed.] The word שמע is perceived as an instruction to create such a bond, union. The word occurs in this context in Samuel I 15,4 וישמע שאול, where it could not mean that Saul had heard with his ears. It means that Saul mustered the troops, i.e. made them join together. Psalms 18,45 is another example of the word שמע meaning something beyond merely hearing with a physical organ of the body. It speaks about the assimilation of such “hearing,” i.e. obedience, as a natural result of “digesting” what one’s ear has heard.
    The word Hashem  is also to be understood as similar to לך ה’, “it is yours O Hashem” (Chronicles I 29,11). That verse combines the three highest spiritual attributes (emanations) אלו-הינו, הגדולה, הגבוורה. The second time the word Hashem occurs in our verse is a reference to the emanation תפארת and the emanations below that until the lowest emanation, “the completion of the structure.”
    The word אחד at the end of our verse comprises all the emanations. The letter א in that word refers to the One whom our mental capacities cannot define. The letter ח refers to all the eight emanations which accompany Him; The letter ד refers to the tenth emanation, the crowning glory known as עטרת זהב גדולה, and the word אחד, is not to be separated from the rest of the verse. [I suppose the author stresses this as by definition that which is אחד, one, unique, is distinct and separate from anything else already. Ed.] Here the Torah tells us that all the ten emanations are to be joined as if they were not multiples but one. The reason it is appropriate for this process of joining the emanations together to proceed from the bottom up, is because we have a principle that in matters of sanctity we always proceed from a lower level to a higher level, never the reverse.
    Concerning the letter ד in the word אחד i.e. the lowest emanation known as מלכות, Isaiah 63,12 says בוקע מים מפניהם לעשות לו שם עולם, “Who divided the waters before them to make Himself a name for all time.” We refer to this manifestation of G’d as the lowest of the emanations in our prayers every day when we recite מלכותך ה’ אלו-הינו ראו בניך בוקע ים לפני משה זה אלי ענו, “Your manifestation Lord our G’d as the emanation מלכות Your children have witnessed when You split the sea before Moses and they answered: “this is My G’d.” [the version of this prayer quoted here is similar to that in Machzar Vitri]
    Seeing that the verse שמע ישראל does not contain an explicit reference to he emanation מלכות, our sages have seen fit to append the line ברוך שם כבוד מלכותו לעולם ועד, “may the name of His glorious emanation מלכות be blessed forever more.” Even though Moses did not mention this attribute explicitly we do find it alluded to in the letter ד at the end of the verse. Our sages (Pessachim 56) illustrated the problems our sages encountered in adding something Moses had not seen fit to add but which our patriarch Yaakov reportedly added, by means of a parable.  The daughter of a king who entered the kitchen smelled a delicious dish which had wonderful condiments added to it. She was very eager to eat some of it immediately. She said to herself that if she were to ask for this outright now it would be considered ill-mannered. On the other hand, if she were to wait until evening when the dish would be served she would experience physical pain during the time she had to wait. When her attendants became aware of this they brought her some of the condiment surreptitiously. As a result, the mind of the princess was put at rest. The parable symbolises the Israelites (princess) who had become aware of the blissful effect of the emanation מלכות. Her attendants, i.e. the Shechinah, realised the Israelites’ strong desire to exalt G’d by making reference to this emanation. If they would not be allowed to do so they might pine away from distress. Giving the princess some of the condiment secretly is equivalent to the sages allowing the Jewish people to recite the line ברוך שם sotto voce, in an undertone, so as not to reflect on the spiritual  presumptuousness of the Jewish people. In kabbalistic terms the compromise thought up by the Shechinah, and later our sages, means that reciting this line in an undertone is equivalent to reciting G’d’s “lower level” of unity and praising it. This is also why the line ברוך שם comprises 6 words just as the verse שמע ישראל comprises 6 words, each alluding to the six extremities of the terrestrial universe, i.e. the four directions of the compass plus “up” and “down.” Adding the letter ד from אחד completes the number 10 so that all the ten emanations are represented. The 6 words in the line שמע ישראל allude to the celestial regions, whereas the six words in the line ברוך שם allude to the terrestrial regions of the universe in each of which the Lord is supreme, unique, unmatched.
    The Sefer Habahir item 27 contains the following comment. The students asked their rabbi about the meaning of the letter ד in the word אחד at the end of our verse. He told them by means of a parable that they should perceive of ten kings, all wealthy, all congregating in a single place. One of the ten, while wealthy, was not as wealthy as the others. Due to this relative poverty he was considered as דל, “poor.” Thus far the text in the Sefer Habahir. The ten kings are the ten emanations all of which congregate in the celestial spheres, except the lowest emanation מלכות which is part of the עולם העשיה, the terrestrial universe, (at least perceptually. Ed.) When people in the terrestrial universe declare the Unity of Hashem they must therefore concentrate on all the ten emanations or they would not do justice to their task. The word אחד therefore has especial significance. The number 10 represents the Power of the One who “invented” the ten emanations
    Compare the smallest unit in our terrestrial universe the “point.” A point is not really only a point, as no matter how  small it is it has width, length, and depth. Not only that, but the area (or imaginary line) called length has a beginning, a middle and an end. The same is true for the area called width and that called depth. This already makes a “point” something consisting of no less than nine definable areas. Add to this the space in the universe this “point” occupies and we are talking about 10 units of space. This demonstrates the importance of the number 10 as an indispensable number; in terrestrial terms you may call it an irreducible minimum. When we translate this into the aleph bet, the smallest letter the י, though perceived and spoken of as no more than a “point,” נקודה, actually represents both the number 1 and the number 10. A similar principle applies to the letter ה of the tetragram, the Holy name of Hashem. Being three-sided it has three times beginnings, middles and ends in each line. Add the space it occupies and you find it also represents the number 10. Or, you simply view the letter ה as a combination of the letter י, i.e. the left, lower part, plus the letter ו. In either event you wind up with the number 10 (at least).
    When we recite the Kaddish, this also has to include concentrating on the ten emanations. The words אמן יהא שמיה רבה מברך are perceived as being said on the קו האמצעי, the centre line of the diagram of the ten emanations. Five of the emanations  are above this “centre line,” whereas the other 5 are below making a total of 10. (The author proceeds to demonstrate similar patterns in the kedushah claiming that the sages of the Great Assembly who formulated that prayer deliberately chose to commence with the word כתר to allude to the highest, the tenth of the emanations. He continues in this vein to analyse the visions described by Ezekiel and quoted in the קדושה דסדרא in the daily ובא לציון גואל prayer).
    According to the Midrash Devarim Rabbah near the end of Parshat Vaetchanan, the reason that the line ברוך שם is recited sotto voce is that it is the formula used by the angels to praise the Lord, and we do not want to provoke the angels by copying them. According to that Midrash, Moses learned this secret formula while overhearing the angels when he was on Mount Sinai. When Moses taught the Torah to Israel he told them that everything he taught them he had learned himself from the Torah (G’d) with the exception of the line ברוך שם which he had learned from the ministering angels. He advised the Israelites to recite this line silently. Only on the Day of Atonement, when, thanks to our sins having been forgiven we are on a spiritual par with the angels, do we recite this line without fear of arousing their jealousy. The fact that on that day we neither eat nor drink, just like the angels, coupled with the fact that we don white garments, makes us sufficiently like the angels to praise G’d in the way they do.
    
    6,5. ואהבת את ה' אלו-היך, “You shall love the Lord your G’d.” Seeing that we have no other G’d than Hashem we are bound to love Him. The point of “loving G’d” is to perform His commandments out of a sense of love for Him. If someone serves the Lord out of fear, his service is not of the best variety. The way this love for G’d expresses itself is by our studying the laws of the Torah  and by obtaining a better understanding of what G’d expects from us through such study. As a result of such study we will enjoy having gained deeper insights of what the Lord wants from us. To tell us that this is the purpose of loving G’d, the Torah immediately continues with
   והיו הדברים האלה אשר אנכי מצוך היום על לבבך, “these matters which I have commanded you this day will be upon your heart.” The verse is the practical manifestation of the result of your loving the Lord. The Sifri Vaetchanan 33 explains the subject of man loving G’d in a similar manner when the author writes  that the key to this is found in the verse והיו הדברים האלה. The words ואהבת את ה' אלו-היך are an instruction to display love vis-a-vis G’d as one would vis-a-vis G’d’s creatures. This is what Avraham did and why G’d referred to him as אברהם אוהבי “Avraham who loves Me” in Isaiah 40, 8.
    Our sages, in elaborating on this theme, defined someone as loving G’d if by his conduct he brings people closer to G’d and thereby helps them secure their claim to the hereafter. This is the reason why the sages cited Avraham as their model for such love.
    Do not argue that seeing that the emotion described as חשק is perceived to be a stronger emotion than that of אהבה, love, why did the Torah not instruct us to וחשקת את ה' אלו-היך, “to display fondness of the Lord your G’d?” The answer to this question is that אהבה, “love”, is something that comes and goes, an emotion which manifests itself on occasion but does not manifest itself on other occasions. If someone loves a certain kind of food, he will experience this emotion when such food is placed before him and he eats it. He does not however, go around all day long “loving” that dish. When someone is in the grip of the emotion we call חשק an inordinate desire, [such as that of Shechem for Yaakov’s daughter Dinah, Ed.] this emotion is ever-present in his mind even if the object of his desire is out of sight and earshot. He will dream about the object he is so fond of.
    Seeing that we have been commanded to love the Lord with both our hearts לבבך, i.e. both the urges within us, (Berachot 62) as well as with all our soul and all our material assets, i.e. we must involve emotions which we cannot suppress in this love of G’d in order to fulfill the commandment properly. The Torah’s point in using this term ואהבת is to make clear that our love for G’d must always win out in a conflict with our other emotions. The other urges cannot be ignored as one cannot live without them. For instance, unless one has an urge to stay alive one will likely become the victim of death in its many forms in short order. Similarly, unless one has an active urge to acquire some material goods one will starve to death not having the wherewithal to pay for one’s food, clothing and shelter. The very relativity of the emotion אהבה then is what enables us to fulfill this commandment. Had the Torah commanded us to relate to G’d with the emotion חשק, this would involve our abandoning all other emotions in order to devote ourselves exclusively to the emotion of being fond of the Lord. We would have had to totally suppress even the emotions without which life on terrestrial earth is impossible. The end-result of relating to G’d in such a manner would effectively have made it impossible to fulfill any of the other commandments in the Torah as they all presuppose the activation of a whole range of human emotions.
    The definition of the emotion חשק implies דבקות, an inseparable attachment to the object of one’s חשק such as described in Psalms 91,14 כי בי חשק ואפלטהו. The point made in that psalm is that if only the Jewish people will display sufficient חשק, affinity to G’d, He will personally deliver them instead of only by means of an angel (compare Alshich). When one attains that level of affinity to G‘d one qualifies for what is commonly known as מיתת נשיקה, a death by kiss from G’d, i.e. a demonstration by G’d of His affinity to the person leaving earth.
    We find that even in His relationship to the entire Jewish people G’d speaks of such חשק, such an intense feeling of fondness for the Jewish people, when He says in Deut. 7,7 לא מרבכם מכל העמים חשק ה' בכם, “not because you are the most numerous of all the nations did  the Lord entertain such a strong fondness for you.“ This verse clearly spelled out that G’d’s closeness, affinity to us, surpasses His affinity to any other nation. Our sages derived from there also that wherever the Jewish people are exiled, G’d, in the form of part of the Shechinah, is also present (Megillah 29).
   בכל לבבך, “with your entire heart.” The heart is perceived as the seat of the soul and man’s wisdom, seeing it is the first organ of man to be created and the last one to cease functioning when 
man dies. The meaning of the words: “love the Lord your G’d with all your heart,” may therefore be equivalent to “love the Lord your G’d until your dying breath.”
   ובכל נפשך, “and with all your soul,” i.e. with the soul which demonstrates all the various desires of man.
   ובגל מאדך, “and with all your material assets.” The word מאדך is derived from מאד, i.e. ‘love him as much as it is physically possible.” In short, “do not love your material assets better than the commandments of the Torah.” One should not begrudge spending money liberally for the performance of the commandments. Cost should not be the factor governing if one buys an etrog and lulav or not. We have the example of Rabbi Gamliel who once spent 1000 zuz (certain coins) in order to acquire the four species (Sukkah 41).
    Our sages stipulated as a rule of thumb that one is allowed to spend up to one third of one’s (liquid) assets in order to perform the commandment in the most impressive fashion. The Talmud in Baba Kama 9 discusses the wording of the above rule of thumb wanting to know if one has to sell one’s house in order to live up to this requirement. The sages point out that if that were so a person might be called upon to perform 3 commandments each one requiring him to pay as much as one third of his total assets. As a result of listening to the sages such a person might become dependent on public charity. The sages therefore agreed that the meaning of paying up to one third of one’s assets for the performance of a commandment in this fashion was not meant literally, but meant that a person should be prepared to overpay up to one third of the going price in order to have a chance to perform the commandment in question. If an average etrog costs 15 dollars, a person should be prepared to pay up to 20 dollars to acquire a specimen of a superior degree of perfection. The sages base all this on the verse זה א-לי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I will beautify Him” (Exodus 15,2). They explain that the way to fulfill this promise is by having a nice talit, a beautifully written Torah-scroll, a perfect specimen of lulav, etc. The rule of not overpaying more than one third of the price for a regular lulav is accepted by the sages.
    The Talmud Berachot 54 states that the way to serve the Lord with “all your heart” is to do so by employing both the evil urge as well as the good urge in G’d’s service. The way to serve the Lord “with all your soul” is that on occasion one may have to serve the Lord by laying down one’s life or Him. The way to fulfill the third part of the commandment, i.e. to serve the Lord with all one’s fortune is applicable only if one does have a fortune. [I understand this to mean that one need not go into debt to fulfill certain commandments. Ed.]
    Rashi explains that the reason that the instruction to love G’d with all our material wealth is placed last is that there are people who find it harder to part with their money than to part with their lives, i.e. they consider life as a pauper not worth living. When people of such a disposition sacrifice their wealth for the love of G’d they have loved Him even better than if they had laid down their lives for Him.
    An alternative way of understanding the words בכל מאדך, is that the Torah refers to the מדות, attributes, by means of which G’d measures us, tests us. We are to display our love for G’d by the way in which we react to the attributes of His He saw fit to apply to us. This is also what David had in mind when he said (Psalms 101,1) חסד ומשפט אשירה, “I will sing kindness or justice;” he meant if G’d measures me with the yardstick of kindness, חסד, I will acknowledge it by song; if He measures me by the yardstick of justice, משפט, I will still acknowledge it by song.” In a similar vein David wrote כוס ישועות אשא ובשם ה’ אקרא, “I will raise the  cup of salvations and call out the name of the Lord;” at the same time צרה ויגון אמצא ובשם ה’ אקרא, “if I should find trouble and sorrow I will still proclaim the name of the Lord.” Some commentators see in these three levels of love for G’d the Torah’s way of reflecting the different levels of love for G’d displayed by the three patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov. Avraham displayed love for G’d with all his heart attracting many people to the service of the Lord, i.e. serving the Lord with heir hearts. Yitzchak displayed the second dimension of love for G’d, i.e. בכל נפשך, seeing he offered his own life on the altar of G’d. Yaakov is an example of the third dimension of loving G’d seeing he vowed to give 2 tithes to G’d of all he would acquire, i.e. he loved G’d with all his possessions.
    6,6. והיו הדברים האלה, “these things (concepts) shall be;” the idea of G’d’s Unity, the love for Him which Moses  mentioned, shall all be deeply engraved on your heart. Alternatively, Moses refers to the commandments, all of which should be firmly engraved on our hearts.
   אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “which I command to you this day, etc.”  Sifri Vaetchanan 93 explains the reason that Moses adds the word היום, this day, as if he were commanding all the commandments on that day for the first time, to mean that the commandments should forever be something fresh in our minds. We should not relate to them as something deja vue, something which has lost its freshness and therefore its appeal. It should always be like some new decree the depth of which we have not yet explored. You should view them as if you had received them from Mount Sinai only this day.
    6,7. ושננתם לבניך, “you will teach them diligently to your children.” The word שנון denotes something “sharp” like the blade of a sharp sword. The word occurs in connection with the tip of an arrow, i.e. חץ שנון, Proverbs 25,18. The idea behind this phraseology is that if your children will ask you about the meaning of these laws you should be able to answer them immediately, without stuttering. 
   ודברת בם, “you shall speak about them.” The principal subject of your conversation with your children (or generally) shall be words of Torah, exploring their meaning. The word בם is restrictive, i.e. you talk about the Torah to the exclusion of other subjects (Yuma 19). The word בם also means that while you may speak audibly about Torah subjects, you must not raise your voice in prayer but pray silently so as not to disturb your neighbour. The reason Torah is to be studied while raising your voice is that Torah was given to the Jewish people under the influence of overpowering voices at Mount Sinai (as we mentioned frequently in connection with Exodus 19,16).
    We learned in Chulin 89 that the meaning of the words האמנם אלם צדק תדברון, (Psalms 58,2) is that the word אמנם has a dual meaning, the psalmist saying that the vocation of man in this life is to act as if he were silent (dumb). In the event you were to understand this message as also applying to the words of Torah, David hastens to add: צדק תדברון, “it is appropriate that you should speak words of Torah.” Solomon confirms this approach by his father when he says in Proverbs 3,21: “let them not depart from your eyes.” Seeing that the attributes (emanations) חכמה, תבונה, דעת are the ones which G’d employed in creating the universe it is fitting that you make them the subject of your conversation.
    
    6,8.וקשרתם לאות על ידך , “you shall tie them as a sign on your hand.”  This refers to the phylactery worn on the arm and we have a tradition that in this instance the word “your hand” refers to the left hand as that word depicts the left hand as we know from Isaiah 48,13: אף ידי יסדה ארץ וימיני טפחה שמים, “also My hand founded the earth and My right hand spread out the skies.” Another verse in which the word יד clearly refers to the left hand is found in Judges 5,26: ידה ליתד תשלחנה וימינה להלמות עמלים, “her hand reached for the tent pin (Yael’s), her right hand for the workman hammer.” Also in Exodus 13,16 the Torah speaks of ידכה “your hand,” with the weak ending, i.e. the letter ה at the end indicating that it refers to the weaker hand, i.e. the left hand.
    Our sages in Menachot 37 cite a tradition according to which the place on the arm where the phylactery is to be fastened is above the elbow opposite the heart. Just as the phylactery of the head is to be placed on the highest part of the head, so the phylactery of the hand is to be fastened at the highest part of the arm, where the muscle bulges. If the Torah had intended the phylactery (the housing with the parchment) to be worn on the hand itself, i.e. on the back of the hand, this would not have been opposite the heart. Besides, that part of the body is not known as “hand,” but as קנה. Seeing that our tradition stipulates that the phylactery be fastened opposite the heart, the only logical spot is the upper arm. Job 31,22 speaks about אזרועי מקנה תשבר, “may my forearm break off at the elbow.” Our sages in Menachot 43 view the Jewish people as especially beloved of G’d seeing He made them wrap the phylacteries around their heads and arms respectively. They also point to the words: “you shall tie them as a sign” as the source for making a knot when tying the phylacteries. The very knot is a “sign”, i.e. this is the hint that all the detailed laws about the phylacteries have been given to Moses at Mount Sinai, i.e. they cannot be arrived at by the use of the exegetical tools at our disposal (Menachot 35).
   והיו לטוטפות בין עיניך, “they shall be as ornaments between your eyes.” The words “between your eyes,” are not to be taken literally but mean that they are to be placed on the forehead opposite the seat of the brain, seeing that it is the seat of our intelligence.
    Our sages in Menachot 37 explain the wording “between your eyes” to mean that the phylacteries are to be placed on a spot, where the Gentiles tear out the hair as a sign of mourning their dead. (compare Deut. 14,1) We also learn from Menachot 36 that the reason why the Torah wrote לטוטפות, ornaments (plural), is that the plural form means that one must put on the phylacteries of the hand first so that when one puts on the phylacteries of the head there will be two (טוטפות) such ornaments.
    6,9. וכתבתם על מזזות, “you are to write them (these words) on the doorposts of your house.” According to Rashi there is a reason why the word is written in the singular, i.e. מזוזת and not מזוזות, as we would have expected. It is to tell us that only one of the doorposts need to have a mezuzah affixed to it. The proper side is the right hand side. [any reader of the Torah knows that the spelling in the Torah is not a defective plural, but that the letter ו denoting two mezuzot at least is part of the text. Ed.] 
    The word ביתך is understood as an allusion to דרך ביאתך, “the way you arrive,” i.e. the right side side of your entrance. All this is based on people preferring the right hand side. People always commence putting the right foot forward first. (Menachot 34.) [not in the army. Ed.]
    Our sages have already explained which kind of house requires a mezuzah and which does not. We find a list in Yuma 11, and Sukkah 3 where we are told that a house which has an area of less than 16 square cubits does not qualify for the term בית and therefore the owner is free of the obligation to affix a mezuzah. Any small foyer (designed to keep out the wind and cold) does not require a mezuzah. Toilets, bathrooms, do not require a mezuzah, neither does the room in which hides are treated to become leather (a tannery), a room which is full of unpleasant odours. A ritual immersion bath house is also free from this requirement. The governing principle is that houses which reflect man’s dignity must be provided with a mezuzah (perhaps to remind us of G’d’s dignity). On the other hand, all the buildings on the Temple Mount, the offices adjoining the Temple, the hall at the entrance to the Temple, עזרה, also do not require a mezuzah, as our sages interpret the word ביתך as “your house,” i.e. the house which serves your secular needs, not the sacred houses, G’d’s houses. Such houses do not belong to you personally. A synagogue does not require a mezuzah unless it contains the private dwelling of one or more of its officials. There was a single office on Mount Zion, the one known as לשכת פלהדרין which did have a mezuzah seeing it was the private residence of the High Priest for the seven days prior to the Day of Atonement.
    It is important to realise that through fulfillment and study of this commandment many fundamental aspects of the Torah and the outlook of Judaism become clearer to us. The belief in the creation of the world by the Creator, G’d’s being a personal G’d who supervises the fates of His creatures, the existence of the institution of prophecy, are all part of what we find in the segments of the Torah written in the mezuzah. The first paragraph contains references to the Unity and Uniqueness of G’d as well as to His Torah. The second paragraph deals with the principle of reward and punishment, the remembrance of the Exodus from Egypt which was a period during which G’d performed many miracles compelling the witnesses to believe in His primacy in the universe as well as convincing them that G’d takes a very personal interest in each one of His creatures.
    Our sages in the Talmud have agreed that the correct spot to affix the mezuzah is within (upper part) the top third of the door frame. (Menachot 33). This is also clear from the Jerusalem Talmud Megillah near the end of the fourth chapter. The reason for this is to symbolise the third and uppermost part of the emanationכבוד  which is known both by the name שדי and אדנ-י. [the concept of עשר מעלות, ten levels of sanctity, is not new and appears symbolically in our liturgy such as the blowing of the shofar in units of three times three, the recital of the Biblical verses in the Rosh Hashanah Mussaph prayer, three from each section of the Bible. In all these instances these divisions of three symbolise the attribute of כבוד as it manifests itself in a lower form, an intermediate form, and an upper form. In all of these divisions the tenth and highest unit represents the highest emanation כתר. [Placing the mezuzah near the top of the upright doorpost then symbolises our striving for affinity to the highest level of sanctity. Ed.] This is also why we write these names on the outside of the parchment of the mezuzah (Maimonides Hilchot Mezuzah 5,4). The word שדי is to be written in such a way that it is visible through a little hole in the upper half of the casing of the mezuzah. The parchment is affixed in an almost upright manner at a slight angle pointing in the direction of the entrance. This is why it is commonly known as מזוזה, the numerical value of which is the same as the name of G’d אדנ-י i.e. 65. That name also symbolises that G’d is the שומר ישראל, “the guardian of the people of Israel.” The reason the word שדי is to be visible from the outside is that the Gentiles believe that the success of their domestic lives depends on the horoscopes of the people dwelling therein. Seeing that the name שדי represents the concept that this attribute of G’d defeats any horoscopic constellations, we write this on the outside to demonstrate the Power of G’d which we believe in. All good fortune originates with Him and not the horoscopes under which we are born.
    We read that Eliphaz (quoting heretics) says in Job 22,17: ומה יפעל שדי למו, “what can Shaddai do about it?” In the following verse Eliphaz continues: “whereas it was He who filled their house with good things.” 
    There is a story told in Jerusalem Talmud Peyah 1,1 (Steinsaltz edition page כב) that the last Parthian king Artavan once sent a gift of a very precious pearl to Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi, asking to be sent something of equal value in return. Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi sent a mezuzah in return. When the king received the mezuzah he was dumbfounded that Rabbi Yehudah could consider this little piece of parchment as an equivalent to the precious pearl. He expressed his sentiments in no uncertain terms. Thereupon Rabbi Yehudah explained to the king that they had different sets of values, hence the king’s amazement. He went on to say that whereas the king’s gift was something that he, Rabbi Yehudah, would constantly have to guard against theft, etc., his own gift to the king was something hat would guard over the king and protect him. He quoted Proverbs 6,22 in support. Solomon writes: “When you walk it (‎Torah) will lead you; when you lie down it will watch over you. When you are awake it will talk to you.” Thus far the quote from the Talmud.
    When someone affixes a mezuzah to his door he has to recite a benediction “who has sanctified us by means of His commandments and commanded us to affix a mezuzah.” Seeing it is not a commandment which one fulfills regularly, one also says the benediction שהחיינו, acknowledging the kindness of G’d in allowing us to live to this point in time.
   ובשעריך, “and on your gates.” This includes the entrances to the city itself, and even to the country. Our sages in Yuma 11 said that (not only gates of private residences) gates to cities and countries are subject to the commandment that they must have a mezuzah affixed to them. The sages base this on the word ובשעריך in our verse. However, this rule applies only if within these gates there is at least one private residence. The word ביתך in our verse means a house set aside as a residence. Had the Torah only written the wordביתך  I would have thought that only residential houses are subject to this commandment. Hence the Torah added the word ובשעריך to ensure I do not misunderstand. There has to be a common denominator between the word “your house” and the word “your gates.” The gates have to lead to a house, a residence.
    6,11. בתים מלאים כל טוב אשר לא מלאת וגו., כרמים וזיתים אשר לא נטעת, “houses filled with every good thing which you did not have to fill; vineyards and olive groves which you did not have to plant..” Our sages (Chulin 17), in interpreting the meaning of the word כל טוב stated that even pig’s ham and vineyards planted less than three years previously were permitted  to be enjoyed by the conquering Jews. Maimonides Hilchot Melachim 8,1 writes that the soldiers who were part of the conquering armies were permitted to eat all kinds of forbidden foods if they were hungry and could not find food which was ritually permissible. They could also drink wine of the Gentiles in such circumstances.
    This appears to be a very peculiar statement by Maimonides, seeing that the Torah permitted all of these forbidden foods without attaching the rider that permission was granted only when nothing kosher could be located. Why would Maimonides add the words: “if he is hungry?” Did then the Torah permit these spoils only if the soldier’s life depended on his eating it? Who needs special permission under life-threatening situations?  Nachmanides already took Maimonides to task for this line in his commentary on verse 10. The same objection applies to what Maimonides writes concerning drinking wine made by the Gentiles. Nachmanides writes that it is not true that such wine is permitted to soldiers in the field, seeing the prohibition is Biblical and is part of the prohibitions of idolatry. On the other hand, if Maimonides meant what is called סתם יין, wine made by Gentiles but not intended a libation for idolatrous purposes, he did not have to write that this is permitted as no one would have thought that it was not. We only needed to be told that soldiers may ignore Biblical injunctions, not rabbinical injunctions. If Biblical injunctions are set aside for soldiers, rabbinical injunctions are most certainly set aside for them!
    6,12. השמר לך פן תשכח את ה’ אשר הוציאך  מארץ מצרים מבית עבדים,  “Beware for yourself lest you forget the Lord Who took you out of the land of Egypt, from the House of slavery!” The Torah warns that as a result of the affluence and carefree existence the people should not forget that this had not always been their lot, that they used to be poor, oppressed, in a land where they had neither owned cities, houses, etc., as they did now. They should not forget who it was who saved them from such a miserable existence and whom they have to thank for their present fortunate circumstances. They must always remember the great acts of loving kindness performed for them by Hashem and serve the Lord as a servant serves his master. This is why Solomon wrote in Kohelet 7,14: “so in a time of good fortune enjoy the good fortune; and in a time of misfortune reflect, the one no less than the other was G’d’s doing.” The meaning of the verse is that in time of good fortune we should remember days of misfortune which we experienced already, whereas in times of misfortune we should remember times of good fortune we have experienced. When we do this we will be grateful to the Lord for our present fortunate circumstances.
    
    6,13. את ה’ אלו-היך תירא ואותו תעבוד ובשמו תשבע, “revere the Lord your G’d, serve Him, and swear only in His name.”  According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is: “if for some reason you have to render an oath that you will adhere to some undertaking or do something which you want to do, do not swear such an oath in the name of any other deity, only by the Lord your G’d.” The verse is not a positive commandment to engage in the swearing of any oath.
    
    Our sages in Tanchuma Vayikra 7 comment on the words: “and in His name you shall swear:” If you possess all the good virtues, i.e. that you fear committing sin, that you are constantly engaged in serving your Creator, then you are entitled to swear an oath using His name, seeing that you will be careful not to do so light-heartedly and frivolously seeing that you truly revere the Lord.
    It is a well known fact that everyone who loves also reveres. There are people who do revere but do not love the object of their reverence. This teaches that reverence is an aspect of love. This is what Moses said here when he wrote; “fear the Lord your G’d, after he had already written in the קריאת שמע that we are to love the Lord our G’d. He first cautioned us to love G’d before he cautioned us to fear Him, i.e. to revere Him.
    In Parshat Eykev, when belabouring a similar point, Moses adds another dimension describing our relationship with G’d by adding the requirement ובו תדבק, “and to Him you shall cling” (Deut. 10,20). The reason is that previously Moses had spoken about G’d on His part displaying this affinity for the Jewish people, i.e. רק באבותיך חשק, “He only displayed such abiding fondness for your patriarchs” (10,15). Seeing that G’d on His part had gone so far out of His way to show the Jewish people evidence of His fondness of them, the people in turn may be expected to reciprocate such feelings and display them.
    
    6,16. לא תנסו את ה’ אלו-היכם, “Do not put the Lord your G’d to a test.” The Torah warns us not to make our service of G’d conditional on G’d responding to it as we expect Him to. We must not serve Him on condition that our undertakings succeed, thus trying to make Him fall in with our wishes instead of vice versa. One must be wholehearted in one’s service of the Lord. Our love of the Lord must not be conditional on His responding to it, requiting it according to our yardsticks. It may well happen that although a person serves the Lord sincerely, he experiences bad times; if this happens one must not conclude that G’d’s Justice and judgment are faulty but one must continue to serve Him even if one fails to always understand His ways. 
    This is why Moses adds as an example of the wrong kind of service: “as you tested Him at Massah.” When the people asked for water on that occasion they did not merely pray for water but they added the words: “in order to know if the Lord is in our midst or not.” We read there that Moses named the location where all this occurred מסה ומריבה, “Test and quarrel,” The test was to see if G’d could produce drinking water in which case the people would serve Him whereas if He would not they would not follow Him into the desert. This is why the word במסה here is spelled with the vowel patach under the letter ב, a reference to why that place had been named מסה. Psalms 78,18 also refers to this event describing it as “they tested G’d in their hearts.” This was an example of serving G’d with a doubting heart, something totally lacking in שלמות, integrity, and this why the Torah forbids it under the heading of “testing, experiment.” We do find that there is a single instance in which “testing” is permitted and that concerns whether in return for being very charitable one will find that G’d repays one.” In Maleachi 3,10 we find a verse to this effect saying: “thus put Me to the test: ‘bring the full tithe into the storehouse and let there be food in My House, and thus put Me to the test, said the Lord of Hosts.” Solomon also said  in Proverbs 3,9-10 “honour the Lord with your wealth, with the best of your income, and your barns will be filled with grain.”
    
    6,17. שמור תשמרון את מצות ה’ אלו-היכם, “be certain to observe the commandments of the Lord your G’d.” This is a continuation of the prohibition to put G’d to the test. Rather, we are to unconditionally observe the commandments in the firm belief that generally speaking you will find that this pays off also in this world and is beneficial for your body, even. By keeping the commandments you will do what is good and right in the eyes of the Lord. This is why Moses adds the words למען ייטב לך, “so that it will prove to be good for you.” It stands to reason that people who are loyal to their king and observe his laws will be recognised as such and be suitably rewarded. The same holds true when you serve the King of Kings in even increased measure. After all, the whole reason G’d issues commandments to His creatures is for their benefit as repeated in 10,13.
    We may divide the commandments mentioned in our verse into three major groups: 1) מושכלות, laws recommending themselves to our intelligence; 2) מקובלות, laws based on our history; 3) חקים, statutes, the meaning of which transcends our ability to understand. When Moses speaks of מצות ה’ he has in mind mostly laws governing inter-personal and inter-societal relationships, the ones generally referred to as משפטים. These are the ones we termed מושכלות, accessible to our intellect. When Moses writes: ועדותיו, he refers to ritual commandments, ceremonies by means of which we express our faith that G’d created the universe, is the only G’d, etc. When Moses speaks of חקיו “His statutes,” he speaks of laws the reason for which has not been revealed. The commandment not to test the Lord applies to each of these categories of law.
    Having dealt with the absolute demand to observe all these commandments, Moses turns to a lesser demand, i.e. to act in a manner which makes G’d’s law, and therefore the observant Jew, appear good in the eyes of man also, i.e. to occasionally do more than strict justice requires by being willing to waive something one is entitled to (compare Rashi on the words הישר והטוב). 
    
    6,20. כי ישאלך בנך מחר לאמור מה העדות והחקים והמשפטים, “when your son will ask you tomorrow (in the future): ‘what is the purpose of the ceremonial laws, the statutes, and (even) the social laws?’” Your children who have not been part of the historic process of becoming a Jewish nation, will ask: “why do you observe all these many types of laws?” You are to tell them that it all dates back to the time when we were slaves, oppressed, and the Lord liberated us from all this. As a result, we are obligated to accept His dictates in lieu of those of Pharaoh. Moses sums up the commandments as the Torah being a repository of our history and that observing it will keep the historic connection between the founding fathers and subsequent generations alive (compare Ibn Ezra and Nachmanides).
    
    6,24. ויצונו ה’ לעשות את כל החקים האלה ליראה את ה’ אלו-הינו, “The Lord commanded us to carry out all these statutes in order to revere the Lord our G’d.” At this point Moses explains the principle of reward for keeping the commandments. Reverence for G’d, something previously (5,26) described as not within the power of heaven to grant, is nonetheless the product of Torah-observance, especially the meticulous observance of the statutes, the laws which have no intrinsic value for us as we do not understand them. [I have elaborated on the theme. Ed.]
   לטוב לנו כל הימים לחיותינו כהיום הזה, “to be good for us for all times as well as to have kept  us alive as of this day.” This means that mitzvah-observance is good both for the body and for the soul. “Good for us for all times,” is a reference to the soul, i.e. the life in the hereafter. The term ימים is indicative of life in the hereafter, something that is prolonged, whereas life on earth is perceived as חיי שעה, “life for hours.” The words: “and to keep us alive as of this day,” are a reference to our physical existence on earth, our bodies. When the Torah describes Avraham as בא בימים in Genesis 24,1, the principal message is that Avraham had earned his hereafter, his eternal life. When David asks: “who is desirous of securing life, loving ‘days’ to see true good?” He refers to eternal life. (compare Psalms 34,13). Only in those “days” will man finally experience to see the true “good.” The reason that Moses did not write כיום הזה but added the letter ה writing כהיום הזה, is a reminder of the terrestrial universe which was created by means of the letter ה, the last letter of the tetragram. The reason why Moses first referred to the reward in the hereafter is that the celestial regions preceded earth in creation as a habitat.
    After this Moses added: וצדקה תהיה לנו לפני ה’ אלו-הינו, “it, i.e. the performance of these commandments, will be considered a merit for us before the Lord our G’d.” The “good” promised us by the Torah will always be “in front of the Lord,” i.e. in  the world of the souls. This is why Onkelos translates these words as וזכו, ”they will merit.” We may view this verse as a clear statement that there is a reward in the hereafter for performing the command-ents. This then is the conclusion of the paragraph dealing with how to explain to the children of later generations why we are obligated and why it is in our interest to fulfill all these commandments.
    7.2. ולא תחנם, “and you are not to show them any favour.” The word תחנם has been explained in many different ways. It may mean חן, grace, charm; it may mean חנינה, compassion, pardon. Clearly, the plain meaning is from חנינה, compassion, reprieve, and tells us that we must not indulge our feelings of compassion vis-a-vis these people. It is as if the Torah had written לא תחון אותם, “do not be charmed by them”. According to the Talmud in Avodah Zarah 20 it is forbidden to even comment on the esthetic beauty of artifacts designed in honour of idols. One must not even admire the physical features of a handsome Gentile or a beautiful Gentile woman. The Talmud suggests that this is part of the word לא תחנם when we read the letter ח as if it had the vowel chirik underneath it. They also understand the expression as meaning that  we must not grant these people חניה “parking,” i.e. temporary residence status and that it is forbidden to sell any land to Gentiles in the land of Israel. The Torah spelled out the reason when it said “so that they will not lead you into sin.” You must also not give them any gift, including land, the letters in the word תחנם being read with the vowel pattern patach, sheva, patach, i.e. tachnam. In fact, the word lends itself to still further permutations by changing the vowel pattern. Basically, the sages demonstrate the power of the written Torah, which, because it does not have vowels or other signs such as commas and period signs, is capable of being interpreted in so many different ways. Changing the vowel pattern can give a single word many different meanings. Having appreciated this you will understand even better the power inherent in the names of G’d which lend themselves to so many permutations, i.e. different emphasis of the basic concept of Hashem. I have elaborated on this already in my comments on Numbers 11,15.
    7,3. ולא תתחתן בם, “and you must not intermarry with them.” This means even after conversion of the other partner to Judaism. (compare Yevamot 76, according to which the term התחתנות would be inappropriate for people who had not converted, and  with whom marriage in the legal sense does not exist for Jews) Seeing the Canaanites were guilty of more sins than any of the other nations, the Torah applied stricter yardsticks to them than to our marrying proselytes from other nations.
    
    7,4. כי יסיר את בנך  מאחרי, “for he will lead your son astray from following Me.” The Torah does not say that the mother, i.e. the daughter-in-law of such a marriage will lead your son astray. but it speaks about the next generation, i.e. the grandson from your daughter married to the Gentile. The grandson from a Gentile daughter-in-law could not be referred to as “your son,“ as, seeing his mother is not Jewish, he is not either (compare Kidushin 68). The syntax of the verses makes clear that the Torah considers the mother pivotal in determining who is Jewish. The plain meaning of the verse then is: ”if the son of a Gentile marries your daughter he will lead your grandson born from your daughter astray” (religiously speaking, even though technically your grandson is Jewish). Her husband will train his son to engage in idolatry.
    
    7,7. לא מרבכם מכל העמים, “not because you are the most numerous amongst all the nations, etc.” The premise underlying the verse is that seeing we have a principle that the glory of a king is manifest in the numerous legions he owns, and it would therefore be natural for G’d, the King of Kings, to command the most numerous legions as His people, this is not the case in the G’d-Israel relationship. His relationship to you is governed by the degree of fondness He has developed for you, a consideration outweighing considerations of numerical strength. This is why He chose you to be His special people as already mentioned in verse 6. You do not have officers or policemen in the celestial regions you are subservient to, only to G’d Himself. This is the meaning of being an עם סגולה i.e. under His immediate authority. This is why you must not err to serve idols in any shape or form (see Nachmanides on that verse).
    
    I believe that the correct way to interpret the words: “not on account of your being the most numerous,” refers to the reason G’d took us out of Egypt to make us His nation. The verse provides evidence that we were indeed the most numerous people at the time but this did not provide G’d with the motivation to take us out of there. Rather, He was motivated by feelings of a strong fondness so that even if we had been the least numerous nation He would still have taken us out of there. G’d loved us and wanted to keep His oath to the patriarchs.
    
    The reason G’d felt compelled to state all this now in the fortieth year after the Exodus is that now Moses had referred to how numerous the people had become, i.e. “like the stars in the sky” (1,10). If so, and especially seeing that the numbers of the people had not changed since the Exodus, how could G’d say that He had taken us out because we actually were the least numerous,  i.e. כי אתם המעט מכל העמים? 
    We may add further  that the absence of a dot, dagesh in the letter מ in the word המעט proves this; had the letter מ in המעט been written with a dagesh I would have used this as confirmation that the people had indeed been the least numerous. However, seeing that it is written without such a dagesh, just as in the word המעט In Numbers 16,9 or 16,13, the word is not to be understood as confirmation of anything, rather as a supposition. The meaning of the line is: the word אתם refers to the spiritual level of the people, i.e. a very high level. Moses, resp. G’d is saying: “you who are numerically the smallest nation are yet on such a high spiritual level that instead of considering yourselves the most insignificant of all you are the most significant of all. Nonetheless, even considering your relative excellence, the reason the Lord took you out of Egypt was because of a feeling of love for you and in order to keep His oath to them. 
    Our sages in the Midrash (compare Rashi Pinchas 26,36) interpret the words: “for you are the smallest, etc.” as ה מעט, “five families.” The total number of families of the Jewish people was 65, i.e. five fewer than the 70 nations (families) enumerated in Noach after the dispersal of mankind subsequent to the Tower. The expression חשק is a variant of קשור and is found in that sense in Exodus 27,10 חשוקים כסף, surrounded by bands of silver (closely attached). These bands were firmly attached. The word in our verse indicates that the attachment between G’d and the Jewish people is permanent, extends beyond the death of the bodies of the individual Jews.
    A Midrashic approach based on Chulin 89: the word לא מרבכם means “not because you boast of the fact that you are so numerous but, on the contrary, because you are unassuming, modest before Me do I relate to you in this manner. David referred to this in Psalms 136,23: “He remembered us because we were humbled, for His kindness is everlasting.” This is the true meaning of: “for you are the least assuming of all the nations.” G’d said: “at a time when I bestow greatness upon you, you belittle yourselves.” When I granted greatness to Avraham, he said: “I am but dust and ashes” (Genesis 18,27). When I granted greatness to Moses and Aaron they said “who are we?” (Exodus 16,8). When I bestowed greatness upon David, he said: “I am only a worm and not a man” (Psalms 22,7). The nations of the world do not react in this manner. When I granted greatness to King Nimrod he went ahead and said “let us a build a tower which reaches into heaven!” (Genesis 11,3)  When I granted greatness to Pharaoh  he reacted by saying: “who is Hashem that I should listen to His instructions!” (Exodus 5,2): When I granted great stature to Sancheriv, he responded by saying: “who amongst all the gods of these countries has saved them from my hand that you (Chizkiyah) would think that the Lord can save Jerusalem from my hand?” (Isaiah 36,20) When I granted greatness to Nevuchadnezzar he proclaimed: “I will ascend the highest places” (Isaiah 13,14). Chirom the king of Tzor  said: “I am a god; I sit enthroned like a god in the heart of the seas” (Ezekiel 28,2).
    7,9. וידעת כי ה’ אלו-היך הוא האלו-הים ה-אל הנאמן, “and you  know that the Lord your G’d He is the true G’d.” The word “you know” refers to the knowledge the people acquired at the Exodus that the Lord is the G’d who had created heaven and earth; further more you will know that He is a true G’d seeing that on that occasion He kept His promise and will continue to so seeing He has the power to do so. Whereas in our verse Moses speaks of one thousand generations hence, in a different context the Torah speaks of G’d remembering things two thousand generations hence. Our sages in Sotah 31 do not see a contradiction in this but say simply that when G’d is served out of fear He will remember this for 1,000 generations and there will be positive fallout. When someone serves Hashem out of love the fallout will continue for 2,000 generations. In each instance, the number of generations that G’d reacts to who either hate Him or love him is mentioned next to the words לשונאיו or לאוהביו respectively. This teaches that the verse is not to be understood only collectively, but that G’d deals with each person on his merits (Nachmanides).
    7,10. אל פניו “to his face.”  to each one of them, individually. להאבידו, “to destroy him.”  Just as He destroyed the Egyptians and not a single Israelite. This attribute is a demonstration of the absolute truth with which G’d operates in this world. Although it may take a long time before the wicked person gets his deserts seeing G’d has a lot of patience during which time the wicked continues his evil, the reason he appears to get away with it is that G’d may still owe him a reward for good deeds he has done without having been rewarded as yet.
    Others (Ibn Ezra) explain the wording here differently, saying that the word אל פניו means “personally, without intermediary,” similar to Samuel II 17,11.
   לא יאחר לשונאו, “He shall not delay for His enemy.” He will not wait for three or four generations with retribution as mentioned as sometimes occurring (Ten Commandments 5,9). He personally will experience the retribution, not a descendant. This is the meaning of the words following אל פניו ישלם לו, “He will pay him back to his face.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Midrash Tehillim 99: our wording “He pays back His enemies to their faces” expresses what is written in Psalms 73,4: “כי אין חרצובות למותם ובריא אולם, “death has no pangs for them; their body is healthy (standard translation). The word חרצובות is understood as an acronym of the two words אחר צביונן, a change of colour, appearance.  G’d does not prescribe a medication for these kind of wicked people which, though making them suffer, would cure them ultimately. You may understand this by means of a parable. A doctor who attends two patients prescribes unpleasant medicines to the one patient whereas he tells the nurse of the second patient to let him eat whatever he wants, etc. When questioned why he did not prescribe medicines for the second patient, he explains that that patient is doomed and therefore there is no point in letting him undergo the additional discomfort of a medicine which will do nothing for him. Moses says something similar here. Seeing that G’d is going to destroy the deliberate unrepentant sinner anyway, the fact that he enjoys some of the benefits life on terrestrial earth has to offer in the meantime is irrelevant. We have another Midrash on the subject in Kohelet Rabbah  7,32: Rabbi Yoshiah said that there are three reasons why G’d allows the wicked to flourish in this world. 1)  He hopes they will repent. 2) They have already fulfilled a major mitzvah for which G’d owes them a reward. 3) He foresees that a righteous person of major dimensions will be descended from them. We know, for instance that one such example was King Achaz, a heretic of considerable proportions who became the father of King Chizkiyah of Yehudah, a king who almost qualified to be the messiah. Another example is Shimi ben Gerah, the one who cursed David, from whom Mordechai is descended. Had G’d punished Shimi sooner than when Solomon eventually executed him, perhaps we would have been without a Mordechai. Mind you, Shimi, was not a heretic though he challenged the legitimacy of David both as king and as Jew. The only people who qualify under the heading of G’d’s שונאיו are the ones who deny Him and His authority. Only concerning such utter heretics does the Torah say that G’d will wipe out such people.
    Onkelos believes that our verse speaks of G’d repaying the sinner generously for his relatively insignificant good deeds so that He will not have to use unrewarded good deeds as ameliorating the eventual punishment of such people in the hereafter. G’d chooses the inferior world to be the arena in which such sinners receive their rewards, a world which is brief and transient. By doing so, He is free to deny such people any share in the world to come, a world which is unending. It follows that what the onlooker perceives a the “good fortune” of the sinner in this life is actually part of his ill fortune, seeing it is the cause he will not enjoy life in the hereafter.
    This is what David alluded to in Psalms 92,7: “a foolish man cannot know, a fool cannot understand זאת, this.” Such people as the ones David refers to do not understand the workings of the attribute זאת, the way the attribute of Justice works. This is also what is meant when the psalmist describes in the following verse: בפרוח רשעים כמו עשב ויציצו כל פועלי און—להשמדם עדי עד, “when the wicked sprout like grass and the evildoers blossom; it is only in order to destroy them forever.” G’d often treats the righteous in the opposite way by punishing him for his relatively few sins through inflicting pain and discomfort on him in this life so as to preserve his life in the hereafter fully intact.
    7,11. אשר אנכי מצוך היום לעשותם, “which I command you this day to perform.” Our sages in Eyruvin 22 use the superfluous word  “this day,” to teach that whereas performance of the commandments is incumbent upon us “this day,” G’d does not promise that the reward will also be paid immediately, i.e. “this day.” Basically, our terrestrial world is perceived a the עולם העשיה, the world of “action,” as opposed to being the period in which one enjoys the reward for one’s actions. Solomon already alluded to this when he said in Kohelet 9,10: “for there is no action, no reasoning, no learning no wisdom in Sheol, where you are going.” His message is that it is too late to rectify after death what one has failed to rectify while alive. Once one has died one has forfeited all one’s former potential. This is why one has to perform all the good one can while on this earth and capable of exercising one’s faculties. This is what Solomon had said in the first half of the verse we just quoted, where we read: “whatever it is in your power to do, do with all your might.” 
    Our sages in Avodah Zarah 3 have paraphrased this thought when they said that he who labours on the Sabbath eve will have what to eat on the Sabbath, When will the one who did not trouble himself on Sabbath eve have food to eat on the Sabbath? All these considerations commit each one of us to spend as much effort to perform a so-called מצוה קלה, an easy commandment, or one that appears capable of fulfilling with little effort as that which requires great efforts on our part. We do not know which mitzvah will be rewarded more greatly. G’d did not take us into His confidence [else nobody would perform the מצות קלות.] Our sages in Avot 2,1 spelled this out quite clearly. We must not commit the error of applying our yardsticks to G’d’s thinking and deciding what in His view deserves a great deal of reward and what does not. In referring to the inadequacy of our intellect, Solomon writes in Proverbs 5,6: “she does not chart a path of life, her ways are unstable; you do not know them.”  We must not overestimate the reliability of the conclusions we draw about what is good and bad by second-guessing G’d. David had a similar message in Psalms 119,14 and 16: by emphasising the positive, i.e. the delight of accepting G’d’s law, His teaching in preference to all riches available on this earth.
  
   והיה  עקב
    
    
   בני לדברי הקשיבה, לאמרי הט-אזנך. אל יליזו מעיניך, שמרם בתוך לבבך. כי חיים הם למוצאיהם, וכל בשרו מרפא, “My son, give attention to my words; incline your ears to my words. Do not lose sight of them; keep them in your heart. For they are life to those that find them; and healing for all flesh.” (Proverbs 4,20- 22). Solomon urges us here to tune in to words of Torah and to tune out to extraneous matters. This is the deeper meaning of the words הט אזנך, “incline your ear.” He uses a similar phrase in Proverbs 2,2 where the words תטה לבך also mean to turn one’s attention away from other matters in order to acquire the requisite תבונה, discernment, insight. Solomon called the commandments דברים ואמרים, warning that neither must the text be forgotten nor the essence, the actual commandment. They must not be forgotten. The words אל יליזו מעיניך refer to forgetting the text of the Torah; even if you have urgent matters to attend to we must always remember these commandments described as הדברים בין עיניך in Exodus 13,9. The reason the Torah commanded us to wear the phylacteries on our forehead is to make it harder to forget these commandments. 
    When saying שמרם בתוך לבבך, “guard them inside your heart,” this refers not so much to the text of the commandments as to their essence. Something buried inside a person’s heart and constantly guarded  is not subject to being forgotten. This is why we must guard Torah text as well as essence in our hearts so that we are not in danger of forgetting them. Solomon provides a reason why he considers this so essential, namely that Torah essence is equivalent to life itself for all those who have once found them. Torah (text) and the commandments between them are healing for both body and soul. Solomon has touched on that subject already earlier in Proverbs 3, 22 when he said: ”they will give life to your spirit and grace to your throat.” When Solomon used the word לגרגותיך in that verse, meaning “for your throat,” he meant that when you (also) observe the words of Torah which you express with your mouth, they will then be an adornment for you. In the words of our sages: Torah words are effective when the one who speaks about them also is known as keeping them, i.e. נאה דורש נאה מקיים (compare Chagigah 14). Solomon also says (Proverbs 4,13) נצריה כי היא חייך, “guard her well” for she is your life. 
    Seeing that our Torah is the fruit, i.e. the product of the attribute of חכמה, wisdom of the celestial world, of which it is written in Kohelet 7,12: החכמה תחיה בעליה, “the wisdom revives those who possess it,” this is why Solomon says in our opening verse that “it is life-giving for those who find it.” The plural of חיים הם, is an allusion to Jeremiah 2,13 who quotes G’d as saying that the Jewish people have forsaken Him Who is מקור מים חיים the source of “living” waters. Moses himself refers to this pheno-menon in Deut. 4,4 where he attributed the people’s being alive to ואתם הדבקים בה’ חיים כולכם השיום, “you are all fully alive this day because you have cleaved to the Lord your G’d, i.e. His Torah, the wisdom He revealed to you.”
    Solomon is very specific in describing for whom the words of Torah constitute life, saying “for the ones who have found them.” By adding this rider he makes it plain that not every person is likely to find words of Torah. The reason that not everyone finds words of Torah is because not everyone searches for them. Those who have not found words of Torah would have found them if only they had wanted to find them, if only they had looked for them. This is what Solomon said in Proverbs 2,4-5: “If you seek it as silver, and search for it as for treasure, then you will understand the fear of the Lord  and will find knowledge of G’d.”
    Our sages  in Eyruvin 54 comment on the word למוצאיהם, “for those who find them,” by slightly changing the spelling to למוציאיהם בפה “for those who express these words of Torah as wisdom with their mouth.” The moral reason is that it is not enough to possess knowledge of G’d and to keep it to oneself; one has to spread this knowledge, talk about it. In fact, these words of Torah have to be שגורים בפה, fluent in one’s mouth, one must have quotations from the Torah constantly at one’s command. Concerning these two additional facets of Torah Solomon said in Proverbs 22,18: “it is pleasant if you store them within you, so that they will be ever ready on our lips.”
    As to the meaning of the words ולכל בשרו מרפא, “that the words of Torah will be a therapy for one’s whole flesh,” it is customary for a physician to give a patient a certain drug and to feed it to him in his food or drink so that it will heal the sickness of a particular organ of the body. Very often such treatment has a negative side effect for parts of the body which were not afflicted by the disease. The great advantage of Torah as therapy is that it applies to all parts of the body and that Torah’s therapy does not produce negative side effects in any part of the patient.
    Solomon also teaches in this verse that not only the body but also the soul benefits therapeutically from Torah. Moses underlines that by saying in 6,24 לטוב לנו כל הימים, “to be good for us for all time.” The word כל in that verse clearly is a reference to the hereafter. The words לחיותנו כיום הזה on the other hand, refer to life in this world. This also explains the division of the commandments into what we called מצות מושכלות and מצות מקובלות. The former are designed to help our bodies while we are on terrestrial earth, whereas the other are primarily of benefit to the soul, all their demonstrable benefit being reserved for the hereafter. David referred to this division, i.e. that the מצות מושכלות are of immediate benefit to our bodies in this world, when he said גם עבדך נזהר בהם בשמרם עקב רב, “Your servant pays them heed; in obeying them there is much reward.” The word  עקב meaning reward  occurs both in connection with מצות מושכלות and with מצות מקובלות. It occurs in connection with חקים, the commandments which defy our reason. Nonetheless, David says in Psalms 119,33: ”Teach me O Lord the way of Your statutes, I will observe them עקב.” We have a similar verse in Psalms 119,112. In both instances David means that one of the reasons that prompts him to carefully observe the laws known as חקים is the reward which will accrue for their observance, ultimately, עקב. This “reward” is concealed at this time but David describes it as מה רב טובך “how great is Your goodness,” (Psalms 31,20) a reference to the greatness of the reward. Hence the term עקב רב for describing great reward for the observance of the social laws, מצות מושכלות the social laws, משפטים as we know from
     
    7,12: והיה עקב תשמעון את המשפטים האלה  ושמרתם ועשיתם אותם, ושמר ה’ אלו-היך לך את הברית ואת החסד אשר נשבע לאבותיך, “This shall be the reward when you hearken to these social laws and observe them to carry them out; Hashem your G’d will safeguard for you the covenant and the kindness which He has sworn to your forefathers.” All the promises made in this portion of the Torah are of a physical dimension, refer to the benefits derived by our bodies in this terrestrial life which is but a prelude to life in the world to come. One reason why this type of reward is described as עקב, something “low” “at the bottom like the heel,” is that the reward shared out in this world for mitzvot performed here is insignificant compared to the part which awaits us in the hereafter. That part of the reward is alluded to in the word והיה, a reference to the world to come, a word which contains the letters of the tetragram, G’d’s Holy Name. We already mentioned the relationship between this world and the next world in matters of rewards in explaining the word היום in the last verse of the last portion.
    In order not to create the impression that מצות מושכלות performed היום i.e. in this life, will not be rewarded at all in this life, Moses wrote our verse here to stress that even those commandments will entitle the people performing them to a measure of reward including זיו השכינה, “a certain divine illumination.” 
    There is yet another lesson, a moral one, in the choice of the word עקב by Moses at this juncture. There are commandments which man does not take seriously, tramples under foot, so to speak with his עקב, his heel. The Torah warns us not to do this as we would miss out on the reward for the meticulous performance of those commandments. Our sages warned us of the punishment for the neglect of just those commandments. We are told in Avodah Zarah 18, based on Psalms 49,6 עון עקבי יסובני, “the guilt of my heels which surrounds me,” that the psalmist has in mind these very commandments which we neglect as not worth our while to pay attention to. Another meaning of that verse is that David refers to the kind of commandments which require from us that we walk toward them, situations which we have to create in order to perform the commandments in question. They include such duties as attending funerals, walking to the synagogue to participate in communal prayer, visiting the sick, etc. The reward for such commandments is especially great as the performance of these mitzvot entails that we extend ourselves. Our sages in Berachot 6 who have taught us that on the Sabbath one does not run or make big steps, have nevertheless suspended this rule for people who run to the synagogue. 
    If one does not fulfill the commandments requiring this use of one’s feet and one’s heels one will be held accountable for this on the day of Judgment after death. Hoseah 11,10 who writes: “the Lord will roar like a lion and they shall march behind Him,” refers to people being allowed to run to the synagogue on the Sabbath.
    Naturally, if one is held accountable for merely not running or walking toward the opportunity to fulfill a commandment, if one rums toward an opportunity to commit a sin one will be held doubly accountable. Not only will one be punished for the commission of the sin, but separately for the effort made to enable one to commit it. We are told that the daughter of Rabbi Chaninah ben Tradyon  was condemned to sit in the company of whores as she had walked with an arrogant gait in front of the noble senators of Rome after she had heard the scholars comment on her beautiful legs. She accepted the sentence by acknowledging that G’d had punished her in accordance with Jeremiah 3,19: “wondrous in purpose and mighty in deed, whose eyes observe all the ways of men, so as to repay every man according to his ways.” We learn from this that even the manner in which we walk (and our purpose in walking in such a manner) is something we are held accountable for. All of this is included in the words והיה עקב תשמעון. 
    A Midrashic approach (based on Devarim Rabbah Lieberman edition page 76) the word עקב teaches that the righteous are rewarded only at the end of their career on earth, whereas the wicked are repaid immediately for any good deeds they perform. This is the real meaning of ומשלם לשונאיו אל פניו, “and He repays immediately (for the good deeds) those who hate Him.” On the other hand: ואחריו כל ישרי לב (Psalms 94,15) “and after him (his life) all those who were of an upright heart.”
    
    7,14. ברוך תהיה מכל העמים, “You will be blessed more than any other nations.” The word יותר “more than,“ is implied here though it does not appear in the text. It is a construction similar to Deut. 28,1: ונתנך ה’ אלו-היך עליון על כל גויי הארץ, “and the Lord will make you supreme above all the nations of the earth.”  Alternatively, the words מכל העמים can be understood as מפי כל העמים, i.e. you will be blessed by all the nations. They will all acknowledge your superiority.
    
    7,15. והסיר ה’ ממך כל חולי, “the Lord will remove all manner of sickness from you;” This refers to the kinds of maladies all of mankind is plagued by.
   וכל מדוי מצרים, “and all the specific illnesses prevalent in Egypt;” unusual kinds of diseases. Alternatively, the words כל חולי may refer to sickness which attacks the body from the outside due to climate, and conditions of air pollution, etc. The words וכל מדוי מצרים would refer to diseases originating inside the body. Concerning those, Moses says: “G’d will not afflict you with them.”
    
    7,16. ואכלת את כל העמים, “you will consume all the nations.” When you will utterly destroy them the result will be as if you had eaten them as one eats bread. This is in line with what Calev had said when he came back from the spying mission 38 years earlier when he told his compatriots that the Canaanites “are our bread” (Numbers 14,9).
   אשר ה’ אלו-היך נותן לך, “which the Lord your G’d is about to give to you.” Our sages in Baba Kama 113 state that this was true only at the time when the Canaanites were being delivered into the hands of the Israelites during the years of conquest. Nowadays, stealing from or robbing Gentiles is certainly prohibited. In fact, the Talmud there describes stealing from Gentiles as a greater sin than stealing from Israelites as it involves the desecration of the name of the Lord. The Jewish people are to be models of morality. If we steal we drag G’d’s Torah into disrepute.
    
    7,20. וגם את הצרעה, “and also the hornet,” etc.; remember that miracles occur on two levels, so-called “open” miracles, i.e. visible manifestations of G’d interfering with the laws of nature; secondly there are the so-called “hidden” miracles which are no less miraculous because we do not witness overt interference with the laws of nature. In the previous verse G’d referred to the first category of miracles, the ten plagues, etc., in which G’d demonstrated His mastery over the forces of the universe, the laws of nature.
    Now the Torah, i.e. Moses, turns his attention to the occurrence of “hidden” miracles such as swarms of hornets which occur at regular intervals, almost like rain. Seeing that neither rainfall nor swarms of hornets are the result of changes in the laws of nature they are not considered as miracles. This is why the Torah introduces this element with the word וגם, “and also,” to say that amongst the agents of G’d assisting us in the conquest of the land of Canaan there will also be the hornet. The fact that G’d employs a tiny insect to drive out the powerful people of Canaan is surely enough of a miracle to register with the people who observe this.
    
    7,21. לא תערוץ מפניהם, “You shall not be afraid of them (the inhabitants, not the hornets).” The only One you shall be afraid of is the Lord your G’d. The author suggests reading the first 6 words in this verse together.
    It is worth noting that the words ה’ אלו-היך and the word בקרבך contain two separate praises of the Lord. They are the attributes גדול ונורא, “great and awesome.” These two adjectives, i.e. attributes, refer to the two types of miracles we spoke of earlier. The word גדול describes the attribute involved when G’d performs “hidden” miracles, whereas the word נורא describes the attribute involved when He performs “open” miracles. When G’d’s activities at the Sea of Reeds were reported in the Torah we read about נורא תהלות עושה פלא, ”too awesome for praises, Doer of wonders” (Exodus 15,11). Presently (10,21) the Torah will refer to both kinds of miracles describing them under the heading of “את הגדולות ואת הנוראות האלה, “these awesome deeds and these great deeds.” The צרעה is an insect similar to a fly which emits a poison by means of its sting. Our sages in Tanchuma Mishpatim 18 have said that a plague of such hornets occurred twice; once during the time of Moses and once during the life of Joshua. It would attack the enemies of the Israelites disabling them from offering serious resistance. The Israelites would simply kill the Canaanites without encountering resistance. There is another Midrash in Sotah 36 according to which the effect of the bite or sting of the hornet resulted in the victim becoming both blinded and impotent as if castrated. The prophet Amos 2,9 referred to this when he said: “Yet I destroyed the Emorite before them, whose stature was like the cedar’s and who was as stout as an oak; destroying the boughs above and his trunk below.” Onkelos also translates the word צרעה as ערעיתא, “wasp, hornet.” According to Onkelos, the reason for this name may be that it encounters man like the Amalekites encountered the Israelites in the desert, i.e. אשר קרך בדרך (Deut. 25,18), compare Onkelos there.
    
    7,25. פסילי אלוהיהם תשרפו באש, לא תחמוד כסף וזהב עליהם ולקחת לך, “the images of their gods you shall burn by fire. Do not covet the silver or gold on those idols and do not take it for yourself!”  The sages in Avodah Zarah 52 read this verse as follows: “if the silver and gold was meant i.e. cast for the idol, do not covet it, if, however it was (once) part of the idol itself (seeing the idol has been destroyed or neutralised, ולקחת לך you may take it for yourself.” This is because the word פסל may have one of two meanings. One meaning is that it is a molten or carved image, the idol itself; the other meaning of the word is related to פסולת, reject, that which is left over, no longer fit for its original purpose. This is why our verse may also refer to a situation where the rejects, the leftovers of an idol after it has been destroyed is permitted for further use, whereas the idol itself is, of course, totally forbidden for any  use.
    
    7,26. ולא תביא תועבה אל ביתך, “and do not bring any abomination into your house.”  Our sages derive from this verse indirectly that it is forbidden to rent out one’s house to a pagan as a residence seeing the pagan will introduce various idols into your house. The technical reason why the Jew renting the house to a pagan is transgressing the law is that renting does not confer title of the ground the property is on to the person who has rented the house. Seeing the ground remains the property of the Jew he is held liable (rabbinically) when the pagan practices idolatry in that house. (based on Me-iri in Avodah Zarah 21). However, we find that some halachic authorities take a more lenient view; these include the Jerusalem Talmud as well as Rabbeinu Chananel, hence our practice of renting houses to Gentiles. Nachmanides takes a more stringent view stating that a responsible person will refrain from renting his house to Gentiles not only in the countries under Catholic rule but also in those under Moslem rule. 
   שקץ תשקצנו , “you shall surely abominate it.” The verse teaches that we must relate to idolatry with a very negative and disdainful attitude and when for some reason speaking about it always make plain how we detest it. We are not to refer to houses of pagan worship by the names they are usually referred to but by some name which belittles them, downgrades them. (Sanhedrin 63). We have a principle that unbecoming speech is forbidden unless such epithets are reserved for idolatry and places where such idolatry is practiced ( compare Isaiah 46,1 where the prophet ridicules pagan deities in insulting language: “Bel is bowed, Nebo is cowering.”) The author quotes more such examples from the Talmud where pagan sites are referred to in a derogatory manner.
    8,1. כל המצוה אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “the whole (set) of commandments which I command you this day, etc.;” The placing in apposition of the words כל המצוה, to the paragraph teaching us how we are to relate to paganism is meant to convey that he who takes the instructions of the previous chapter to heart is considered as if he had fulfilled כל המצוה, “all the command-ments.” Our sages reinforced this when they said anyone who denies paganism is as if he had expressly acknowledged the entire Torah; conversely, if someone acknowledges any aspect of idolatry as true he is considered as if he had denied the totality of Torah and Judaism.
    We find the following comment in Devarim Rabbah (Lieberman edition Ntzavim page 14): the words כל המצוה are to be understood as “fulfill the commandment to its nth degree, completely;” the author means that if you have commenced to fulfill a certain commandment make every effort to complete that commandment. Do not content yourself with half-measures. (compare also Tanchuma Eykev 6)  where the Midrash states that the credit for fulfilling a commandment goes to the person who completes it. Although for 40 years only Moses was preoccupied with transporting the remains of Joseph through the desert as we know from Exodus 13,19, the Book of Joshua 24,32 credits the Children of Israel who reburied Joseph’s remains in Shechem with that mitzvah. This is because Moses had not been able to complete carrying out the entire mitzvah.
    
    8,2. לדעת את אשר בלבבך, “to know what is in your heart.” The word לדעת is to be understood as if the Torah had written להודיע, “to make known to others.” The author attributes the comment to Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon. [it is clear that the meaning cannot be “to know,” as G’d does not have to find out what goes on in our hearts. Ed.] We find a similar meaning of the word לדעת in Exodus 31,13: לדעת כי אני ה’ מקדשכם, where the translation “to know that I the Lord am sanctifying you,” would not do justice to the text. [the text discusses the fact that the Sabbath is something called אות, a symbol, a declaration vis-a-vis others; clearly then the word לדעת must have a transitive meaning. Ed.] In both our verses the message is to be radiated to the nations of the world. In order for the Torah to make plain that service of the Lord is the principal reason G’d bothered to create the universe, G’d had to use  the appropriate educational tools. It is possible to understand the words וירעיבך, “He starved you,” as a reference to the excellence of the manna. Anyone eating it would understand the meaning ofמצות המושכלות , “the deeper meaning of the commandments which are accessible to our intelligence.” This is possible only after the traces of physical food have departed from the body. This is also how our sages explained the need for Moses  to be wrapped in cloud before reaching the top of Mount Sinai (Yuma 4 based on Exodus 24,16). During those six days the last traces of conventional food Moses had eaten prior to his ascent left his body. In other words, the word: “he starved you,” is not to be understood objectively, but He ensured that prior to eating manna your bodies were cleansed of any excrement remaining from convenional food. When that had occurred it was possible to become a receptacle for receiving certain command-ments and to cleave to the Shechinah.
    
    8,3. ויענך וירעיבך, “He afflicted you and let you go hungry.” The word “He afflicted you,” refers to the tedium of the journey, compare Palms 102,24: “He drained my strength on the way.” The word “He let you go hungry,” refers to denial of the kind of conventional food eaten by the other nations.
   ויאכילך את המן, “He fed you the manna.” This is celestial food, not terrestrial food.
   ולא ידעון אבותיך, “and which your forefathers had not known.” It is possible that these words are a reference to the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, in which case our verse would describe that the generation of Israelites journeying in the desert enjoyed manifestations of miracles not granted to their illustrious forbears. The reason for this is that the patriarchs had not been granted a proper appreciation of the attribute Hashem as had their descendants. The great and awesome miracles are usually performed by that attribute, and G’d had not needed to invoke this attribute during the lives of the patriarchs. He had contented Himself with the kind of miracles performed within the boundaries of nature, miracles orchestrated by the attribute Shaddai.
   לא על הלחם לבדו, “not on bread alone, etc.,” the bread that people normally eat does not possess the power by itself to keep man alive but it must contain also ingredients enabling it to grow, to be assimilated by the body through a digestive process. These ingredients are usually referred to as the power and mazzal of bread. The Torah here reflects a well known statement by our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 10,7) that there is not a blade of grass in this world which does not have its own mazzal, i.e. properties which enable it to accomplish the purpose of its Creator in calling it into existence. This mazzal tells the blade of grass: “grow!” We know all this from Job 38,33: “do you know the laws of heaven  or impose its authority on earth? Can you send up an order to the clouds for an abundance of water to cover you?” Each of these powers reposing in any of the phenomena G’d created contains within it an adjacent power, all of which combined amount to what we call the laws of nature, the symphony of instruments which combine to keep this universe on track. Moses sums it all up as the מוצא פי ה', “the utterances of the Lord’s mouth.” Just as historic decisions are attributed to הדבר יצא מפי המלך, “the word had emerged from the mouth of the king,” (Esther 7,8) so Moses uses an idiom understandable to us human beings when describing G’d’s activities.
    The principal message Moses teaches us here is that contrary to appearances, the power to keep us alive does not reside in the purely physical properties of bread, or any other food for that matter, but in the potential G’d has placed within that physical food to sustain and make grow the people who consume it. Bread was chosen as the example seeing that in order for man to even produce it so many steps are necessary that one could have thought that the finished product reflects man’s accomplishment more than it does G’d’s. 
    The closer we are to direct divine input and reduced reliance on intermediaries such as the eleven stages needed to convert a kernel of wheat into bread, the closer we are to the true life-giving forces of heaven. This is the meaning of Exodus 24,11: “they ‘saw’ G’d and they ate and drank.” The ability of the nobles of Israel described in that verse to have a vision of G’d is what gave them the energy they normally thought they derived by eating  and drinking physical, conventional food.
    Rabbi Yochanan in expounding this verse in Vayikra Rabbah 20,7 said: אכילה ודאית. This sounds as if he meant that the people described ate regular food after or in spite of having been granted such a vision of G’d. I do not believe that this is what Rabbi Yochanan had in mind. If that had been his meaning he need not have commented at all, as the matter is self-evident. I believe that Rabbi Yochanan meant that the effect of the vision described in the Torah was the same as the effect of consuming regular terrestrial food. Even though all the phenomena in the world are in the last analysis “intermediaries” having originated with G’d, i.e. are מוצא פי ה’, as we know from the very word  כל, “everything,” the manna came more directly from G’d more than any other kinds of food. This is why G’d described it as לחם מן השמים, “bread from heaven” in Exodus 16,4. The complete meaning of the verse then is: “man lives by means of all the various divine sources of food and energy. Seeing that this is so the words מוצא פי ה’ mean that this food, the manna is even superior to the other foods which come from G’d only indirectly.
    
    8,4. שמלתך לא בלתה מעליך, “your garment did not wear out from you.” This was a great miracle involving suspension of the rules of nature. It is normal for clothes to wear out, to disintegrate after much use. The garments worn by the people of this generation remained as new for 40 years. They resisted the acidity generated by human sweat which normally has a very corrosive effect.
    A Midrashic approach based on Midrash Tehillim 23: Rabbi Eliezer asked Rabbi Shimon where the Israelites got all their clothing during the forty years in the desert. Rabbi Shimon answered that their clothing came from the same source as that of the ministering angels. He based this on Ezekiel 16,10: “I clothed you in embroidered garments.” Concerning the meaning of the word רקמה, “embroidered,” used by the prophet, Rabbi Simai said that it is a kind of mantle. To the question: “did they not wear out?” Rabbi Shimon replied: “Did you not ever read the text of the Torah? The Torah tells you that the clothing did not wear out!” To this Rabbi Rabbi Simai retorted: ‎”did then the clothing grow with the children?” He was told to take his cue from the lizard whose skin (compared to clothing because it is shed) also grows with it. To this came the question: “did this clothing not ever need laundering?” He was answered that the cloud would both wash it and iron it. The questioner then wanted to know if these clothes did not ever burn, catch fire? He was told to observe a certain category of animal called Sitin (salamander) which are “sort of dry-cleaning themselves” in fire without suffering burns. The questioner now wanted to know if the people wearing the same clothing for forty years did not ever experience attacks by vermin such as lice, etc.? Thereupon the questioner was told that if the bodies of these people were not subject to attacks by worms, they would certainly not be vicitimised by vermin while they were alive. The next question concerned the foul smell that must have emanated from people who wore the same clothes year in year out without change. The answer given was that the traveling well produced fragrant smells which neutralised any stench emitted by the clothing of the people. This is why they did not have to change their garments at all. In fact, according to our tradition this well made all kinds of herbs grow, herbs the fragrance of which could be inhaled from one end of the earth to the other. The people would waft these herbs to and fro; this is what David referred to in Psalms 23,2 בנאות דשא ירביצני, “He makes me lie down in green pastures.” Solomon also referred to this phenomenon in Song of Songs 4,11 when he said: “and the scent of your robes is like the scent of Lebanon”. Thus far Midrash Tehillim on Psalms 23. The meaning of the word Sittim is “garment;” a garment of the size of a זרת, the span between the two outermost fingers of the hand, is called sit.
    According to Shabbat 105 the word sit refers to a folded garment. It is also reputed to be one of the 72 names of the Lord and if manipulated in the appropriate manner in order to demonstrate the power of G’d against a pagan who challenges it will result in the death of that pagan.
   ורגלך לא בצקה, “and your foot  did not swell;” the word is derived from בצק, dough, i.e. a mass which swells and expands in size. It is observed frequently that people who spend a lot of time walking experience swelling of their feet. It is also possible that this remark of Moses addresses the Levites who had to carry the Holy Ark on their shoulders while walking barefoot. Even though it is actually the law that the Holy Ark is to be carried by the priests, seeing that at that time there were only so few priests, the Levites assumed this function until the priests increased in number. (compare Maimonides Sefer Hamitzvot, positive commandment number 34). Onkelos simply understands the words to mean that not only did the clothing of the people not wear out, but neither did their sandals.
    
    8,5. ה’ אלו-היך מיסרך, “the Lord your G’d is disciplining you.” Moses means that the denial of regular food and the strain imposed on the people by their journeying are examples of how the Lord subjected them to discipline, to tests of obedience and faith. The principal virtue of a Torah-true Jew is his faith in the Lord. The two examples of “afflictions” mentioned by Moses were designed to test this faith.
    
    8,7. כי ה’ אלו-היך מביאך אל ארץ טובה ארץ נחלי מים, “for the Lord your G’d is bringing you to a good land, a land of many rivers full of water, etc.” Moses contrasts the land of Israel with the desert the people find themselves in at this time. We find something similar in verse 6 where Moses emphasises what grows in the land of Canaan. The products mentioned there including the honey from dates and pomegranates are supposed to account for the growth of blood in our bodies. In our verses Moses mentions only the three principal sources of nutrition. The word ארץ occurs six times in the three verses 7-8-9. The word occurs twice in verse 7, and again twice in each of the next two verses. In the fourth verse the word is הארץ when the Torah speaks about the commandment to say grace after meals, a prayer in which the excellence of the land of Israel is mentioned. The reason that the word ארץ occurs 6 times in the first three verses is that the land of Israel is the source of 6 different climatic zones which spread out from this land and which draw on its qualities. Concerning the seventh climactic zone, the Torah uses the expression הארץ הטובה, with the letter ה marking the one and only country boasting these advantages. When our sages in Avot de Rabbi Natan speak about 7 regions, they refer to seven different climates which exist in our globe. David praised the seventh of these climates when he said in Psalms 48,3  concerning Mount Zion that it is situated in the most beautiful region, both  climate and landscape-wise. The words יפה נוף used by the psalmist refer to the climate of Jerusalem. The word נוף meaning climate occurs in Joshua 17,11 in connection with the division of the Holy land to the tribes. The difference between different “climates” is determined by the proximity of the area in question to the sun. It is a well known fact that when people leave one climatic region to settle in another they are liable to suffer disease and sickness as a result. However, Jerusalem enjoys such a good climate that anyone moving there will not experience any problems but will be healthy and never get sick (based on David Kimchi). This is the reason that David calls it נוף כל הארץ, ‘the best climate on earth.”
    
    8,8. ארץ חטה ושעורה, “a land producing wheat and barley, etc.” Seeing the land corresponds to the tenth emanation, it is praised as possessing ten qualities. Five of these qualities are the types of grain that can be grown in the land of Israel successfully. Moses mentions only the two principal varieties, i.e. wheat and barley as he considers the other three as sub-categories, i.e. oats, spelt, and rye. The five types of fruit mentioned make up the number ten. On other occasions the blessings of the land of Israel are summarised under the heading of “a land flowing with milk and honey.” This hints that G’d’s goodwill results in an abundance of products reminding us both of His attribute of Mercy (the white, milk) and His attribute of Justice, (the red colour of the honey from dates). [The author commented on Genesis 36,39 that the abundance of material blessings when abused such as by the descendants of Esau may result in the attribute of Justice being activated. Ed.]
    
    8,9. ארץ אשר לא במסכנות תאכל בה לחם, “a land where you will not eat bread in poverty.” A land in which all the good things of earth can be found such as the land of Egypt which the Torah compared to “a garden of the Lord,” nonetheless lacks certain ingredients found elsewhere so that people eat bread in such a land of plenty in poverty, not enjoying the affluence around them. This is why the Torah praises the Holy Land by comparison to the land of Egypt seeing it offers the same advantages without the accompanying drawbacks. None of the food products found anywhere in the world are not also available in the land of Israel. There are, however, agricultural products which are exclusive to the land of Israel and cannot be grown successfully elsewhere. This is the meaning of the words לא תחסר כל בה, “nothing is lacking in it (the land of Israel).”
    It is possible that the expression: “you will not eat bread in poverty in that land,” refers to something spiritual, i.e. that the word לחם, “bread,” does not refer to physical food. This would not be the first time that Torah has been compared to לחם. Compare Proverbs 9,5 where Solomon, quoting the Torah called “Wisdom,” says: “come eat my bread”. Seeing that it is impossible to acquire Torah and wisdom in the full sense of the word without proper preparation designed to facilitate its study, Moses may indicate here that the ideal such preparation is residence in the land of Israel, which possesses the physical conditions such as ideal climate to enable people to study Torah successfully. Scholars studying Torah in that land do not suffer from the handicaps which scholars in other countries suffer from. Those scholars belong to the category of people known as eating לחם העצבים, “the bread of troubles” (Psalms 127,2), in contrast to the people in Israel. The true wealth of the people in Israel is the quality of their Torah knowledge which was acquired with the help of the superior climate and therefore food produced in the Land of Israel. This is why Moses underlines this thought by adding לא תחסר כל בה, “nothing is lacking in that land.” The blessing is anchored in the word בכל; compare Genesis 24,1 “and the Lord had blessed Avraham בכל.” The reason Moses adds that the stones of the Land of Israel yield iron, is to tell us that in places where one expects to encounter only stone  one will be surprised to find iron. A similar surprise awaits those who see nothing more than high piles of rock in the mountains of that land. These mountains are filled with copper. Seeing that copper and iron are used as raw materials for most of man’s utensils, a land which yields such raw material can aptly be described as “lacking nothing.” A people who have to import all these raw materials are at a serious disadvantage, aware of real shortcomings in their land. If the earth of a land does not yield silver or gold this is at best considered a minor shortcoming. Moses praised the availability of those ores which are needed daily in people’s lives. Moses includes this kind of blessing once more at the end of the last portion of Deuteronomy when he praises the soil of Asher’s section of Eretz Yisrael (33,25). 
    Our sages in Taanit 4 take a Midrashic approach to the words ארץ אשר אבניה ברזל by suggesting that instead of reading אבניה, “its stones,” we might read this as בוניה, “its builders,” i.e. the Torah scholars are possessed of a faith as strong as iron.
    
    8,10. וברכת את ה’ אלו-היך, “you will bless the Lord your G’d.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses means that when you reflect on the painful periods of your history, the sufferings you experienced in the land of Egypt, and you also look back on the discomforts experienced during your long trek through the desert, you will be inspired to bless the Lord as soon as you will enjoy eating the produce of this land. You will include the food of the land in your blessing of the Lord. 
    An approach to these words by our halachic authorities based on Berachot 21: our verse is the positive commandment to recite grace after one’s meal. The commandment is similar in force and meaning to: “you shall make a fence around the roof of your house” (Deut. 22,8), i.e. if you have a house (with a flat roof) you must protect the edges against the danger of someone falling from it. When you ate and were satisfied you have to bless the Lord your G’d for the food He has provided.
    The meaning of the word על הארץ הטובה in our verse is the same as if the Torah had written ועל הארץ הטובה, “and for the good land, etc.” This verse contains a clue to the whole mystical dimension of the concept that man “blesses” the Lord. The whole idea of the creature blessing the Creator instead of vice versa is somewhat strange. We do not find any other place in the whole Torah except here where G’d commands us to “bless” His name. This is the verse which prompted David to say in Psalms 145,1 “and I will bless Your Name.” He also said הודו לו ברכו שמו, “give thanks to Him, bless His Name” (Psalms 100,4). We find many similar quotes in the Book of Psalms. 
    According to the plain meaning of this legislation we must appreciate that we are not dealing with the needs of the Lord but with the needs of man. Seeing that G’d is the source of all blessings and all the blessings devolve on His creatures from heaven it is clearly an impossibility for any of His creatures to bless Him adequately. Seeing that He, G’d, is the original Being in this universe having “invented” all the others, there is really no existence worthy of the name. His Existence is so self-sufficient that it has no need of anyone or anything beside Him. Therefore, even if we were to bless Him all day long and all night long what would we accomplish by this? How would we thereby enhance His existence either qualitatively or quantitatively? Job 35,7 makes this point when he says: “if you are righteous what do you give Him? What does He receive from your hand?” Any usefulness of blessing G’d is one-sided, i.e. affects our well-being not His, addresses our needs, not His. When we bless G’d for what we have received and enjoyed we testify that we acknowledge His השגחה, His benevolent and ongoing interest in all His creatures. The merit we accumulate for ourselves by such an act of “blessing” G’d ensures that He will continue to favour us with His benevolent largesse. The produce, the fruit, etc., will continue to be blessed by Him seeing we acknowledge Him as the provider. This is the reverse side of what the sages said in Berachot 35 that if someone enjoys the good things of this world without reciting a benediction of thanks it is as if he had robbed both G’d and the כנסת ישראל seeing that Solomon said: (Proverbs 28,24) “He who robs his father and his mother and says: ‘it is no offense,’ is a companion to vandals.” Failure to bless the Lord for His generosity in providing for us will result in a reduction of this abundance of good food, etc., and the individual -even the one who was not guilty of not reciting such benedictions- will suffer the fate of the majority seeing that in matters of livelihood the world as well as the individual is judged according to its or his respective preponderance of merits versus demerits (Kidushin 40). Seeing that this is so we can never be sure whether our next action does not place us in the minus column with all the dreadful consequences this may entail. We must therefore always behave as if our fate was in the balance and depended on our next action.
    A kabbalistic approach: the commandment “you shall bless the Lord your G’d,” means that this blessing is neither exclusively for the benefit of the person reciting it, nor is it exclusively an expression of gratitude; rather it is a formula depicting something additional, natural increase, etc., as we know from Exodus 23,25 וברך את לחמך ואת מימיך, “and He will bless your bread and your water.” [the assumption being that G’d will provide additional food and water. Ed.] You must properly understand what the sages said in Baba Metzia114 concerning a debtor on the verse in Deut. 24,13 that when the debtor who had to give the lender a blanket as a pawn is allowed by the lender to have it back so he can cover himself with it by night, that G’d will bless the lender who is so considerate even if the debtor will not. The Talmud says that the subject of the word וברכך in that verse is the one in need of a blessing, i.e. only human beings are in need of blessings as opposed to the Temple Treasury which is not in need of blessings. The Talmud there counters: how can you say that הקדש i.e. the Temple Treasury or any property belonging to the Temple does not qualify for blessings in view of our verse  that after eating and being sated one must bless G’d the provider? The Talmud answers that the reason pawns owned by the Temple Treasury do not have to be restored at night is that the verse ends “and it will be considered a charitable act on your part (if you give it back). Seeing the Temple Treasury is not in need of charity there is no need to return the pawn at night. It is evident from that passage in the Talmud that whereas the Temple Treasury is in need of blessings it is not in need of charity. The reason is that all charities emanate from G’d (the owner of the Temple treasury).
    We have a still more direct proof of the fact that blessings do apply to G’d from the Talmud Berachot 7, where Acatriel, a high ranking angel asked Rabbi Yishmael to bless him, i.e. such blessings are applicable to G’d? We also find in Shabbat 89 that G’d reprimanded Moses for not “assisting Him.” Clearly, man’s blessing or assistance is of value even to G’d? The assistance meant there was a blessing. When we express a blessing for the Lord we add a dimension of Holy Spirit in the universe. Our blessing will become the cause of more of G’d’s creatures receiving His blessing.
    The sages said also that G’d is desirous of the prayer of the righteous. If the meaning of the word blessing and prayer only referred to man thanking the Lord, why would G’d be interested specifically in the prayers of the relatively few righteous people instead of His desiring everybody’s prayer? Do we not have a principle that the glory of the king is expressed by the adulation of multitudes (Proverbs 14,28)? Clearly the very word ברכה implies that the one bestowing it adds an additional dimension to the recipient of the blessing. This is why in our prayers we mention  the words תתברך ותתרומם, “be blessed and (as a result) be elevated, our King, etc.” This is also the reason for the wording in the Kaddish: יתברך וישתבח ויתפאר ויתרומם ויתנשא, “Blessed and praised, glorified, exalted, extolled, proclaimed in His majesty, etc.” In addittion we find that the word ברך, knee, describes the One before Whom each knee bends, i.e. the word ברכה, blessing is directly related to a motion with his kness by the one proclaiming the blessing (compare Sefer Habahir item 4).
    
    8,11. השמר לך פן תשכח את ה' אלו-היך לבלתי שמר מצותיו ומשפטיו וחקותיו, “Be very much on guard against yourself not to forget the Lord your G’d and to not observe His commandments, His social laws and His statutes.”You are aware already that throughout the Book of Deuteronomy Moses constantly speaks of the combined attributes ה' אלו-הינו, the ones we invoke each time we recite one of the blessings mentioning that we perform one of His commandments. The mystical dimension in that formula is that we address G’d both directly i.e. ברוך אתה, as well as indirectly אשר קדשנו וג'.
    
    8,14. ורם לבבך ושכחת את ה' אלו-היך, “and your heart will be arrogant and you will forget the Lord your G’d;” pride is the principal cause of forgetting essentials. Due to the abundance of affluence, peace, tranquillity, etc., a person’s heart becomes haughty, smug, and his evil urge finds it easy to provoke him to follow the dictates of his heart without restraint. When that happens, heaven’s concerns become marginal for him. This is why Solomon felt prompted to say (Kohelet 10,4) “if the spirit of a ruler flares up against you, do not leave your place, for deference appeases great offenses.” Solomon referred to the power of the planet Mars as a “ruler,” seeing it is the instigator of all the troubles and unpleasant occurrences on earth; the evil urge  derives from that constellation. Solomon calls it רוח, spirit, seeing it personifies the spirit of impurity. The meaning of the whole verse is: “if this spirit of impurity wants to assert itself over you, do not prove agreeable, do not listen to it to put aside the concerns of the Lord in order to follow its call. Do not leave “your place,” seeing G’d is “the place” of the universe.”
    
    8,16. למען ענותך ולמען נסותך להיטיבך באחריתך, “in order to afflict you  and in order to test you, to do good for you in the end.” All the tedium the people experienced during their trek in the desert was designed to subject them to a test to get them used to deal with such phenomena and to strengthen their faith when they would emerge from these tests each time. Faith in the Lord had to be instilled in them until it became their second nature (actually “first” nature). This is what David prayed for when he said in Psalms 25,5: “guide me in Your true way and teach me.” The word למדני, “teach me,” must be understood as similar to Jeremiah 2,24: פרא למוד במדבר, “a wild ass used to the desert” (trained in the desert). [The wild ass would not be wild if it had indeed been trained. The meaning is that it was unbridled and reflected the norms applicable in the desert. G’d used the Israelites’ desert experience to train them to cope with adversity by relying on their G’d in heaven. Ed.] Hoseah 10,11 using the example of a heifer, makes a similar point. David asked for G’d’s assistance in training him to do His will until it would become his nature to do so, until it required little effort. We find the same wish expressed in Deut. 14,23 where the commandments of tithing and making pilgrimages to Jerusalem annually are used as prime examples of getting the Jewish people to “learn” to revere the Lord our G’d.
    The reason why the Torah describes a people being fed manna from heaven as suffering, enduring an “affliction” in doing so is to teach that when someone does not have a food supply for a number of days ahead he is considered as enduring an “affliction.” The fact that the supply of manna was only sufficient for one day at a time and the people had to depend on G’d’s goodwill on a daily basis was an ענוי, a serious discomfort. Even the eating of such a limited food supply makes one conscious that there is nothing left when one has concluded one’s meal, a fact which lessens’ one’s enjoyment. Psychologically, this is similar to the blind who cannot see what they eat and therefore do not enjoy it. Peace of mind, and therefore enjoyment of what one has in storage depends largely on one’s ability to see and reassure oneself that one has no immediate worries. Scriptural proof for this is found in Kohelet 6,9 טוב מראה עינים מהלך נפש, “better what the eyes see than what the mind (only) imagines.”
    
    8,17. ואמרת בלבך כחי ועוצם ידי, “and you will say in your heart: “My strength and the power of My hand, etc.” Moses says that possibly your arrogance will become such that you  ascribe your affluence to your horoscope. The word כחי would refer to influences from outer space, astrological in nature, the word עצם ידי would refer to sub-terrestrial influences, demons resident below earth.
    
    8,18. וזכרת את ה', “You shall remember the Lord your G’d.” He alone is the source of your good fortune because He has given you the strength to perform deeds of valour. In other words: “He handed over to you the power to overcome negative horoscopic influences, influences which G’d had created to perform His will in the terrestrial regions. None of these constellations have any power or influence over you and your fate. This is what our sages meant when they said אין מזל לישראל, “Israel is not subject to horoscopic influences” (Shabbat 156). This is also meaning of the end of our verse: “in order to maintain His covenant which He swore to your forefathers as of this day.” G’d, in His first appearance to Avraham, had positioned him above the stars, making him look down at the stars to teach him that his descendants’ fate would not be governed by such stellar constellations. (compare Genesis 15,5 and Bereshit Rabbah 44,14 on that verse). 
    The expression הבט in that verse always implies “looking down on something.” Although, technically, the wording there is in the singular, whatever G’d said to Avraham at the time was intended to cover the Jewish people as a whole not just the individual fate of Avraham. Our paragraph also commences with the singular but continues by using the plural אשר תשמרון לעשות.
    You might argue that Moses addressed every single Israelite making his message relevant for all future generations and this accounts for the address in the singular, and the meaning of the verse would be: ‘’if you will say in your heart  that the wealth and affluence have been decreed from heaven for each Israelite individually rather than for the people collectively.” You would base this on the saying that: “there are no horoscopic forces which determine the fate of the Israelites collectively, though there are such forces at work determining the individual fate of the nation.” You might cite the statement that “economic success, the ability to have children, and the control over life and death do not depend on individual merit but on mazzal” (Moed Katan 28). This consideration might prompt you to ascribe your success to כחי “my personal mazzal.” In fact you would ascribe your success to a combination of the forces at work in outer space and those beneath the earth; Moses tells you here that you must not commit such an error but you must “individually remember (וזכרת את ה' אלו-היך), the Lord your G’d,” i.e. He gave you individually the strength to accomplish what you thought was decreed for you by the stars. Whereas G’d may have used intermediaries to channel success your way, were it not for the power He personally equipped you with, all the stars in the world would not have the power to influence your well being by one iota.
    This is what Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 22,2: “rich man and poor man meet; the Lord made them both.” He meant that success and failure are occurrences; they encounter each other due to the motions of the planets in orbit, not because the people who appear to possess it have acquired it due to their superior intelligence or have failed to acquire it due to their inferior intelligence. Neither is the reason for acquisition of wealth due to more sustained effort by one party than the other. Having assimilated this lesson you might say that seeing that success is not due to effort why make any effort at all? It is all the doing of the horoscopic constellations!” To ensure that you do not reason in this fashion Solomon added: “the Lord makes them both.” Everything is the result of Divine decree, even if it sometimes appears as if it is accidental or due to independent power residing in stellar forces.
    
    9.3. אש אוכלה, “consuming fire.” The meaning is: “like consuming fire.” The reason for the simile is that fire consumes instantly. This is why Moses adds: “you will dispossess them quickly and destroy them.”
    
    9,5. לא בצדקתך וביושר לבבך וגו'...כי ברשעת הגוים האלה, “not due to your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart, etc.,...but due to the wickedness of these nations, etc.” This verse causes us to think that if only the Canaanites had been righteous they would not have been dispossessed, would not have been driven out of the land of Canaan. In that event, what would have happened to G’d’s oath to our patriarchs? The situation is as follows: seeing that these nations are wicked they deserve to be exiled from that land. Even if they had been righteous they would not have been allowed to remain in that land seeing the land had been assigned to them only as a פקדון, an object to be held in trust for the real owners. Ever since the time of the patriarchs the “real” owners are their descendants the Jewish people. G’d, however, is able to give these people some other land seeing that the whole earth belongs to Him. This particular land they could not hold on to seeing G’d had already promised it to someone else. Therefore, regardless of the righteousness of the inhabitants of that land they would have to be transferred elsewhere.
    
    9,11. ויהי מקץ ארבעים יום וגו'...נתן ה' אלי, “it was at the end of forty days,...that  the Lord gave to me the two Tablets of stone, etc.” We learn from this verse that on the very day that Moses received the Tablets the golden calf was made. Previously Moses had mentioned only: “G’d gave to me the two Tablets (verse 10), without mentioning a date. This is why here he repeats the receipt of the Tablets adding the date. This is also what Isaiah 17,11 meant when he said: “on the day that You plant you see it grow...but the branches wither away.” The word תשגשגי used for “growing” by the prophet is related to סיגים, “refuse, garbage.” This was a reference to the sin of the golden calf. Targum Yonathan there also translates Isaiah in that sense.
    9,17. ואתפוש בשני הלוחות ואשליחם מעל שתי ידי , “I took hold of the two Tablets and threw them from my two hands.” Nachmanides writes that Moses describes that he placed his life in jeopardy smashing G’d’s Tablets for the benefit of the people. He considered it as preferable that the people committed infidelity while not married than to their being married at the time (if they had already received the Tablets).
    
    9,18. ואתנפל לפני ה' כראשונה ארבעים יום, “I threw myself down before the Lord as the first time, forty days;” The meaning of the word ואתנפל is that he fell on his face on the ground. Our sages derived from this wording the mode of our prayers which includes three positions, i.e. standing, sitting, and prostrating oneself. Moses mentioned all three of these positions when he referred to his sojourn on Mount Sinai. In verse 9 he referred to “sitting” on the mountain; in Deut. 10,10 he refers to his standing on the mountain, whereas in our verse he mentions prostrating himself.
    A Midrashic approach based on Midrash Tehillim 90,1: Rabbi Berechyah said that Moses did not leave a single corner of the celestial regions in which he did not pray for the Jewish people. We derive this from the words ואתנפל לפני ה' כראשונה , “in the presence of the Lord,” i.e. wherever His presence extended. 
    A kabbalistic approach: The reflexive form ואתנפל means that Moses offered two prayers. During a period of forty days he addressed a prayer to Hashem without informing us of the contents of that prayer. However, his words in verse 18: “because of your entire sin which you committed to do what is evil in the eyes of the Lord to make Him angry,” reveal that the second prayer concerned the fundamental sin committed by the people, a sin equivalent to cutting themselves off from G’d. It was this sin which caused anger to the attribute Hashem, not just to the attribute of Justice. The prayer Moses mentions in verse 26 was addressed to the attribute of Justice seeing Moses describes part of it as his saying: ”ado-nay elo-him,” i.e. (the attribute of Justice)  do not destroy Your people and Your inheritance, etc.” This was the same prayer he had mentioned in Exodus 32,11 beginning with the words למה יחרה אפך בעמך, “to what purpose will Your anger be aroused against Your people?”
    
    9,20. ובאהרן התאנף ה' מאד להשמידו, “ and against Aaron the Lord was very angry wanting to destroy him.” Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 10,5 explain that the word להשמיד in this verse refers to the killing of Aaron’s children. They base this on Amos 2,9  ואשמיד פריו ממעל ושרשיו מתחת, “I destroyed his boughs above and his roots below.” As a result of Moses’ prayer on behalf of Aaron G’d carried out only half of His plan, allowing two of Aaron’s sons to survive. At any rate, this verse is testimony that Aaron was guilty of a great sin in connection with the golden calf, so much so that the penalty was loss of his children. Having read this, we must surely ask: “seeing that Aaron did whatever he did with the purest intentions, לשם שמים, “for the sake of heaven,” (compare author’s comments on Exodus 32,4) and even the text attributes to him only a deed which was wrong not a faulty intention, why would G’d be so angry at him? 
    The answer is that G’d measures great people by a most severe yardstick, according to Baba Kama 50 even deviating from the straight and narrow by as little as a hair’s breadth becomes a culpable sin. That wording is based on Psalms 50,3 וסביביו נשערה מאד, “and people close around Him will be judged even by a hair.” Even though Aaron’s deed was well intentioned, he personally not having sinned in thought, he became the instrument of the  Jewish people not only sinning but desecrating the Lord’s name in public. This is why when Moses confronted him he said to him: “how could you bring such a great sin upon this people?” (Exodus 32,21).
    We find proof of the fact that Aaron personally had not committed a sin in Deut. 33,8: ”You tested him at the waters of Merivah.” Moses also called Aaron חסיד in that same verse, i.e. he had not been guilty of any personal sin other than not speaking to the rock or reminding Moses that he was supposed to speak to the rock. I will discuss this further when discussing the verse in question in detail.
    
    9,23. ולא האמנתם לו, “and you did not believe Him.” This refers to the commandment to trust the Lord in your heart. ולא שמעתם בקולו, “and you did not hearken to His voice.” This refers to the action stemming from belief or non belief, as the case may be.
    It is possible that Moses alluded to the attribute Hashem when he said to the people: “you did not believe Him.” This is why he chose an unusual preposition, i.e. לו instead of the preposition ב which is usually associated with matters of אמונה, “faith.” Examples of the use of the preposition ב associated with the word אמונה are Exodus 14,31 ויאמינו בה' ובמשה עבדו, or Numbers 20,12 יען לא האמנתם בי, and numerous others. If the Torah had used this preposition here, there would not have been any need to write afterwards ולא שמעתם בקולו, seeing the word בו would already have referred to “His name,” and the word וקולו implies “His name.” In order to mention G’d’s attribute of Hashem specifically, the Torah first had to write לו when referring to האמנתם. The full meaning of the verse then is: ‘you rebelled against the command of the Lord your G’d  and did not believe Him, i.e. the Lord your G’d; neither did you obey the Lord your G’d.”
    
    9,26. אדני אלו-הים אל תשחת  עמך ונחלתך, “O G’d, attribute of Justice, do not destroy Your people and your inheritance!”  We discussed previously that this is a formula for the attribute of Justice. We encountered this already in Deut. 3,24 when Moses introduced his plea אתה החילות להראות with these words. I discussed this  formula in connection with Exodus 20,1.
    
    9,29. והם עמך ונחלתך, “seeing that they are Your people and Your inheritance.” Moses means that “You” employed these two attributes when You took them out of Egypt. If You do not forgive them, the Egyptians will interpret this as inability on Your part to carry out Your plan. They will retroactively lose all the respect they gained for You as a result of the miracles You performed for the Jewish people.
    
    10,1. בעת ההיא, “at that time,” at the end of the forty days when G’d was finally mollified and said: “carve for yourself!” 
   ועשית לך ארון עץ, “and make a wooden ark for yourself!”. Moses reports that he first made the ark (compare verse 3) and only after that did he carve out the Tablets. He followed this sequence in order to have a “home” ready for the Tablets when he would return with them from the mountain. If he had not first made the ark where would he put the Tablets when he arrived among the people with them? Our sages  have a tradition that the “ark” mentioned by Moses in verse 5 was the one that he had made immediately after receiving the instructions to carve out the second set of Tablets. In other words, this was not the same Ark which Betzalel was instructed to make for the Tabernacle in Exodus 25,10 (based on Tanchuma Eykev 10).
    
    The ark which Moses made was strictly temporary in order to have a place for the Tablets to be put pending the instructions to build the Tabernacle and to make a permanent home for the Tablets. The wooden ark made by Moses was the ones the people would take with them when they went to war. The Ark made by Betzalel was removed from the Tabernacle (except during the journeys when the Tabernacle itself was dismantled) only at the express command of G’d when the people marched around Jericho with the priests carrying the Holy Ark in front of them (Joshua 6,12). When, several hundreds of years later, the sons of the High Priest Eli took it upon themselves to take the Holy Ark to war with them against the Philistines, the Ark was captured and the sons of Eli died as a punishment for their high handed action. (Samuel I 4,8 describes that although, initially the Philistines were frightened of the Ark, they fought the Israelites and were victorious, capturing the Ark).
    The ark (box) made by Moses contained (initially) both the Tablets and the broken pieces of the original Tablets which Moses had smashed. After Betzalel made the Holy Ark for the Tabernacle the contents of Moses’ ark were transferred to it. This is the meaning of Exodus 25,16: “you will place inside the Ark the testimony which I shall give you.” Even though the Talmud in Baba Batra 14 states: “there was nothing inside the Holy Ark except the two Tablets,” this is not to exclude the broken pieces of the first Tablets, as whenever two restrictive clauses are employed consecutively, the meaning is that something additional is meant, in this case the remnants of the first Tablets. This was after the Temple of Solomon had been built. As long as the Tabernacle of Betzalel functioned as the Temple, the Holy Ark contained the second set of Tablets whereas Moses’ ark contained the broken pieces of the first set of Tablets. (compare Tossaphot Eyruvin 63. Tossaphot base themselves on the verse quoted by the Talmud in Baba Batra which appears in Kings I 8,9.) I have already mentioned in connection with Exodus 16,32 that the Ark constructed by Betzalel was secreted inside the Temple (of Solomon) together with the bottle of manna and certain other sacred vessels at the instruction of King Yoshiah who hid them under an area of the Sanctuary known as מחילה. There was a special reason why these specific vessels were selected for hiding rather than others. The reason that King Yoshiah hid the Ark rather than most other sacred vessels was twofold; one reason was its superior holy status unmatched by other sacred vessels. Seeing that it was the first of the holy vessels to be constructed, its holiness was greater than the vessels fashioned later. It was perceived as a symbol of the celestial throne. As a result of such considerations it was feared that loss of the Ark would be equivalent to a departure of G’d’s presence from the land of Israel. The king knew that the state of Israel was going to be destroyed by Nevuchadnezzar as the prophets of his time had been threatening this if the people did not return to G’d wholeheartedly. It was clear to him that the conquerors would capture and take with them the holy vessels of the Temple to Babylon; this is why he was so concerned with the honour of the Holy Ark that he preferred to bury it and hide it.
     The second reason was that the Holy Ark symbolised for him the journeys of the Jewish people. He experienced that the staves of the Holy Ark which protruded a long distance beyond either corner to enable it to be carried [it was very heavy due to the outer and inner layer of solid gold plus the weight of the Stone Tablets. I have seen a calculation of the total weight of the Ark complete with contents in Eliyahu Ki Tov’s commentary on Parshat Terumah or Tetzaveh. If my memory does not deceive me the weight approximated 3 tons. (76,000lbs) Ed.] 
    During the reign of King Yoshiah these staves became visibly shorter, making transportation by means of them impossible. They reverted to the size they had been in Moses’ time. The king viewed this as a bad omen. Originally, the staves could be seen protruding through the dividing curtain of the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies by causing the curtain to protrude into the airspace of the Sanctuary where it was pushed by these staves. The retraction in the length of these staves meant for King Yoshiah that the Ark was once more destined to travel, just as in the days of Moses. The Israelites, when looking into the open doors of the Sanctuary, could no longer perceive the curtain bulge at the point they were used to see it do so.
    The king also saw that when the High Priest Chilkiyah came to perform the service in the Sanctuary (Kings II 22,8) that he found a Torah scroll on the side of the Holy Ark which had rolled into the Sanctuary (instead of remaining in its assigned place in the Holy of Holies on top of the Ark (compare Deut. 31,26 and Talmud Baba Batra 14). These occurrences meant for him that the Temple would be destroyed. This is the reason why Targum Yonathan renders Ezekiel 1,1 “it was in the thirtieth year” as a reference to the year that Chilkiyah found the Torah scroll we mentioned. When considering these various omens King Yoshiah decided to hide the Holy Ark so that it would not have to travel into captivity.
    We have established that the sanctity associated with the Ark applied to the Ark made by Betzalel, not the box made by Moses to accommodate the Tablets when he would come down from the mountain many months before the Tabernacle had been erected. Moses’ “ark” was strictly a temporary housing for the Tablets pending the construction of the Tabernacle. Concerning the Ark constructed by Betzalel, the Talmud in Eyruvin 63 taught that whenever the Ark and therefore the Presence of the Shechinah were not in their assigned abodes the Israelites were forbidden to engage in marital relations with their wives. It is totally impossible to understand this statement of the Talmud as applying to the ark made by Moses, i.e. the ark that went to war with the people. Seeing that  the Holy Ark was held in captivity by the Philistines for seven months (Samuel I 6,1), we cannot assume that during all this time the people did not practice the commandment to be fruitful and to multiply. [I do not understand the author here. He had previously accused the sons of Eli of taking Betzalel’s Ark to war without G’d’s authorisation although normally only Moses’ ark would be taken to war. Moreover, note that in Samuel I 4, it is clear that it was not Moses’ ark the people took to war on that occasion. Ed.]
     David is also reported to tell Uriah (Bat Sheva’s first husband) to go home and engage in marital relations, all of this while war was in progress (Samuel II 11,8). Surely the prohibition mentioned in the Talmud could have applied only to the Ark of Betzalel. The lesson the sages taught must have been “When the HOLY ARK was not ‘at home,’ i.e. G’d was not at home, how could the people feel “at home,” by indulging in marital relations and carry on “business as usual!”
    
    10,6. ובני ישראל נסעו מבארות בני יעקן מוסרה, “and the Children of Israel journeyed from the wells of Beney Yakon to Mosserah.” Our sages in Jerusalem Talmud Sotah query this as the order of the journeys indicated that the people traveled in the reverse order, i.e. from Mosserah to Beney Yakon (Numbers 33,31). Another difficulty in this verse is the reference to Aaron having died there when we know that Aaron had died at Har Hahor. We find that there are 8 stations between Har Hahor and Mosserah. The correct interpretation of our verse is that although Aaron had died at Har Hahor and had been buried there, the eulogy and mourning for Aaron occurred at Mosserah, so that anyone watching this would have concluded that this was the place where Aaron died and was buried. This is also one of the rebukes of Moses versus the people. He reminded the people that at the end of 40 years when Aaron had died and as a result the protective cloud-cover they had enjoyed during all these years disappeared, they became afraid of the Canaanites, so much so that they had actually retraced their steps through the desert as far back as Mosserah. They had wanted to appoint for themselves a new leader who would lead them back to Egypt. Our sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Sotah explain that the Levites fought against the people who wanted to return to Egypt at that time and killed many of them.
    The reason that this paragraph appears next to that of the smashing of the Tablets is to teach us that the loss of Torah scholars is as great a loss for the Jewish people as the smashing of the Tablets was at the time. Our sages in Eychah Rabbati 1,39  interpreted Isaiah 29,14: “truly, I shall further baffle this people with bafflement upon bafflement; and the wisdom of its wise shall fail, and the prudence of its prudent shall vanish,” as describing the  loss of its Torah scholars as twice as painful for the Jewish people as the destruction of The Temple. The  word הפלאה (bafflement) occurs in the curses of Deuteronomy only in a single form. Only in Isaiah, when referring to the Torah scholars is the word repeated, i.e. is the absence of such Torah scholars described as the greatest possible affliction for the people.
    
    10,8. בעת ההיא הבדיל ה' את שבט הלוי, “At that time the Lord set apart the tribe of Levi.” The time frame described by Moses is when the Israelites worshipped the golden calf. At that time G’d separated the Levites who had not taken part in that sin from the rest of the people. The reason that all this is mentioned in connection with Mosserah is that on that occasion, 40 years later, the tribe of Levi again distinguished itself by not participating in the plan to return to Egypt and by opposing it actively.
   לשאת את ארון ברית ה', “to carry the Ark of the Covenant with Hashem.” This refers to the Levites. 
   לעמוד לפני ה'  לשרתו, “to stand in front of the Lord to serve Him;” this refers to the Priests. ולברך בשמו, “and to bestow blessing in His name.” The priests were to bless the Israelites in Hashem’s name, as is written in Numbers 6,27 ושמו את שמי.
   עד היום הזה, “until this day.” Eleazar was pronouncing the blessing in lieu of his father Aaron who had died already at the time when Moses addressed the people. Eleazar had taken over all of his father Aaron’s functions as High Priest as is clear from verse 6 in our chapter.
    
    10,10. ואנכי עמדתי בהר כימים הראשונים ארבעים יום, “and I stood on the mountain just as during the earlier days, for forty days.” The Torah compared the last forty days to the first forty days; just as the people enjoyed G’d’s grace during Moses’ first sojourn on the mountain so they enjoyed His goodwill during these last 40 days that Moses spent on the mountain. This teaches that the second time Moses spent forty days on the mountain G’d was angry at the people. Moses had to keep praying for 40 days to overcome G’d’s anger on account of the sin of the golden calf.
    
    10,12. ועתה ישראל מה ה' אלו-היך שואל מעמך כי אם ליראה את ה’ אלו-היך, ללכת בכל דרכיו, ולאהבה אותו, ולעבוד את ה' אלו-היך בכל לבבך ובכל נפשך, “and now, what does the Lord your G’d ask of you except to revere the Lord your G’d, and  to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and all your soul.” Moses sums up that in spite of the fact that you have annoyed G’d so many times both at Chorev and in the desert, He is prepared to forgive you on the understanding that from now on you will display reverence for Him.
    Nachmanides writes that this verse is a long verse continuing until the end of verse 13 in our text, i.e. including the words לטוב לך, “for your benefit.” The message is that G’d does not require obeisance, service, love, reverence for His sake, but all of these requests are for your benefit. We have repeatedly explained the concept that seeing G’d owns the universe and all there is in it there is nothing that a creature can do to enhance His well being.
     Our sages in Menachot 43 use the words מה ה' to derive from here the requirement for each person to recite 100 benedictions daily. They read the words מה ה' שואל as מאה ה' שואל, “the Lord asks for one hundred (benedictions)”. The verse contains 99 letters. If you add the missing letter א to make up the word מאה, you will have 100 letters. We have another verse in Psalms 128,4 הנה כי כן יבורך גבר ירא ה', “this is the way a G’d-fearing man is to bless the Lord.” The numerical value of the combined words כי כן is 100. David introduced the rule to recite 100 blessings a day. It had been forgotten in the course of centuries until the Men of the Great Assembly reintroduced the practice 
    
    10,14. הן לה' אלו-היך  השמים ושמי השמים הארץ וכל אשר בה, “Behold! the heaven and the heaven of the heavens belong to the Lord your G’d, the earth and all that is thereon.” I believe that if all the verse was supposed to tell us was the superiority of the people of Israel over all the other nations, it would have been enough to simply write: “the earth and all that is thereon belongs to the Lord your G’d; however He took special liking to your forefathers, etc.“ There would have been no need  to mention “the heaven and the heaven of the heavens.”
    It is more likely that this verse wanted to drive home the point that although G’d owns all the three regions mentioned in our verse, He considers the earth as the most important region. We have clear evidence of this already in the story of creation in Genesis  when the functions of the luminaries in the heaven are defined as providing light for the earth (Genesis 1,14). The verse means that although the planetary systems are very powerful creations, the reason they were created was only to enhance earth and life on earth. Even though the scientists of our day do not accept this opinion, we are bound by our Torah and tradition. Our sages are on record that “the righteous on earth are greater than the ministering angels” (Sanhedrin 93). We find similarly that David writes: הודו על ארץ ושמים וירם קרן לעמו, “His splendour covers earth and heaven; He has exalted the horn of His people for the glory of His faithful ones, Israel.” The psalmist means that G’d has elevated the people of Israel above all creatures in the universe both in heaven and on earth. We have another verse in Psalms 103, 20-22 in which the psalmist urges the following order: “bless the Lord, His angels, the mighty creatures, the ones who carry out His bidding; bless the Lord all of His hosts, His servants, the ones who perform His will. Bless the Lord, all of His (works) through the length and breadth of His realm.” David lists the worlds in descending order reserving the title “His works” for the terrestrial part of the universe. In other words: “terrestrial earth comprises all His works.” Tanchuma Vayikra 1, in commenting on Yoel 2,11 says that the words כי רב מאד מחנהו, “that His camp is indeed very great,” refer to the ministering angels, whereas the words וכי עצום עושי דברו, “and powerful are those who do His bidding,” are a reference to the people of Israel.
    
    We have further proof from discussions of the philosophers who ask why a planet constantly describes the same repetitive orbit? If it has achieved its purpose, why does it keep repeating the same motion? Its motion, its orbit has then become a wasted effort. If it has still not achieved its mission after endless orbits, what good are its orbits? If it had really achieved something visible, how come we do not notice that our lives are constantly becoming more pleasant due to these efforts? The philosophers answer this seemingly unanswerable question by saying that these orbits of the planets are required in order to ensure the continued existence  the “lower” world, i.e. man on this terrestrial earth. This proves that even the scientists admit that man is the focal and pivotal creature in the universe. Once you admit it, it is a small step to understanding that all the seven fixed stars have as their purpose to guide our globe in such a way that it does not come to harm, that the laws of nature operate satisfactorily.
    However if you were to argue that the eighth and ninth star (planet) perform an independent function and have not been created for the sake of our globe there is no merit to such an argument. The fact is that all the planets are much like the skins around the onion, earth being the kernel, the innermost and most precious part, requiring the protection of all these outer layers. The orbital motions of each one of these layers is determined by the orbit of the planet closest to it. [The author continues in this vein citing allusions from Scripture, etc. Seeing all of this is pre-Corpernicus astronomy there is little point in pursuing these “philosophical” musings further. The same applies to the interpretation of “heaven” and “heaven” of heavens” respectively. Ed.] 
    A kabbalistic approach understands the words רק באבותיך חשק ה' as an allusion to the souls of the patriarchs as having been derived from higher emanations such as חסד גבורה, and תפארת respectively This is why upon their deaths the patriarchs became part of the מרכבה, the carriers of G’d’s Shechinah as if they and the emanations from which their souls had evolved were one and the same thing. This, of course, would account for the extraordinary degree of fondness of G’d for these patriarchs as described in our verse. This would also account for G’d’s close relationship with the descendants of these patriarchs.
    10,16. ומלתם את ערלת לבבכם, “You shall ‘circumcise’ the foreskin surrounding your heart.“ The term ערלה is applied when the Torah or the prophet wants to describe a negative character trait, a trait which inhibits development of a personality to its full potential. Anyone who is burdened with such an impediment to his personality development cannot truly embrace the commandments we know as the מצות המושכלות and to understand their true value.
   וערפכם לא תקשו עוד, “and you will not continue with your stiff-neckedness.” Moses implies that up until now the people had been characterised by such a stiff-necked attitude. G’d Himself had accused them of this outright in Exodus 33,3.
    
    10,17. כי ה' אלו-היכם הוא אלו-הי האלו-הים, “for Hashem your G’d He is the supreme G’d;” superior to the angels; (Nachmanides) ואדוני האדנים, “and the Master of masters;” a reference to the planets which have been appointed to run nature. ה-אל, “the Creator,” הגדול, “Who is great in the attribute חסד, הגבור “and in the attribute גבורה, Justice;  והנורא “and awe-inspiring,” in the way He practices the attribute רחמים, Mercy. The three attributes Moses referred to here are perceived as the אבות, the “patriarchs” of the attributes, the others being relatively junior to them seeing they are derivatives, תולדות. It is these three principal attributes which are meant when the sages speak about the מרכבה, the carriers of G’d’s glory. I have already explained on Exodus 33,6 that Moses meant to include all the thirteen attributes G’d had acquainted him with at the time when he now summarises them as  גדול, גבור, נורא. 
   אשר לא ישא פנים, “Who does not show favour,” to the perfectly righteous, by overlooking a minor infraction. 
   ולא יקח שוחד, “and Who will nor accept a bribe, “i.e. offsetting one sin against 1000 merits so that the person concerned is left with 999 net merits and does not get punished for the one sin he committed. G’d will punish the individual for his one sin and leave the reward for the 1000 mitzvot fully intact.
    
    10,18. עושה משפט יתום ואלמנה, “He carries out judgment of orphan and widow.” Even though G’d is so high, exalted, He nevertheless concerns Himself personally with the most lowly one of His creatures. Our sages in Megillah 31 drew our attention to the fact that whenever G’d’s greatness is referred to in either the Torah, the Books of Prophets, or the Scriptures, you find side by side a reference to His “humility,” to the fact that He associates and takes a personal interest in the fates of the most humble. Our verse is one such example. Another example is found in Psalms 68,5 where David exalts G’d’s greatness, following with the words: “He acts as father for the orphans and as judge for the widows. A similar sequence of verses is found in Isaiah 57,15: “For thus said He Who high aloft forever dwells, whose name is holy: ‘I dwell on high in holiness; yet with the contrite and lowly in spirit  reviving the spirits of the lowly.’”
     ואוהב גר, “and Who loves the proselyte;” seeing that G’d loves the convert, we are to love the convert also. We have another verse on the same subject in Leviticus 19,34 where G’d says: “love him as yourself.”
    
    10,20. את ה' אלו-היך תירא, אותו תעבוד, ובו תדבק, ובשמו תשבע, “Revere the Lord your G’d; serve Him; cleave to Him and swear in His name.” The word תירא, means no to violate His negative commandments; the words “serve Him” refer to His positive commandments; “to cleave to Him,” means not to exclude Him from your thoughts .
    Nachmanides writes on this that it is possible that Moses speaks of people who have attained such high spiritual stature that they can claim this level of דבקות בה', “cleaving to G’d” even in their life on earth. They would be considered as already צרור בצרור החיים, the wish expressed by Avigail for David. These people are a domicile for the Shechinah even while on earth. Rabbi Yehudah Halevi alluded to this in his Kuzari 3,1.
    Our sages in Pessachim 22 commented that the word את which precedes the words ה' אלו-היך תירא is a reference to the Torah scholars, the religious authorities who are to be treated with a measure of reverence similar to that reserved for the Lord Himself.
     This statement is attributed to Rabbi Akiva, who was eminently entitled to make such a statement seeing that he alone amongst the four sages who ventured into the Pardess, i.e. the realms of exploring the deepest mysteries of the Torah emerged from there whole in both body and spirit (Chagigah 14). Concerning Rabbi Akiva, Solomon said in Song of Songs 1,4 according to Chagigah 15 משכני אחריך נרוצה, “Draw me, we will run after You.”
    A kabbalistic approach: With these words in Song of Songs Solomon the wise Rabbi Akiva alluded to wisdom, seeing that we have a statement in Job 28,28 הן יראת אד-ני היא חכמה, “behold the reverence for G’d is wisdom.” Rabbi Akiva referred to the hidden wisdom possessed only by the select few on earth. In fact, when Rabbi Akiva said that every time the word את appears in the Torah  [when it is not grammatically necessary, Ed.] we must search for profound mystical meanings that the Torah alludes to by this word, he taught us a great lesson. To quote but one example: the Torah writes in Numbers 7,1 להקים את המשכן, “to erect the Tabernacle.” On the face of it the Torah only had to write להקים המשכן. The sages explain that the extra word את alludes to another (celestial) Tabernacle which was erected at the same time as Moses erected the Tabernacle in the desert.
    Another example of the significance of the word את is found in Genesis 21,1 וה' פקד את שרה, “and G’d had remembered Sarah” (by making her pregnant). The word את in that verse is understood by the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 53,12 as including all the other women who had suffered from being barren at that time. There are numerous other instances where the otherwise extraneous word את affords us many insights which would have been denied us without that word. 
   ובשמו תשבע, “and in His name you are to swear.” Moses means that anyone who has first acquired the attributes listed is entitled to mention the Lord’s name when swearing an oath. Under certain circumstances it becomes a positive commandment to swear an oath, especially when it involves glorifying the name of the Lord. Examples of such circumstances are Elijah who decreed on oath that no rain would fall (Kings I 17,1) in accordance with G’d’s threat (in Deut. 11,17), and the sage Choni Hamagal who  swore not to leave the spot he was standing on until G’d would provide rain (Taanit 19).
    A kabbalistic approach: the words: “you shall fear the Lord your G’d” refer to a reverence for those aspects of G’d which are beyond human intelligence to unravel (the emanation כתר), on the other hand “Him you shall serve” refers to the next lower emanation חכמה, also described as Torah, according to the Jerusalem Talmud, the Torah (wisdom) which preceded creation of the universe by 2,000 years. The word ובו תדבק, “and to Him you shall cleave,” refers to the next lower emanation בינה, the domain to which the souls (of the righteous) will return after death of their bodies. The words ובשמו תשבע are an allusion to the number seven, i.e. the lower seven emanations conclude the reference to all 10 emanations in this verse. [The author proceeds to list several additional verses from the Bible in all of which all of the ten emanations are alluded to, such as Chronicles I 29,11; Song of Songs 5,15; Proverbs 8,22. Ed.]
    10,21. הוא תהלתך, “He is your praise;” according to the plain meaning of the text Moses means that it would be appropriate for you to consider Him as your praise, i.e. not to praise anybody or anything except G’d. It is also possible that what Moses meant was that the words  הוא תהלתך והוא אלו-היך refer to the attributes Hashem and Elohecha respectively. The verse would then make clear that these two attributes are the ones with which G’d relates to the people of Israel. 
    A kabbalistic approach focuses on the meaning of Deut. 26,19 ולתתך עליו לתהלה ולשם ולתפארת, where the word לתהלה would refer to the attribute Hashem and the word לתפארת to אלו-היך. [Basically, when applied to Israel,  the message is that either the attribute of Justice, diluted by the attribute of Mercy, or the attribute of Mercy, diluted by the attribute of Justice is applied to the Jewish people. The author cites a number of apparently contradictory verses to prove that because of G’d’s eternal relationship with Israel He has to temper Justice with Mercy and vice versa or that premise of the reciprocal relationship of G’d and Israel would disintegrate. Ed.]
    
    10,22. בשבעים נפש ירדו אבותיך מצרימה, “Your forefathers comprised only 70 people when they descended to Egypt.” Moses enumerates some of the great and wonderful acts performed by G’d for this nation. It is these which entitle G’d to be loved by this people. Although only 70 people emigrated to Egypt, their number by now had increased to be like the stars in heaven. This is why in the next verse Moses demands that the people love “the Lord your G’d and observe His commandments. Here Moses mentions the number of Israelites descending to Egypt as being 70 whereas if you will check the number given in Genesis 46,27 you will  find that actually only 69 are listed as leaving. Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 94,9 have already pointed out that the discrepancy is accounted for by Yocheved, who was conceived by her mother on the way but was not born until Yaakov and family arrived in Egypt.
    Some sources claim that the discrepancy is accounted for by Serach, daughter of Asher. They  base this on Samuel II 20,19: “I am one of those who seek the welfare of the faithful in Israel.” The words שלומי אמונה in that verse are understood as “completed their number.”
    
    I have seen in Pessikta De Rav Kahane  that it was the Lord Himself Who made complete the number 70 as He said (Genesis 46,4) “I am going down with you (Yaakov) to Egypt.” [In other words 69 members of Yaakov’s family as listed in chapter 46 in Genesis plus the Shechinah went down to Egypt. Ed.].” The author of that Midrash cites our verse: “for He is your praise  and your G’d,” in the same verse as Moses making reference to this number as proof that it was the fact that G’d personally accompanied the Israelites on their descent to Egypt as the reason that they can use Him as “their praise.” A similar approach is taken by the Midrash in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 39 where the words כשש מאות אלף, “about 600,000 foot soldiers” instead of “600,000 foot soldiers (Exodus 12,37) are also interpreted as the Israelites being 1 shy of that number with G’d Himself making up the number 600,000. If we accept this interpretation G’d made up the requisite number both when the Israelites descended to Egypt and when they ascended from Egypt. This would correspond to precisely what G’d said to Yaakov in Genesis 46,4: “I will go down with you and I will also surely bring you up.”
    11,2. וידעתם היום כי לא את בניכם אשר לא ידעו, “and you will know this day, that not with your children who did not know, etc.” This verse tells that all the wonderful deeds performed by the Lord which Moses speaks about are not events which will happen in the future [like the promises of prosperity in the land of Canaan he had told them about. Ed.] Rather, “you yourselves have seen all this with your own eyes.” Everything we read here is an introduction to verse 7: “for you have seen.” Moses recalls that the people (or most of them, those 40 years and over ) have been witnesses to what he is describing. If we find Moses relating to Datan and Aviram and what happened to them while omitting mention of Korach who was the leader of that rebellion, the reason may well be that he felt ashamed that a member of his own family had become guilty of such a sin. Or, he may have singled out Datan and Aviram as they had exceeded everyone else in their demagoguery and their effrontery, strutting around cursing, etc. (compare Tanchuma Korach 8).
    You are already aware that the “hidden” miracles are performed by the attribute Shaddai, the attribute which G’d employed in His dealings with the patriarchs. That attribute is referred to here as the שם הנכבד והנורא  הזה, את ה' אלו-היך in Deut. 28,58. The “manifest” miracles are the ones orchestrated by G’d’s attribute Hashem, the tetragram. This is the attribute of G’d which manifested itself to Moses all the time. This is why you find at the beginning of this passage when Moses refers to all the miracles which affected the bodies of the people, i.e. “hidden miracles,” not dramatic changes in the laws of nature, that Moses employs the attribute ה' אלו-היך for the G’d who had performed them, just as Moses had done since the beginning of the Book of Deuteronomy. When he switches to recalling “manifest” miracles, the ones which changed the laws of nature, such as the descent of people into the bowels of the earth after this event had been announced in advance, suddenly Moses mentions only י-ה-ו-ה, the attribute Hashem as orchestrating that event.
   את גדלו ואת ידו החזקה וזרועו הנטויה, “His greatness, His powerful hand and His outstretched arm” Every intelligent person knows that terms such as “hand,” “arm,” “mouth,” “nose,” etc., cannot be applied to G’d in the literal sense of these words. They merely represent celestial equivalents of extensions of the essence of G’d just as these parts of the body are extensions of the essence of people on earth, extensions which enable the essence to carry out its will. Every such term used by the Torah in connection with G’d describes a specific function such an extension performs. Just as we do not call a “hand” once “a hand,” and another time “a foot,”  the same is true of these terms when used in connection with G’d. We do not lump “arm” and hand together when describing these organs as part of a human being. Similarly, we do not do so when we describe them as extensions of the essence of G’d.
    The definition of יד, “hand,” includes the surface of the hand up until the beginning of the fingers. The part from the wrist to the elbow is known as קנה, whereas the part from the elbow up is known as זרוע. This is the part of the arm on which we put the phylacteries. On occasion this is known as the higher region of the hand, the part on the same level as the heart. Concerning this arm the sages in Menachot 43 said that proof that Israel is beloved of the Lord is that He assigned this part of the arm for them to place the phylacteries of the hand, and the head to place the phylacteries of the head. The proof that the part of the arm above the elbow is called זרוע is found in Job 31,22 כתפי משכמי תפול ואזרועי מקנה תשבר, “may my arm drop off my shoulder; my forearm break off at the elbow.” Job enumerated parts of the arm beginning with his shoulder, followed by זרוע, continuing with קנה, the arm below the elbow, the part which links up with the hand.
    We find similar terminology in the Mishnah in Oholot 1,8 where 248 limbs (bones) of man are enumerated, thirty of them being considered part of the פסת היד, ‘the hand;’ 6 of these bones of the hand are attributed to each of the fingers. The Mishnah enumerates 2 bones as being part of the forearm (below the elbow) and 2 more as part of the elbow, one in the upper arm and four in the shoulder. This Mishnah is proof that the part called קנה  are the bones linking the hand to the elbow. The term עציל is a word found in the Baraitha describing the word מרפק in the Mishnah (elbow). In Biblical language the עציל of the Baraitha is identical with אציל as described in Ezekiel 13,18 על כל אצילי ידי, “upon all my elbows.” Targum Yonathan clearly translates the word אצילי as “my elbows,” [in contrast to Rashi who considers it as “my armpits”. Ed.]
    In Massechet Sofrim 3,15 we find the halachah “a man is not to place a Torah scroll upon his knees and hold it down with his elbows (so it does not fall) as it is unseemly (to place one’s weight upon the Torah scroll).” Having explained the difference between  יד and זרוע, the author of Massechet Sofrim continues: “it is a well known fact that the זרוע is “greater” (more powerful) than the יד, seeing the power of the hand is derived from the arm and not vice versa.” This makes it clear that whenever the Torah speaks of both hand and arm, the arm is always considered as describing something even more forceful than the hand. Both the mention of G’d’s “hand” and mention of G’d’s “arm” are references to the attribute of Justice at work. The attribute of Justice operates on different levels of intensity, however. Just as red wine comes in different shades of red so the attribute of Justice becomes manifest in different degrees of severity. The manifestation of a weak form of the attribute of Justice presupposes that there must be a stronger form from which the weaker form derives its input. I have explained this in connection with the two letters ה in מי כמוכה in Exodus 15,11. This is also the meaning of Isaiah 53,1: וזרוע ה' על מי נגלתה, “against whom has the “arm” of the Lord become manifest?” When David (Psalms 44,4) speaks of כי ימינך וזרועך, “Your right hand and Your arm,” he also refers to G’d employing His power against the Canaanites as first relatively mildly, ימינך, followed by a stronger dose, i.e. זרועך. I have alluded to all this in my commentary on Exodus 14,31 “Israel saw the great hand, etc.”
    When the Torah speaks here of G’d’s “greatness, גדלו,” followed by His “strong hand, ידו החזקה,” and “His outstretched arm וזרועו הנטויה,” this is similar to what we read in 5,21. הן הראנו ה' אלו-הינו את כבודו ואת גדלו ואת ידו החזקה וזרועו הנטויה  describes “His strong hand and outstretched arm, The word כבדו describes the “weak” manifestation of the attribute of Justice, a manifestation containing also part of the attribute of Mercy. This fact is underscored by use of the tetragram for G’d in that verse. It is as if the Torah had written כי בי-ה ה' a combination of Justice, i.e. י-ה,and Hashem, i.e. Mercy. Solomon used similar terms when he prayed at the dedication of the Temple (Kings I 8,42) asking G’d to respond when the people would first hear G’d’s attribute of Mercy mentioned,שמך הגדול  followed by the attribute of Justice, i.e. את ידך החזקה וזרועך הנטויה.
    11,10. לא כארץ מצרים היא, “it is not like the land of Egypt;” a land which depends on manual irrigation, i.e. though water is always available it must be brought by man to the fields. The land of Canaan receives its irrigation directly from heaven, through rainfall, not requiring man to bend down and to do back-breaking labour. As long as you observe the laws of the Torah G’d will provide this rainfall for you and the land will produce its yield. If not, (verse 17) G’d will lock the heaven and there will not be any rain, hence no crops either. Even though G’d could have stopped the river flowing in Egypt if the Jews had remained there and failed to keep the laws of the Torah, Nachmanides already dealt with this by writing that G’d prefers to use minimal interference with natural events. Seeing that the land of Israel, as opposed to the land of Egypt, consists of mountains and valleys, an absence of rain means that whatever moisture there had been before will run off much faster than in a flat land like Egypt in which the moisture is retained longer. Sick people need to possess some merit in order to regain their health. Similarly, if Israel or the land of Israel becomes ”sick” as evidenced by an absence of rain, it has to acquire some merits to be healed, i.e. for G’d to make the rain descend again.
    
    11,12. ארץ אשר ה' אלו-היך דרש אתה תמיד, עיני ה' אלו-היך בה, “a land which the Lord your G’d seeks out; the eyes of the Lord your G’d are upon it from the beginning of the year until the end.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses means that G’d’s supervisory activities are concentrated on this land more than on any other. Once G’d has found out what goes on in the land of Israel, His gaze extends further and further and encompasses the rest of the globe. The matter is similar to man’s organs. First and foremost the heart is examined to determine its condition, seeing that life or death depend in large measure on the condition of the heart, the centre of man’s organisms. Subsequently, a physician examines other limbs and organs which are more peripheral than the heart. The major point of our verse is that the condition of the land of Israel is not left to G’d’s agents, horoscopic influences, etc., but that G’d Himself super-vises this land on an ongoing basis.
    This is also what David referred to in Psalms 87,7 when he said כל מעיני בך, “all My fountains are within you.”  The word מעין is perceived as related to עין, eye; David quotes G’d as saying that His principal supervision is concentrated on “you,” the land of Israel. From there it will extend throughout the rest of the world.
    
    A kabbalistic approach: the words ארץ אשר ה' אלו-היך דורש are a reference to the Sanctuary in the celestial regions. Concerning this celestial Sanctuary the prophet Isaiah 66,1 already quoted G’d saying that whereas the heavens are “My throne, the earth is  My footstool.” “Feet” symbolise a lower extremity. The reason Moses speaks here of two attributes, i.e. ה' אלו-היך, is because he wants to display the linkage between the terrestrial and the celestial Sanctuary, i.e. two extremities of the concept Sanctuary. The terrestrial Sanctuary is known as בית קדשנו ותפארתנו, “the house of our holiness and glory,” i.e. dedicated to the One Who is our Holy One and our glorious One. The word קדשנו refers to the attribute כבוד, and we find this reflected in Psalms 96,6 עז ותפארת במקדשו, “strength and glory are found in His Sanctuary.” In this connection you must appreciate the previous verse(11) והארץ אשר אתם עוברים שמה, “and the land which you are passing over to, etc.” In that verse the Torah refers to the terrestrial land of Israel, the one on which the terrestrial Sanctuary is to be erected. To make this distinction clear Moses describes the mountains and hills in that land which receives its rainfall from heaven (obviously not heaven itself) as distinct from the celestial regions. However, the land mentioned in our verse (12)  is a “land” in the celestial regions, the “tenth” emanation as alluded to by the word תמיד better read as מדת י, “the tenth attribute, emanation.” Seeing that this is so, i.e. the correlation of the celestial Sanctuary and the terrestrial Sanctuary, “our” land is blessed with ten blessings as spelled out in Deut. 8,8 where we explained how, although only seven species are explicitly mentioned there, actually 10 are meant. This entire verse is an allusion to the word הארץ mentioned at the beginning of Genesis.
   מרשית השנה, “from the beginning of the year.” The word מרשית is spelled without the customary letter א after the letter ר. This is an allusion to the New Year, the first of the month of Tishrey, anniversary of the creation, the day on which G’d sits in judgment of His creatures. Our sages in Rosh Hashanah 8 see in this the source for G’d predetermining our fates for the whole ensuing year, based on our past performance.
    
    11,13. ולעבדו בכל לבבכם, “and to serve Him with all your hearts.” Our sages in Taanit 2 ask rhetorically: “what kind of service can one perform for G’d with one’s heart?” They answer: “Prayer.” They prove this from Daniel 6,17: “your G’d, the one whom you serve constantly, He will save you.” Was there then a Temple for the Jewish G’d in Babylon where Daniel could have offered sacrifices?  Clearly the King must have referred to the G’d to whom Daniel prayed in his heart. In verse 11 of that same chapter Daniel is described as opening the window of his room facing Jerusalem when praying.  David also said in Psalms 141,2: “take my prayer as an offering of incense.” Moreover, our sages in Berachot 26 have said that the daily prayers nowadays are in lieu of the daily communal offerings, the תמידים.
    It is important to appreciate that the power of prayer is such that it can  bring about changes in the laws of nature, save people from mortal danger, and bring about cancellation of evil decrees by G’d. We know that it can effect changes in the laws of nature from Yitzchak whose prayer in the presence of Rivkah brought about the new-found ability of Rivkah to conceive (Genesis 25,21). She had previously been barren, and our sages explain that this was so as G’d wanted to encourage Yitzchak to pray to Him to reverse this situation. (compare Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2,31). Our sages explained to us that the barrenness of our matriarchs was due only to the absence of the prayers of either themselves or their husbands.
    Proof that prayer can save one from mortal danger is found in Psalms 107,23: “the ones who descend to the sea in ships.” We know that from when Jonah prayed inside the fish, surely a mortal danger if ever there was such. Not only this, but David continues in that psalm describing how the mariners in time of a storm pray to G’d Who saves them from these dangers. As a result of their prayers G’d silences these turbulent waters (verse 29).
    Proof that prayer is able on occasion to reverse evil decrees by G’d is found in Isaiah 38,8 where G’d tells King Chizkiyah that his prayer has been granted that he will enjoy a 15 year extension of his lifespan after the prophet had told him in the name of G’d to make his last will and testament as he would not recover from his sickness. (compare Berachot 10 on what the king told the prophet) The Talmud tells us not to despair even if the sword is poised to fall on one’s neck, that G’d is still able to help. They quote Job 13,15 to prove their point. Incidentally, our sages there reveal that the power of prayer exceeds the power of prophecy. 
    In this connection we must remember that in the period between Moses and the men of the Great Assembly (over 900 years later) prayer was not formalised as it is nowadays. Every person formulated his prayers in his own words in accordance with his knowledge and ability. The men of the Great Assembly organised the formula which serves until this day as the principal prayer commonly known a the Shmone Esreh, (“18,” according to the number of benedictions which it contains). The main reason the men of the Great Assembly formulated this prayer was to ensure that everyone would learn it by heart and be familiar with it. This is why the language of that prayer is very plain and simple. 
    This would prevent people from becoming confused and making errors. The sages wanted the prayers of both fools and wise men to be identical so that the fools would not feel at a disadvantage.
    These benedictions were composed with the utmost care and with regard to such formulas having proved successful. The introductory  benediction, known as אבות introduces the petitioner as a descendant of the patriarchs and as such entitled to a hearing. It is followed by a benediction known as גבורות, a declaration of our awareness of G’d’s mighty deeds. The third  benediction is called קדושה, a prayer in which we extol G’d’s Holiness. These three benedictions are followed by a string of בקשות, requests  (12 in all) which are arranged both in terms of our spiritual needs, our physical needs, our national needs and our individual needs. The final three benedictions consist of עבודה, a prayer asking for the restoration of the Temple and the sacrificial service in the Temple, followed by a benediction known as הודאה, thanksgiving. This is followed by the blessing by the priests, the prayer for peace, without which all the other blessings are short-lived.
    If you will examine the letters in the tetragram י-ה-ו-ה you will find that if the letters of that name are spelled in a different sequence you have a total of 12 variations, known as צירופים, permutations. An example of these variations is that starting with the first letter י you could follow it with either a ו followed by two letters ה, or by the letter ה twice followed by the letter ו. The three basic letters in the tetragram, the letters י-ה-ו lend themselves to six permutations, i.e. יהו,יוה,הוי,היו,ויה,והי giving you a total of 6 such צירופים. The tetragram, having four basic letters, doubles the number of permutations possible so that you wind up with basically 12 צירופים. [Some authorities speak about 24. Ed] The number 12 corresponds to the numerical value of the word זה in the verse זה שמי לעולם, “this is My name forever” (Exodus 3,15).  The three first permutations, i.e. the ones using the letter י at the beginning, correspond to the first three of the benedictions representing אבות, גבורות, קדושה. The final three צירופים in that series correspond to the last three benedictions עבודה, הודאה, ברכת כהנים. The  6 permutations in the middle correspond to six of the 12 central requests, i.e. אתה חונן, השיבנו, סלח לנו, גאולה, רפואה, פרנסה. The other six benedictions do not have a specific permutation of the tetragram assigned to them and one can perceive them as being used interchangeably. The reason that the 19th benediction, the one added by later sages as a request to ward off the potential damage caused to Jews and Judaism by its defectors and maligners cannot be assigned any of these permutations of the tetragram is that this benediction is addressed in the first instance to the attribute of Justice, not the tetragram as we want that attribute to neutralise these anti Jewish forces. 
    This nineteenth benediction and its significance has already been alluded to in Psalms 29 where after mentioning the tetragram 18 times, David adds the words ואל הכבוד הרעים, in verse 3, a reference to the attribute of Justice. The only reason David changes the attribute he addresses there after having referred to the tetragram 18 times is that he hints that this attribute ought to be poised, ready to strike these virulent anti-Semites unless they retract.
    Another reason that David introduces an additional attribute of G’d in that psalm is that he conveys the message that not only our external enemies but our internal enemies, the evil urge, should be taken care of by the attribute of Justice. We encourage the attribute of Justice, so to speak, to vent its anger on our internal enemies. 
    Among the 12 requests we observe that 6 address human needs whereas the other 6 are the plea for the restoration of G’d’s kingdom on earth and His closeness to His people as it had been prior to the destruction of the Temple. By means of the addition of the 13th request, the one to liquidate the hostile heretics, we have a total number of 13 requests corresponding to the 13 attributes of Himself which G’d revealed to Moses after the episode of the golden calf. This is an allusion to the fact that all the good on earth, be it for the benefit of man or G’d Himself, is channeled our way by means of these attributes in one form or another. It is therefore incumbent upon us to address the Essence of G’d, Who operates by means of these attributes. This is what Moses had in mind when he quoted the Gentile nations (Deut. 4.7) as describing our relationship to that Essence as אשר לו אלו-הים קרובים אליו. The Gentiles felt that no other nation established such a close relationship to the Divine Essence, the tetragram, by means of the attributes as did the Jewish people. This is conditional on בכל קראנו אליו, “providing that when we pray we always call out to Him, the Essence” (Deut. 4,7). The word אליו specifically excludes any of the attributes as being the address to which our prayers are to be directed.
    11,14. ונתתי מטר ארצכם בעתו, “I will give the rain for your land at its appropriate time.” At the hours when it is most beneficial for newly seeded fields. You will be pleased with the timing of the rain, which, according to our sages in Taanit 22 and 23 will descend at night when it does not interfere with any of your activities. In Leviticus 26,3 the Torah words this blessing somewhat differently, writing  “ונתתי גשמיכם בעתם, “I will give your rains at their respective seasons.” Our sages interpret the wording there to mean that the rain will neither be sparse nor excessive. Too much rain soaks the earth so that it does not produce fruit. Another meaning of these words is that the word בעתם, refers to the nights from Tuesday to Wednesday and on Friday nights, periods when everyone is at home. We have a tradition that during the period of Rabbi Shimon ben Shetach  this blessing was fulfilled and the rains in Israel descended only on these two nights of the week. As a result, the wheat kernels were as big  as kidneys and the barley as big as the pits of the olives, and lentils grew to the size of golden dinars. Our sages used this period to illustrate to what extent sins by the people can reduce the fertility of the Holy Land. They used Jeremiah 5,25 to illustrate their point. The prophet wrote: “it is your iniquities that have diverted these things, your sins have withheld the bounty from you.” We also find that during the reign of Herod when the people were busy with major renovations of the Temple, rain descended only at night so as not to interfere with the work of restoring and enlarging the Temple. On the morning following such rain, the clouds would disperse quickly, the sun would shine and work could proceed without impediment. The people would rise at an early hour and go to work at the Temple site.
    
   יורה ומלקוש, “early (seasonal) rain and late rains.” The rain called יורה descends during the first quarter of the season shortly after sowing. It moistens the earth after a dry summer and provides critical moisture for the seedlings (Taanit 6). According to this view the word יורה is derived from רוה, “irrigated, well-watered.” Alternatively, the word may allude to “teaching”, forecasting a good year, i.e. if that rain materialises at the proper time in the proper quantities it is a good omen for the agriculture of the year which just commenced. 
   מלקוש is the rain which descends much later in the season shortly before the barley is ripe for cutting. The reason the Torah called it by that name is because it descends on מלילות, ears of corn already fully formed on their stalks. The second half of the word, קש, may be an allusion to the straw, part of the grain. At any  rate, it refers to the rain that descends near the end of the rainy season. It may be an allusion to the grain gaining volume while on the stalks. Onkelos also translates the word עטופים in Genesis 30,42 as לקישא, “born late.” It may also be an allusion to מל קשיותן של ישראל, that it “circumcises the obstinate posture of the Jewish people.” [when they observe G’d’s blessing arriving on time. Ed.] Our sages in Taanit 6 interpret it thus: ‘when the rains are late in arriving the people will be motivated to pray for rain. They will also become penitents in order not to forfeit the needed rainfall’.
   ואספת דגנך ותירושך, “you will gather in your corn harvest and your grape harvest.” The sages (Berachot 35) ask how it is possible to reconcile the commandment that “the Torah should never be absent from your mouth” (Joshua 1,8), with these instructions to pursue an agricultural career, ploughing, sowing harvesting, etc.? They answer that there are times set aside for both of these activities. This is also what Kohelet 7,18 had in mind when he said: “it is best that you grasp the one without letting go of the other.”
    11,15. ונתתי עשב בשדך, “I will provide grass in your field, etc.” Moses attributed the provision of grass in the field to G’d personally in order to counter the opinions of the people that the world as we know it has been handed over by G’d unconditionally to planetary forces and terrestrial forces encouraging the growth of vegetation. Seeing this was a widely held view, the Torah had to phrase some things in such a way that people will remember that it is only He Who provides the celestial input without which no growth of any sort will manifest itself in our world. David also reminds us of this in Psalms 104,14: “Who makes the grass grow for the cattle, and herbage for man’s labour.” Just as the rainfall is attributed to G’d in verse 14, so the growth of grass is attributed to Him in this verse. The same idea is also expressed in Zecharyah 10,1
    .
   ואכלת ושבעת, “you will eat and be sated.” These words refer to the earlier verse which spoke about the grain harvest and the grape harvest. They do not mean that you will eat grass. The words could also be understood thus: When I provide plenty of grass and grazing in the fields, the animals which fed on this and whose meat you will eat will be a source of satisfaction for you. Our sages in Berachot 40 derive a moral lesson from our verse. Seeing G’d speaks first about the feed for the livestock before assuring us that we will eat our fill, this teaches that we are not to sit down to eat until after we have made sure that our animals have food to eat.
    11,16. השמרו לכם פן יפתה לבבכם, “Be very much on guard that your hearts will not be seduced, etc.” The seduction might result from the very serenity and affluence of your existence in the land of Israel. You might, G’d forbid, become attracted to idolatry and depart from the path G’d has earmarked for you. If that were to happen, G’d will become very angry at you and lock the heavens so that there will not be any rain (next verse). The reason that Moses uses the example of absence of rain as indicating G’d’s anger is because the pagans attribute the very presence of rain to their worshipping their various deities faithfully. This is why it was important to point out to the Israelites that if they would depart from the path of the Torah the very opposite would occur; instead of their assuring themselves of their rain supply through idolatry they would lose that life-giving rain. Isaiah 30,22-23 is on record that when the Israelites who had been guilty of worshipping idols will throw out the silver overlays of these images they will be provided with rain as acknowledgment of their penitence. The prophet also picked rainfall as his example of G’d’s positive reaction to a penitent Israel to remind them that such basics as rainfall are provided only through the Lord our G’d. We have to pin our hopes on Him and not on anyone else.
    
    11,17. ועצר את השמים ולא יהיה מטר, “He will lock the heaven and there will not be any rain.” This is a reference to verse 11 where the drinking of water is credited to the rain which emanates in heaven. The reason G’d did not provide the Israelites with a land irrigated by rivers is in order that such irrigation should not be dependent on their own labour and they would not feel dependent on G’d. A land which requires rainfall to provide its water resources is a land whose inhabitants must turn to G’d pleading for such rainfall to materialise.
    We find a disagreement between the scholars Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Eliezer in Taanit 9 as to the precise origin of rain.  
    Rabbi Eliezer holds that all the waters in our terrestrial universe originate in the oceans (and are recycled via the sky). He bases his opinion on Genesis 2,6 that a mist rose from earth before it had ever rained. Rabbi Joshua believed that the earth gets its rainfall directly from heaven, seeing the Torah told us in our portion “you will drink water which originates in the rain from heaven.” Each one of the scholars has weighty arguments. Rabbi Eliezer cites a powerful proof from Psalms 33,7: “He heaps up the ocean waters like a mound, stores the ‘deep’ in vaults. Who caused the vaults to be filled with water? The “deep”, i.e. the waters of the ocean.” This appears to be proof that rain water originates in the ocean. How do we account for the salt in the waters of the ocean and the absence of such salt in rain water? We assume that while traveling as clouds the waters that had emerged from the ocean are being sweetened.
    Rabbi Joshua cites proof for his opinion that the rain waters originate in heaven from Psalms 104,13: “He waters the mountains from His lofts.” Rabbi Yochanan said that the word מעליותיו in that verse refers to “celestial lofts.” He quotes a Baraitha in Taanit 10: “the waters of the ‘upper’ regions are suspended by an utterance of G’d, their ‘fruit’ is the rain water.” We know this from Psalms 104,13 which describes them as פרי מעשיך תשבע ארץ, “by the fruit of Your works the earth is sated.” The words of these scholars are truly divinely inspired.” It is entirely possible that both scholars are correct and that sometimes the rain waters originate in the oceans whereas on other occasions they are of celestial origin. The key to understanding the phenomena in question lies in the use by the Torah of two different words for the word rain, גשם and מטר, respectively. The word גשם refers to something physical, i.e. rain originating in the ocean, whereas the rain originating in the celestial spheres is described by using both the name גשם and the name מטר, (compare Isaiah 5,10, or Deut. 28,12). When the deluge occurred we also find that it consisted both of מטר and of גשם, compare Genesis 7,4 and 7,12. I have found support for my thesis in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 5. The text there reads as follows: “the thick clouds draw their water from the ‘deep,’ i.e. oceans as we know from Psalms 135,7: “He makes clouds rise from the end of the earth.“ In every place where the King directs them they unload their rain and the earth immediately responds by becoming pregnant and growing vegetation much like a woman who was a widow and has become pregnant through engaging in harlotry.” However, when G’d really wants to bless the vegetation on earth the rain originates in the celestial spheres which are masculine regions. The earth then becomes pregnant immediately and produces vegetation which reflects G’d’s blessing. This is the meaning of Deut. 28,12: “may the Lord open for you His good store, the heaven.” Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer. If you will peruse the Torah you will find that the word מטר, is associated with שמים, “heaven,” in most instances when it occurs. There is a considerable difference in the meanings of גשם and מטר respectively. The distinctions between different meanings as reflected by different words in a language reflect a deep-rooted wisdom. Consider for a moment the combination of the words וגשם מטר in Job 37,6. Elihu had previously said that the snow which originates beneath the throne of G’d’s glory returns to earth whereas the rain which is of physical origin turns into מטר, a most remarkable and inexplicable phenomenon. Our sages have already stated G’d turns flesh into streaks of lightning. This is the meaning of Psalms 135,7 “He turns flashes of lightning into rain.” If we were to accept the verse at face value the meaning is that rain should always be accompanied by lightning, something which contradicts our experience. We may therefore conclude that the מטר mentioned there is not a phenomenon visible on earth. Clearly, the only thing we can be sure about is that the terms גשם and מטר cannot always be used interchangeably.
    
   ואבדתם מהרה, “and you will perish quickly, etc.” if you were G‘d forbid to serve idols you will be exiled from Eretz Yisrael, a good land which does not tolerate sinners for long. We also have a verse in Isaiah 13,9 which states וחטאיה ישמיד ממנה, ”and it wipes out the sinners on it (the earth).” Our sages (Sifri Eykev on the word והשתחויתם) have illustrated this concept by a parable. A father leads his son on the way to a feast and warns him not to overeat there so that he would return home from the feast looking clean. The son paid no heed to the warning; he overate, vomited and returned home in utter disgrace after he had dirtied all the other participants at that feast. How did the other guests at that feast react to such conduct? They took  the son in question by his hands and feet and tossed him out of the palace.
    
    11,18. ושמתם את דברי אלה, “you are to put these My words on your hearts, etc.” our sages in Sifri Eykev comment on this that even after you will be in exile you continue to be obligated to obey the commandments of the Torah. You are to put on the phylacteries, attach mezuzot to your houses, in order that all these commandments will not be strange to you when you return to your homeland. We have a verse in Jeremiah 31,20 reflecting this same theme when the prophet says הציבי לך ציונים, “erect markers, set up signposts!” The prophet means that though the performance of the commandments which require our bodies in order to fulfill them are applicable everywhere and therefore automatically obligatory in exile, the whole Torah was given primarily in order to be observed on holy soil (Nachmanides).
    
    11,19. ולמדתם אותם את בניכם לדבר בם, “You shall teach them to your children to speak about them.” From the time your son (or daughter) is old enough to talk you must instruct him in Torah. One of the first lessons should be the verse תורה צוה לנו משה, as well as שמע ישראל .
    
    11,22.  לתת להם כימי השמים על הארץ, “to give to them as the days of heaven on earth.“ This verse teaches that the land of Israel is given to us in perpetuity just as the days of heaven on earth are a phenomenon which will continue in perpetuity. If the people will be exiled from their land, they will surely return to it in due course. No nation other than the Jewish people will ever have a permanent residence in Eretz Yisrael. We may add that this verse contains the additional promise that in the future, after the redemption, the lifespan of people in the land of Israel will be far longer than nowadays, probably in the region of 4-500 years. This is the reason that Moses chose the simile “like the days of heaven on earth.” The distance from heaven to earth is perceived to be 500 years. We find a similar verse in Isaiah 65,22 where the prophet predicts:  “as long as the days of a tree, My chosen ones will outlive.” This may be a reference to the length of time Adam continued to live after he had eaten from the tree of knowledge. People’s lives in the period foreseen by Isaiah may be similar in length. This will all occur when the Shechinah, which corresponds to the final letter ה in the tetragram will return to earth (in full force). At that time, when the final letter ה will be fully active again, people will not be held accountable by G’d until they have completed 100 years of life on earth as had been the case prior to the deluge. 100 is perceived in term of 5 times 20, the present age of accountability. This is what Isaiah 65,20 has in mind when he writes: ”he who dies at 100 shall be reckoned a youth and he who fails to reach a hundred shall be considered accursed.” Seeing that even a wicked person will be given almost 100 years to repent it is clear that a righteous person will enjoy five times as long a life at least. This is a reference to the tree of life of which the sages said in Bereshit Rabbah 15,7 that it extends for 500 years. This is what Moses referred to in our verse when he compared heaven to earth, i.e. the measurements, distances between one and the other. Basically, Moses (the teacher) and Isaiah (the pupil) speak about the same concept. Moses gave the general outline whereas Isaiah filled in some details.
    One may also view our verse in terms of the lives of our patriarchs whose combined total amounted to 500 years (actually 175+180+147=502). The additional 2 years in that number are: one for the wordהשמים , and one for the word הארץ. The number 500 describes the distance between heaven and earth. You will also note that the “hidden name of G’d, שדי,” i.e. when the letters are spelled as word (שין,דלת,יוד) amount to 500. This is the allusion to that attribute which said די to further expansion and development of the universe. The oath by G’d to the patriarchs quoted by Moses here is the one which promised them a combined life span equal to the distance between heaven and earth, i.e. 500 years. If this oath will be applied to the people of Israel it is thanks to the merit of the patriarchs. A third alternative of the meaning of the words “as the days of heaven on earth,” is that the words refer to the beginning of the creative process and are a reference to the Jubilee we discussed in Leviticus 25,8 i.e. after 49,000 years of this terrestrial universe. Moses, i.e. G’d, promises the people to exist for all that time.
    
    11,22. כי אם שמר תשמרון, “For if you will surely observe, etc.” If you will observe the laws of the Torah Hashem will expel your enemies from before you, seeing you enter the land in order to fulfill the commandments.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Bereshit 1): the reason the words שמר תשמרון are repeated is to tell us that the merit of the commandments which we fulfill will protect us, i.e. the Torah will protect us against our enemies. This is also the reason the previous paragraph commenced with the repeated והיה אם שמע תשמעו. The message is that if you will listen to G’d’s instructions He in turn will listen to your prayers. You may infer the reverse to be true in the event that we do not listen to G’d’s instructions.
    
    11,23.  והוריש ה' את כל הגוים האלה מלפניכם, “Hashem will drive out all these nations from before you.” This refers to the ones that reside near the Israelites’ present location. Afterwards He will also do so to the nations which reside further away, הרחוקים, i.e. wherever you will set foot. Seeing that G’d here indicates a certain order in which the conquest of the land of Canaan has to proceed, we know that David erred when he did not follow this sequence by first driving out the nations which lived further away from the Israelites such as Aram Tzovah, Aram Naharayim. He conquered the nearby countries only afterwards including Jerusalem, i.e. the Jebusite (compare Sifri Eykev 51 ). Our sages also ruled that lands conquered by an individual (with fewer than 600,000 Israelite soldiers) does not have the legal status of a conquest based on milchemet mitzvah. When the land is conquered in the true order, the conquered territories all become part of the Holy Land with all that this entails, i.e. the need to tithe its product, and to give the Levites and Priests all the gifts prescribed by the Torah. Lands conquered as כבוש יחיד, as the result of a private initiative is not subject to the Shemittah and Yovel legislation by Biblical decree. The Rabbis applied this legislation to such lands only so as not to encourage Jews to settle in such lands and to circumvent the intent of Torah legislation.
    
    11,25. לא יתיצב איש בפניכם, פחדכם ומוראכם יתן ה' אלו-היכם על פני כל הארץ אשר בה כאשר דבר לכם, “no man will remain standing upright before you (on account of you); the Lord your G’d will give the fear of you and the terror of you  all over the land on which you set foot, just as He has said.” This verse contains 72 letters corresponding to the 72 letters (number 72) in the tetragram when spelled in a certain manner, adding the following letter to the original one. [י+יה+יהו+יהוה =72. Ed.]. This name is invoked by people familiar with Kabbalah when they want G’d to counteract fears experienced on journeys into uncharted territory. When Moses adds the words כאשר דבר לכם, “as He has said to you,” he refers to Exodus 23,27: “the fear of Me I shall send ahead of you.” This is also what Moses had prayed for at the end of the Shirah in Exodus 15,16: “may fear and terror fall upon them.” He wanted the attribute of Justice to be constantly poised against the enemies of the Israelites both then and in the future. This is also the method employed by G’d in His dealings with the righteous as we know from Psalms 91,11: “for He will order His angels to guard you wherever you go.” This is a reference to G’d’s “sword” which has 16 facets which are instructed to smite the adversaries. I have explained this matter in connection with Genesis 3,24. We have three veses in Scripture referring to this “sword of G’d” in Leviticus 26,25, Isaiah 27,1 and Genesis 3,24. 
    In our paragraph the Torah simply assures us that if we keep all the commandments He will deliver into our hands all the far more powerful nations surrounding us and that we would inherit their possessions. This is why the Torah also had to caution us not to be afraid of the pagans. Anyone who is afraid of someone made of flesh and blood is deficient in his trust in G’d’s promise. This is the reason why fear itself is one of the greatest obstacles our soul encounters in its effort to trust G’d absolutely. Such people may become the architects of their own misfortune although none had been decreed against them. People who are saved from all troubles are the ones who take to heart Deut. 20,5 and Psalms 40,8: “he puts his trust in the Lord.”
   
   
   
   ראה
   
   
   מחרף עצל לא יחרוש, ושאל בקציר ואין, “in winter the lazy man does not plough; at harvest time he seeks but finds nothing” (Proverbs 20,4). Solomon has made it a point in the Book of Proverbs to explain the value of all the good character traits in order that we learn how to avoid the negative virtues. One of the positive virtues is זריזות, diligence, and eagerness to carry out one’s duties. Laziness, by contrast, is a negative virtue, one to be avoided. In fact, laziness is at the root of many of the problems one experiences in one’s life. There are different kinds of laziness. Some people’s laziness becomes manifest in the manner in which they neglect their homes, other people’s laziness we can recognise by the way they neglect their bodies. A third form of laziness is the way one relates to the requirements of one’s soul; a fourth kind of laziness involves one’s attitude to Torah study and performance of the Torah’s commandments. An example of laziness or slovenliness in one’s house is failure to repair a leaky roof during the summer. Not only will immediate steps taken to make the repairs presumably save one greater expense the longer one waits, but one will save oneself discomfort when it starts to rain. Concerning people who put off the inevitable such as the need to repair their roof, Solomon says in Kohelet 10,18: “through slothfulness the ceiling sags, through lazy hands the house caves in.” 
    Concerning laziness, i.e. neglect of one’s body’s needs it is well to remember that if one attends to the need to assure oneself with a livelihood and is satisfied if one attains an average standard of living without trying to attain what one does not need, one is liable to achieve what one sets out to do. This is the secret of “enjoying one’s share.” If one neglects one’s basic needs relying on miracles to happen instead, one is liable to die from hunger. Concerning people who are too lazy to fend for themselves and prefer to wait for miracles, Solomon writes in Proverbs 13,4: “a lazy man craves but has nothing; the diligent shall feast on rich fare.”
    There are people whose laziness is manifest in the neglect of the requirements of their soul. Such people, though aware of shortcomings in their character, make no effort to correct these shortcomings. They forget that the soul has much in common with the earth;  some earth is easy to work and it does not take too much time to make things grow from such earth. Other parts of the earth are by nature hard, difficult to work; nonetheless the farmer must not abandon it in despair; he must invest extra time and will find that eventually even such earth will yield its produce. Concerning such “earth,” i.e. soul, Solomon says in Proverbs 18,9: “one who is slack in his work is a brother to a vandal.”. Some people (their souls) respond to minimal encouragement and discipline. Others require a great deal more. However, if the latter person makes an effort to respond to rebukes, teachings and exhortations he will find that eventually he will rehabilitate himself completely so that positive characteristics will become second nature for him. Concerning such a person (before rehabilitation) Solomon says in Proverbs 24,30: “I passed by the field of a lazy man, by the vineyard of a man lacking sense; it was all overgrown with thorns, its surface was covered with weeds.” In this simile Solomon compared greed and lust to a field seeing it is a derivative of raw material [I believe that by “raw material” the author means something physical, not divine such as the soul. Ed.]. If one does not treat raw material in the manner it is intended to be treated and used and allows one’s urges free reign one will wind up destroying both one’s body and one’s soul. When Solomon goes on in verse 31 to describe that he saw a stone fence lying in ruins, this describes the result of what happens to people who neglect body and soul.
    There are also people to whom the negative virtue of laziness can be applied as they neglect Torah study and the performance of good deeds. If someone is guilty of this in this world how will he attain eternal bliss in the world to come? This is the person whom Solomon had in mind in our opening verse, “he who does not plough in the winter will surely have nothing to show in summer.” Solomon’s definition of laziness is not just failure to do one’s duties, but failure to do the requisite duty on time. There are times which are meant for certain activities. If one wastes these times by not performing the requisite activities such as ploughing in winter, such failure will backfire. Solomon uses the farmer as his model par excellence for describing the results of laziness. He compares our life on earth to “winter” and the hereafter to “summer,” the time for reaping what one has sown. The winter is perceived as under the relatively weak domain of the moon whereas the summer is under the far more powerful domain of the sun. Everyone knows that in a comparison between moon and sun as luminaries, the sun is primary whereas the moon is secondary. Compare what Solomon wrote in Song of Songs 2,11: “here the winter  has passed, etc.” Our sages in Avodah Zarah 3 phrased it thus: “the present world is comparable to Sabbath eve whereas the world to come is comparable to the Sabbath itself.” They therefore ask: what is he going to eat on the Sabbath who has not toiled on the Sabbath eve?”
    Amongst other things the sages explained to us by means of their simile that whereas the present world is one of מעשה, deeds, the world to come is one of מנוחה, “rest and compensation.” It is not a world in which activities which are meant to store for the future are performed. Searching for work in the world to come is a non-starter, אין, one will find nothing (if one had not amassed it previously). 
    Why does Solomon write: מחורף when speaking about the winter, instead of בחורף, as he does when speaking about בקציר, “at harvest time?” The word מחורף must be understood as מפחד החורף, “because of the fear of winter.” It is typical of lazy people to look for any excuse (including weather) to justify their putting off essential tasks which they ought to perform. An example of this is found in Proverbs 26,13: “the lazy man says: ‘there is a lion on the path, a fierce lion in the streets.” He excuses his failure to sow in winter by his fear of the inhospitable climate at that time. The reason that Solomon harps so many times on the subject of laziness is in order to thoroughly delegitimize such laziness in the eyes of people. He wants people to shun this negative virtue and to copy the ways of the ant instead. This is why he writes in connection with the ant: “go to the ant, you lazybones; study its ways and wise up!” (Proverbs 6,6) He means that although the ant is a most insignificant appearing little creature, even brainy man can learn a lesson from such a creature when he observes how the ant stores up food to be consumed at a time when it will not be found lying around ready to pick up. Not only this; the ant has sense enough not to collect its food immediately it has been made wet by the rain but it waits until the wind has dried it so that when it is stored it does not rot. When Solomon adds in 6,7 “which though having no ruler, captain, or overseer,” he means that the ant has no intelligence of its own which dictates its behaviour but is simply prompted by its instincts. It follows that creatures equipped with intelligence would do well to consider the ant as their model. The three words: קצין, שוטר, מושל, “captain, overseer, and ruler,” which Solomon says the ants do not have, correspond to three aspects of human intelligence, שכל, known as חכמה, תבונה, דעת., “wisdom, insight, knowledge.” All of these three attributes are only found in man. They are basically sub-categories of the same attribute. This is why Solomon uses three terms each of which represents different degrees of authority, in describing them.
    By acquiring and nurturing the attribute of זריזות, diligence, man can assure for himself eternal life, whereas by indulging his laziness he is sure to forfeit such eternal life. The former characteristic prompts him to fulfill G’d’s commandments whereas the latter keeps him from doing so. After all, man has been given free choice and our salvation or otherwise lies in our own hands. We are to make the choice between good and evil and only by making the right choice do we qualify for the eventual reward promised by the Lord.
    
    11,26. ראה אנכי נותן לפניכם היום ברכה וקללה, “See, I place before you this day blessing and curse.” The reason Moses commences with the singular ראה, followed by the plural form לפניכם is that he addresses everybody, both the individual and the community (Ibn Ezra), and because blessings and curses respectively are  influenced and channeled from two different attributes Justice and Mercy, both of which were active in creating the universe and both of which are capable of being appreciated only by a select few individuals. When addressing these select few, Moses says ראה, a reference to “seeing” with one’s mental eye. The word corresponds to Kohelet 1,16 ולבי ראה הרבה חכמה ודעת, “I have seen (acquired) great wisdom and knowledge.”
    Seeing that the promise of a blessing and the threat of a curse are an important factor in encouraging observance of the commandments of the Torah by the people at large, Moses used the plural form when addressing the nation, i.e. לפניכם. We find that the Torah used this combination of singular and plural also in  Deut. 4,5: ראה למדתי אתכם חקים ומשפטים, “See I have taught you statutes and social laws.” The singular form ראה was addressed to the individuals who have some appreciation of the statutes, whereas the plural form was used when speaking of the social laws whose merit can be appreciated by the whole nation. The word אתכם in the plural emphasises that the entire Torah, all of its commandments were given to the masses, not to select individuals.
    Our verse here makes plain that the right to choose has been given to man. If he wants to conduct himself in a manner acceptable to G’d he is free to do so; if he chooses to contravene G’d’s commandments he cannot be coerced by G’d. We have already referred to this in connection with Deut. 5,26: “who would give, etc.” We pointed out there that If G’d had not granted freedom of choice, He would not have to “wish” for the people to remain on a spiritual high but could legislate it. The whole premise of this freedom of choice is understood easily by the fact that G’d bothers again and again to command us what to do and what not to do. If we were not free to chart our own course, it would not make sense for G’d to have to give us all these commandments. All He would have to do is to program us according to His wishes. Seeing the principle of man’s freedom to choose is so fundamental, the Torah mentions it already at the beginning such as in Genesis 3,27 where G’d explains the need to expel Adam from Gan Eden by referring to his freedom to help himself to the fruit of the tree of life so that “he would live forever.” Had G’d been able to physically prevent Adam from reaching for the tree He would not have to had to place the tree out of reach for him. In the verse just quoted, G’d makes plain that as a result of having eaten from the tree of knowledge both good and evil have become viable options for man. The words הן האדם in Genesis 3,27 are G’d’s way of saying that man as a species is unique in the universe in that he possesses this freedom of choice. There is no other species like man in either heaven or on earth. The celestial beings have all been programmed by G’d to do His bidding with a minimum of delay and opposition. The reason that man is basically different is that he is the only species composed of both matter and spirit. The celestial beings are totally disembodied, whereas all other creatures on earth are earth-bound, equipped with a minimal “spiritual” equipment, one that merely strives to keep its body physically alive, i.e. the נפש of an animal.
    At the end of the Torah too the theme of man’s freedom of choice is dealt with once more when Moses says: “see I place before you this day life and goodness or death and evil.” (Deut. 30,15.) Our verse here basically reflects a similar message. Concerning this whole subject of what G’d is able to do and how He has voluntarily limited His options, Maimonides in chapter 5,4 of Hilchot Teshuvah has this to say: “Do not be amazed that we read in Psalms 135 6: “G’d does all He wants to do in heaven or on earth, in the oceans and in the deep.” There is no question that everything He does, He does as a result of His will. This is so in spite of the fact that what we do is subject to our own volition. How do we illustrate that this apparent contradiction is in fact no contradiciton at all? Just as G’d wants that fire and wind rise upwards whereas water and earth are programmed through the forces of  gravity to always strive downwards [the four basic raw materials the universe is made of], and the planets orbit in space around the globe, so all other phenomena in the universe behave in accordance with the way G’d has programmed them. Man’s freedom of choice is part of G’d’s expressed desire, i.e. this is part of how He decreed in His own free will that the universe should function. As a result of this system man is judged in accordance with his deeds. If he chooses the right way he will be rewarded, if not he will be punished. This is what the prophet meant when he said in Isaiah 50,11: מידי היתה זאת לכם, “do you think this was decreed for you by ME?” The same theme occurs in Isaiah 66,3 גם המה בחרו בדרכיהם, “they have also chosen their own paths” Concerning the above Solomon said in Kohelet 11,9: “rejoice young man in your childhood let your heart cheer you in your youth; but remember that for all these things G’d will call you to account.” Solomon warns that though it is within your power to do what you fancy and to lead a life of frivolity, remember that the day of accounting is not far off. Thus far the comment of Maimonides in Hilchot Teshuvah.
    
    11,27. את הברכה אשר תשמעו, “the blessing, that you will listen, etc.” Interestingly, Moses did not use the conditional אם when speaking about the blessing, in contrast to his using this word when referring to the people not listening, i.e. את הקללה אם לא תשמעו, “the curse if you will not listen.” Seeing that the word אם implies that what follows is doubtful, Moses did not want the blessing to be associated with a word expressing doubt. The word אשר expresses that something is definite. This is why Moses chose to use this word as describing the blessing, i.e. its materialising.
    
    11,28. אם לא תשמעו אל מצות ה' אלו-היכם וסרתם מן הדרך, “If you will not listen  to the commandments of the Lord your G’d and you will deviate from the path, etc.” This verse teaches that anyone guilty of idolatry is as if he had abandoned all of G’d’s commandments. This verse also inspired the statement by our sages in the Sifri  that anyone who acknowledges that idolatry has any substance to it is considered as having denied all aspects of Torah.
    
    11,29.  את הברכה, “you will give the blessing, etc.”  The word “you will give” in this instance refers to something you will say. Pronouncing  blessing while standing on Mount Gerizim is equivalen to “giving” the blessing on Mount Gerizim. We have a similar construction In Leviticus 26,21 ונתן אותם על ראש השעיר, “he will place them (the iniquities) on the head of the billy goat.” [Clearly, Aaron could not literally place the peoples’ sins on the head of that he-goat. He consigned the sins onto the head of that animal so they would be removed when the he-goat was taken to the desert. Ed.]
    
   על הר גריזים, “on Mount Gerizim.” The meaning is not “on” but “facing” Mount Gerizim. The Levites would turn their faces toward Mount Gerizim and begin to pronounce the blessings. The reverse applies to the “curses” mentioned in Parshat Ki Tavo in connection with Har Eyvol, Mount Eyvol. The Levites would first pronounce the blessing before spelling out the curses for violating the eleven commandments listed there. Nachmanides writes that possibly Mount Gerizim was to the south, i.e. the right of the people, whereas Mount Eyvol was on their left in the North. We have a tradition that evil, misfortune, always begins in the north (Jeremiah 1,14).
    
    11,30. הלא המה בעבר הירדן אחרי דרך מבא השמש, “Are they not on the other side of the Jordan, far, in the direction of the sunset.” Moses gave the people a sign by which to recognise these two mountains. If they were to journey in its direction by bearing west they would find them in the land of the Emorite who dwells in the wilderness opposite Gilgal, close to Eloney Moreh.
    
    12,2. אבד תאבדון, “you must surely destroy, etc.” The repetition of the verb אבד prompted our sages in Avodah Zarah 45 to say that when destroying idols, etc., one must do more than let the remains lie around, but must scatter them in the wind or drown them in the Dead Sea or a similar place.
    
    12,4. לא תעשון כן, “do not do likewise, etc.” You must not burn incense on the various mountains even to Hashem, seeing this was where the pagans offered their incense. The only place where G’d welcomes incense as an offering is the one designated by Him in the Holy Temple (Ibn Ezra).
    
    12,5. כי אם אל המקום אשר יבחר ה' אלו-היכם מכל שבטיכם, “except in the place which the Lord your G’d will select from amongst all your tribes, etc.” The place in question is Mount Moriah; it is well known among the Gentiles. They know of its spiritual advantages through tradition. There is no need to mention this location by name. The people all had a tradition that this was where their ancestor Yitzchak had lain bound on the altar. Maimonides writes in his Moreh Nevuchim (3,45) that there were three reasons why the location of the future Temple was not spelled out at this point. 1) If the nations of the world had known that in that location prayers are answered positively by G’d and sacrifices are welcome to Him, every nation would have made a supreme effort to take possession of that site. This would have resulted in untold slaughter among the nations and ongoing strife among them. 2) If the Canaanites who dwelled in the land at the time Moses spoke these words had heard of them and they had realised that the Israelites would dispossess them and take over that site they would have utterly destroyed it before the Jewish people had a chance to conquer it. 3) Even the tribes of the Israelites would have argued among themselves in whose territory this site, would be located at the time the land was distributed among the tribes. Such a division among the people would have been even worse than the rebellion of Korach when the people were not prepared to recognise the preferred hereditary status of the Priests. For all these reasons Moses preferred not to spell out the exact location of where the Temple would be built in the future. If even the Jews did not know the location, it is clear that the Gentiles did not know it either. Although everyone knew of the significance of Mount Moriah in the past, they had no idea of what this meant in terms of its future religious significance, in terms of the place G’d would choose.
   לשכנו תדרשו, “you shall seek out His Presence.” You should seek out His attribute כבוד which first became manifest on Mount Sinai. In due course this Shechinah would be manifest in the Holy Land, originally in Shiloh (where the Tabernacle stood for over 390 years.). In this instance, seeing that Mount Moriah as the ultimate site of the Temple was not known yet, Moses has in mind the Tabernacle of Shiloh.
    
    12,8. לא תעשון ככל אשר אנחנו עושים פה היום, “This verse addresses the problem of private altars which during the transitional 14 years of conquest and distribution of the land were still permitted as sites from which to present offerings, something which had been forbidden while the people were in the desert, seeing the Tabernacle was right in their midst and there was no need to travel in order to offer sacrifices in it
    12,9. כי לא באתם עד עתה, “because you have not come so far, etc.” This is a reference to the 14 years during which the conquest and distribution of the land of Canaan would take place.
   אל המנוחה, “to the temporary rest, i.e. Shiloh,” ואל הנחלה “and to the permanent inheritance, i.e. Jerusalem.” We are entitled to ask why the Torah made reference here at all to Shiloh as it would have sufficed to allude to Jerusalem which is the principal inheritance. The reason that the Torah writes both מנוחה and נחלה is that  as long as the Israelites were in the desert prior to the erection of the Tabernacle everyone offered personal offerings on private altars, not subject to any rules and regulations. As soon as the Tabernacle was erected all private altars were banned (Zevachim 112) seeing the Torah writes in Leviticus 17,4 “if he did not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle he will be subject to the karet penalty.” Once the people entered the land of Israel and they arrived at Gilgal where the Tabernacle was put up private altars were once again permitted, seeing the Torah had linked the ban on private altars to the existence of “camps,” something which existed only in the desert. (compare Maimonides  Peyrush Hamishnayot Zevachim 14,5) based on Leviticus 17,3 אשר ישחט שור או כשב או עז במחנה, “who slaughters an ox, a sheep, or a goat in the camp;” in other words the insistence of the Torah that all sacrificial offerings be brought to the Tabernacle is conditional on there being different camps which surrounded the Tabernacle. As soon as the division of the people into tribal groups and camps was dissolved, the prohibition to offer sacrifices on the private altars was rescinded.
    It is well to remember that the Tabernacle in Gilgal was the very same which the Israelites had carried with them by dismantling it and putting it together again for the last 38 years. Once the people arrived at Shiloh we find for the first time that the “Tabernacle” is referred to as בית, “house” in Samuel I 1,24. [This “house” though it had solid walls as distinct from the Tabernacle in the desert, did not have a permanent solid roof. This is why it was also known as משכן as we know from Psalms 78,60: “He abandoned the Tabernacle in Shiloh, the tent He had set among men.” At that time private altars were forbidden once again. All of this is reflected in the two terms מנוחה and נחלה used by Moses in our verse. Had Moses not said that in the first instance the people would not come to מנוחה, we would not have had a source for permitting private altars while the Tabernacle stood in Gilgal. This was a period of 14 years. After the destruction of the Tabernacle/House in Shiloh, the Tabernacle which had served as such in the desert was erected in the towns Nov and Givon respectively where it remained for 57 years. The private altars were once again permitted during that period [seeing there were neither camps nor a “house.” Ed.] Finally, when the Temple was erected in Jerusalem, i.e. נחלה, private altars were outlawed once and for all. By mentioning both the words מנוחה and נחלה, Moses indicates that in the interval between these two stages of “Rest” private altars would once again be permitted, i.e. during the period of Nov and Givon.
    Our sages in Zevachim 119 explain the separation between the words מנוחה and נחלה by the word ואל as indicative of the permission to offer sacrifices on private altars during the periods between when the Temple stood in Shiloh and when it was built in Yerushalayim. The reason the Torah applied the term מנוחה to the period when the Temple/Tabernacle stood in Shiloh is that the verse (10) promising מנוחה from all our enemies (i.e. the end of the conquest) was fulfilled at that time. The reason that the word נחלה is used by Moses to describe the Temple in Yerushalayim is  that David speaks about G’d never abandoning (permanently) עמו ונחלתו in Psalms 94,14. Psalms 132,13 had already mentioned that G’d had selected Zion as His residence which He wanted. Another verse in Psalms 135, כי יעקב בחר לו י-ה לסגולתו, is interpreted by Maimonides as expressing the same thought.
    
    12,13. בכל מקום אשר תראה, “in any place that you see.” This is a negative commandment; however, at the bidding of a legitimate prophet, under special circumstances, sacrifices may be offered on an altar outside the Temple such as Elijah’s at Mount Carmel when the purpose was to delegitimise the prophets of the Baal. 
    
    12,14. כי אם במקום אשר יבחר ה' באחד שבטיך, “except in the place which the Lord will choose amongst one of your tribes.” The Torah speaks in general terms without specifying in whose tribal territory this place will be located. It turned out to be the territory of Binyamin (Zevachim 54). In verse 8 in our chapter the wording had been: מכל שבטיכם, “from among all your tribes.” How can we reconcile these two verses? When David purchased the threshing ground of Ornan the Jebusite, the site on which the Temple would be built, he raised the money for this from all the tribes, a total equivalent to six hundred shekel (in) gold (Chronicles I 21,25). On the other hand, the amount paid for that site described in Samuel II 24,24 was only 50 shekel silver. How do we account for this contradiction? The answer is that the 600 shekels must be divided into 12, (the number of tribes). The Book of Samuel informs us that each tribe contributed an amount of 50 shekel to the purchase of the site on which the Temple was built. The reason the number 50 is mentioned at all is that David personally handed over the share of the tribe of Yehudah consisting of 50 shekels.
    
    12,19. כל ימיך על אדמתך, “all your days on your land.” The specific command not to abandon the Levite is applicable only in the Holy Land. Levites in the Diaspora do not enjoy preferred status regarding receipt of charity from their brethren.
    
    12,20. ואמרת אוכלה בשר, “and you will say: “I want to eat meat;” This verse teaches the lesson that only economically well-situated people should indulge in a meat based diet; this is why the paragraph is prefaced by the words כי ירחיב ה' את גבולך, “when the Lord expands your borders, etc.”
   בכל אות נפשך תאכל בשר, “you may eat meat to your heart’s desire.” The Torah permits consumption of non-sacrificial meats with the people’s entry into the Holy Land. As long as the people had been in the desert, meat was basically the meat of the peace-offerings.
    
    12,21. וזבחת...כאשר צויתיך, “you will slaughter..just as I have commanded you.” According to the plain meaning of the text the words “as I have commanded you,” refer to the procedure of ritual slaughter which precedes the offering of animals on the altar. We do not find a single verse commanding slaughter of animals except in connection with sacrificial offerings (compare Leviticus 1,5).
    A Midrashic approach: Moses had received these instructions while on Mount Sinai though they were not part of the written Torah. He had been told that the windpipe and gullet of the animal has to be cut (most of it) during that procedure, whereas in the case of birds only the greater part of one of these pipes has to be severed (Chulin 28).
    12,23. רק חזק לבלתי אכול הדם, “only be strong, not to eat the blood, etc.” Seeing that in the past the Israelites had been consuming lots of blood as parts of the pagan cults they had worshipped while in Egypt, the Torah had to make a special appeal to them to resist the temptation to eat blood. The Torah had to especially legislate in Leviticus 19,26: “do not eat in the presence of blood,” i.e. not to eat meat before all the blood had been removed.
    Similarly, sacrificial meat must not be eaten until after the animal’s blood has been sprinkled on the altar. In our verse the Torah again exhorts us to resist the temptation based on a long tradition to eat blood. Consuming blood is one of the ways through which the Israelites might suffer a relapse to the ways of paganism. The prohibition to eat blood occurs no fewer than seven times in the Torah. (Leviticus 3,17; 7,26; 17,12; 17,14; 19,26; Deut. 12,16; 12,23).
    It is quite customary to repeat again and again injunctions against practices considered as especially objectionable in the eyes of the Lord. For instance, the work-prohibition on the Sabbath appears on 12 separate occasions. This is because the Sabbath legislation is considered as equaling in importance all other laws of the Torah combined (Maimonides end of Hilchot Shabbat). The subject of the Exodus from Egypt appears no fewer than 50 times in the Torah, showing how fundamental to Judaism this event is considered by the Torah.
    Another possible reason why he Torah here uses the unusual phrasing of “only be strong,” is that seeing that it is a widespread perception that consuming the blood of an animal strengthens the body of the person eating it, it is natural for people to think that the whole purpose of eating meat is in order to make the blood part of one’s own body. The Torah therefore has to tell the Israelite that his body will become stronger if he does not eat the blood of the animal. The word רק in our verse exempts the liver, which is all blood, from the prohibition of eating blood. We find a similar exclusion in the words אך כאשר יאכל הצבי in verse 22 where the Torah exempts the consumption of חלב, certain fat parts of the animal reserved for the altar in animals fit as sacrifices from that general prohibition. In other words, חלב of free-roaming beasts such as deer is not forbidden for consumption by Jews. Our verse here was necessary as we might have drawn a parallel between the permission to eat חלב of animals which do not qualify as sacrifices for the altar with blood of animals which do not qualify as sacrifices. The Torah therefore had to repeat the prohibition once more in connection with meat consumed as meat which had not been consecrated first. Also, the Torah wanted to avoid our drawing the conclusion that just as the חלב of a free-roaming beast is permissible, so the חלב of a domestic animal not slaughtered as a sacrifice is permitted. Had it been the intent of the Torah to allow such a conclusion, the Torah would have had to write in verse  22 כל אשר יאכל בצבי  ואיל יאכל, “everything which is permitted to eat of the deer, etc. may be eaten (in all non-sacrificial animals).
   כי הדם הוא הנפש, “for the blood is equivalent to the life-force.” The Torah writes this here to provide a reason for this prohibition. I have discussed this at length In Leviticus 17,11.
   ולא תאכל הנפש עם הבשר, “and you are not to eat the life-force when you eat the meat.” The literal meaning is that you must not eat the meat which has been cut out of a living animal while this animal remains alive. Even if the animal from which this piece of flesh had been cut off died in the meantime, the piece cut off first is forbidden under the heading of אבר מן החי, “tissue from living animals”, a prohibition which applies to all of mankind as we know from Genesis 9,4. The reason is that inflicting such pain on the animal is an act of cruelty which will engender cruel traits in the person consuming such flesh. The Torah adds the words (apparently unnecessary) לא תאכלנו, “do not eat it” (verse 24), to tell you that you must not eat the blood which is slow in seeping out, (which we remove through salting the meat).
    
    12,28. למען ייטב לך ולבניך, “so that it will be well with you and your children, etc.”  Our sages in Makkot 23 use these words to prove that there is a reward in store for keeping the commandments. They argue as follows: if the Torah promises such a comprehensive reward as it does in this verse where even the children of the person observing the commandments are included in the reward for merely abstaining from eating blood, something which disgusts most of us, how much greater must be the reward for performing commandments which really require an effort on our part. 
    Abstaining from sexual relations with partners forbidden to marry surely represents a greater effort and qualifies for even greater reward. The prohibitions of the Torah may be subdivided into three basic categories. 1) Prohibitions of things which human nature craves such as unrestricted sexual relations and robbery, acquisition of property belonging to others. 2) Prohibition of things which normal people do not desire anyway such as the consumption of blood or creeping things and insects. 3) Things which man relates to as neither repulsive nor especially desirable such as the mixing of certain seeds when sowing one’s field or vineyard, or the wearing of garments containing a mixture of wool and linen. Seeing that this is so, the person to whom such prohibitions apply must train himself to detest the matters the Torah has forbidden if they had been something he craved by nature. Seeing the Torah forbade them one must re-orient one’s attitude towards such things because the Torah has forbidden them. This is the meaning of Sifri at the end of Parshat Kedoshim: “a person should not say: ‘I am by nature incapable of eating pig;’ on the contrary, he must acknowledge that by nature he is perfectly capable of eating pig, however, seeing the Torah forbade it he retrained his nature.”
    
    12,29. כי יכרית ה' אלו-היך את הגוים, “When the Lord your G’d will destroy the nations, etc.” This paragraph warns man not to engage in idolatry supplying a rationale for this. The reason the inhabitants of the land of Canaan forfeit their land is that they practiced all the cults which are an abomination to the Lord. The very manner in which they practiced their idolatry was so abhorrent to the Lord your G’d, especially the cult of child-sacrifice. Even the inquiry into details of the former inhabitants’ religious worship is forbidden especially if it is conducted as a prelude to imitating them. One must not delude oneself that these practices were pleasing to the Lord. What these people did has been described in Psalms 36,3 as “because its speech is seductive to him till iniquity be found out and he be hated,” The author of Psalms describes the cumulative effect of Satan’s urgings. The arguments presented by Satan are so seductive sounding that parents take the most precious creature in the universe, their own children, kill them as an act of sacrifice and persuade themselves that they have thereby done the will of the Creator of such sophisticated forms of life as human beings.
    13,1. את כל הדבר אשר אנכי מצוה אתכם, “the whole matter which I command to you;” this refers to sacrificial service and the Temple service. G’d sums up once more that He hates all aspects of pagan worship and none of it must be added to the ceremonies prescribed by the Torah.
    A Midrashic approach to the words כי יכרית, based on Tanchuma Re-ey 9: We may best understand the need for this paragraph by means of a parable. A king had planted a vineyard in his field, a field which also contained great cedar trees as well as thorns and weeds. The king cut down the trees, but left the thorns untouched. When his servants observed this they remonstrated with the king saying: “our Lord, the thorns which tore our clothing you left untouched whereas the trees which give shade, etc., you cut down!” The king replied: “if I had uprooted the thorns and left the trees standing what would I use to fence off my vineyard?” This would not have been an appropriate way of doing things. The way I have done things provided me with lumber for the fence and provided more sunshine for my vineyard to produce good grapes. Israel is viewed as G’d’s vineyard as we know from Isaiah 5,7: “for the house of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts.” When G’d made the Israelites enter the vineyard, i.e. the land of Israel, He had already cut down the mighty cedars, i.e. the Emorites who lived there, people as powerful as oaks (Amos 2,10), but He left the children and grandchildren of these powerful Emorites in the meantime until the Israelites arrived so that they would tend the land (the vineyard) pending the Israelites’ arrival. We know this from Judges 3,1: “and these are the nations which the Lord left alive there in order to test the Israelites (who had not been alive at the time of the war of conquest).” We find a similar verse in Judges 2,22: “for it was in order to test Israel by them (the remaining Canaanites) to see whether they would faithfully walk in the ways of the Lord or not.” If the vineyard would remain in place as a result of the Israelites observing the Torah the remaining Canaanites would become “burnings of lime, thorns cut down that are set on fire” (Isaiah 32,12).
    
    13,2. כי יקום בקרבך נביא, “When a prophet will arise among you, etc.” This refers to someone claiming to be a prophet, claiming that G’d had communicated with him either while he was awake or while he was dreaming.
   ונתן אליך אות, “and he will produce a sign (miracle) for you,” something in heaven proving G’d had communicated with him. (compare Judges 6,17) 
   או מופת, “or a miracle,” something occurring on terrestrial earth which defies the laws of nature. The Torah tells you that such miracles nothwithstanding you are not to listen to his instructions. (Rashi) If you will ask why G’d has empowered such a person to perform a miracle, the Torah answers that G’d will test your faith in Him by doing so.
    [it is assumed that the so-called prophet uses the miracle to entice you to violate a law of the Torah you are familiar with, primarily forms of idolatry. Ed.] 
    Nachmanides understands the word אות או מופת as follows: אות is advance notice of an otherwise unexpected future event, the sort of thing Moses did when he announced the arrival and time of the plagues to Pharaoh beforehand. The Torah had referred to his staff as the instrument with which he would make these אותות occur. (Exodus 4,17) Isaiah 7,14 also uses the word אות to describes an event he had foretold. The word is derived from אתה, “i.e. to come, to arrive, to occur,” as in Deut. 33,2 ואתה מרבבות קודש, “He arrived with myriads of holy ones” (angels.)
    The word מופת on the other hand, describes a totally new phenomenon occurring on earth, such as when G’d said in Yoel 3,3 ונתתי מופתים בשמים ובארץ, “I will perform miracles in the sky and on earth.” The word מופת is an abbreviation of the word מופלאת,  (compare Job 37,16). In Egypt G’d had performed both אותות ומופתים as we know from Deut. 4,34. אותות were the ones Moses had announced in advance, whereas מופתים took the victims by surprise and also defied the laws of nature.
    It is a well known fact that one does not accept a person’s claim to be a prophet until he has legitimised himself either by an אות or by a מופת. Not only do the miracles he foretold have to occur, but they have to occur 100% as he had foretold, both regarding date, regarding extent, etc. If a single detail of what the claimant promised did not materialise it is certain that he is not a prophet. Once a person has legitimised himself in that all the miracles he foretold occurred in accordance with his predictions, if he will foretell a disaster in the future and the disaster does not occur this does not mean that he is a fraud. The test of whether a prophet is real or an impostor is when he foretold something pleasant, something that people look forward to and all or some of it fails to materialise. It makes no difference whether his prophecy concerned an individual or a group of people; not a single detail of what he predicted is allowed to fail to come true. In Jeremiah 28,9 the prophet told Chananiah son of Azor, who claimed to be a prophet “if a prophet prophesies good fortune, then only when the word of the prophet comes true can it be known that the Lord really sent him.” When prophets predict disasters which do not occur, one does not suspect them but attributes this to other causes, primarily that the people warned of the disaster had repented. After all, the whole purpose of the prophet’s mission is to cause people to return to G’d in penitence. We have a rule that G’d never reconsiders the promise of good fortune. (compare Maimonides Yessodey Hatorah 10,4). Proof that the failure of a prophet’s foretelling disaster does not disqualify him when it does not occur, is what happened a Nineveh. Jonah was not discredited by the people of Nineveh doing teshuvah. Had G’d wanted to destroy those people at that time why did He have to send the prophet to them in the first place? When Isaiah told king Chizkiyah מות תמות, “you will surely die,” it did not discredit the prophet when Chizkiyah was given 15 more years of life on earth. At the time Iaaiah warned Chizkiyah he was most certainly under divine sentence of death. G’d allowed Himself to be entreated by him; this did not make Isaiah a liar. The technical reason why such prophetic pronouncements can be canceled is that teshuvah, repentance, was created prior to the creation of the universe, i.e. it overrides anything created later. (compare Pessachim 54).
    
    13,5. אחרי ה' אלו-היכם תלכו, “Follow Hashem your G’d!” This is an exhortation to emulate G’d’s attributes. The call by Moses here is similar to והלכת בדרכיו in Deut. 28,9.
   ואותו תיראו, “and Him you shall revere.” Do no relate to Him by trying to investigate His essence but by assessing His manifest actions. 
   ואת מצותיו תשמרו, “and His commandments you are to observe.” This is a reference to the written Torah, the 613 commandments written therein.
   ובקולו תשמעו, “and to His voice you are to hearken.” This refers to the prophets and includes the oral Torah as we learned in Avot 1,1: “Moses received the Torah (orally) at Mount Sinai and handed it over to Joshua,” etc.
   ואותו תעבודו, “and Him you shall serve.” This refers to prayer. ובו תדבקון, “and to Him you shall cleave.” This means that even while you are preoccupied with matters other than Torah, matters which are your legitimate concern, such as working for a living, you shall still have G’d on your mind and not totally disassociate your mind from Him even at such times.
    Alternatively, the meaning could be that you should not ever entertain the thought to leave the service of the Lord. When someone is a slave, even if he is fortunate enough to have the most accommodating and sympathetic master, there are times when he wishes to be free, independent. A Jew is never to allow himself the feeling that he wants to be free of his obligations vis-a-vis the Lord. The affinity between Israelite and G’d should be one that neither party ever wishes to sever. The reason is that true freedom is this very cleaving to Hashem, the best insurance against being enslaved to the evil urge.
    It is also possible to view the words ובו תדבקון not so much as a command but as a promise. It is the promise of life in the world to come if we have fulfilled the instructions in the first half of the verse to emulate the attributes of the Lord, to revere Him and to serve Him by praying to Him and to observe His commandments, both the written ones and the oral ones (compare Ibn Ezra).
    
    13,6. כי דבר סרה על ה' אלו-היכם המוציא אתכם מארץ מצרים, “for he has spoken perversely against the Lord your G’d Who has taken you out of the land of Egypt.” In other words, the false prophet is guilty of insurrection against heaven even if he performed numerous miracles and placed the sun in the zenith of the sky (at morning or evening) and claimed that this was proof that G’d had instructed him to do so, so  that on that particular day we are to serve a certain planet or constellation of stars or other celestial manifestations. Such an impostor is guilty of death by asphyxiation. The reason is that by doing what he did he challenged Moses’s stature as G’d’s foremost prophet (compare Maimonides Hilchot Yessodey Hatorah 9,5). By claiming to have received such instructions from G’d he violated the second of the Ten Commandments that “you shall not have any other deity.” All of the people of Israel had heard this commandment directly from G’d with their own ears. How could anyone come later and claim that G’d had suspended this commandment even for a day?! All of Israel were witnesses against this so-called prophet even before he spoke. This is why the Torah decrees that such a person must be executed seeing all the “so-called” miracles he performed were not real but were deceptions of his audience, sleight of hand, power of suggestion, mass hypnosis, whatever you want to call it.
    
    What we have said so far applies only when such a “prophet” asks the people or some of them to commit an act known to be forbidden as idolatrous. If however, a prophet, who had legitimised himself and had been proven to be a legitimate prophet for an extended  period of time, will call on the people to temporarily disregard one of the other commandments of the Torah we must listen to him and continue to believe him and to follow his instructions seeing he made it clear that the  suspension of the particular commandment he called for was only temporary. This is the meaning of the words אליו תשמעון, “to him you shall hearken” in Deut. 18,15 where the subject of prophets occurs once more. [if the prophet merely called upon you to perform the commandments of the Torah, the Torah would not have had to tell us that we must be “listening to him;” we  would be listening to G’d directly, without the need of a prophet’s call. to do so. Ed.] If we do rely on the miracles performed by such a prophet and do not treat them as deception and sleight of hand this is because he has a חזקה, an established reputation, of being a true prophet. If for some reason unknown to us such a prophet becomes a renegade, the Torah does not consider our being misled by him as our fault, but wrote in Deut. 29,28 הנסתרות לה' אלו-הינו, “hidden matters are G’d’s problem” (not our province to investigate). On the other hand הנגלות לנו ולבנינו , “matters which can be clarified by our using our means of detection, we ourselves are held responsible for.” Man must judge by what his eyes see, only G’d is able to look into a man’s heart. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Yessodey Hatorah end of chapter 7) The Talmud Sanhedrin 90 also rules that when an established prophet such as Elijah at the time calls upon you to repair a private altar in order to discredit the priests of the Baal, we are to listen to such a prophet. The exception is if such a prophet were to ask you to commit an act of idolatry. The fact that Elijah offered a sacrifice outside the Temple, something prohibited in Leviticus 17,4 and 9, was prompted only by special circumstances. 
    Anyone arguing that a commandment should be canceled permanently is a false prophet seeing the commandments of the Torah (unless otherwise stated) are permanent This is the meaning of the last half of the verse we quoted from Deut. 29,28 לנו ולבנינו עד עולם לעשות את כל דברי התורה הזאת, “for us and for our children to carry out all the words of this Torah forever.” What the sages said in respect of Elijah at Mount Carmel is applicable in all similar situations when prophets cancel Torah injunctions as an emergency measure. When Joshua (compare Bamidbar Rabbah 14,5) violated the Sabbath when the priests carrying the shofarot and the Holy Ark marched around Jericho for seven days in a row, he did so at the express command of G’d. This was an emergency. We encounter a similar occurrence with the prophet Elisha in Kings II 3,25 when the Israelites in their battle against Moav cut down fruit-bearing trees and stopped up wells. Although the Torah had expressly forbidden this in Deut. 20,19 the prophet used his authority to set aside this injunction on a temporary basis. If the prophet gives such orders and they sound as if they are meant to be permanent he has discredited himself and people must not listen to his instructions. This is the meaning of a statement in Yevamot 102: “if Elijah were to come and tell you that the rites of chalitzah are performed with a shoe known as מנעל one follows his instructions; if he were to instruct that this procedure must not be performed with a sandal instead, one does not follow his instructions.” [the original practice had been to use a shoe known as מנעל. At the time of the Talmud, sandals had been in use for this for hundreds of years already. Even this established custom a prophet must not cancel permanently. Ed.]
    The Talmud in Berachot 24,2 quotes a scholar saying that even if the greatest authority of his time had told him that it was permitted to recite the kriat shema in an otherwise unfit location by placing his hand over his mouth first, he would not obey this scholar in this matter. Moreover, the Talmud is also on record that even when such instructions are issued by means of a bat kol, a heavenly echo, this is without halachic significance when it involves permanent changes of Torah law. Prophecy is a higher authority than a בת קול and all the laws of the Torah have been communicated by the father of all prophets, by Moses. Rabbi Joshua used this latter statement in Baba Metzia 59 to aver that halachic decisions are arrived at by a majority of the competent scholars of their time and are not subject to divine interference (at a time when  we have no prophets.).
    13,7. כי יסיתך אחיך בן אמך, “if your brother, the son of your mother tries to seduce you, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text  the wording means that “even if the seducer is a brother, son of the same mother, you must not protect him against justice“ (Ibn Ezra). 
    A Midrashic approach based on Kidushin 80: even a brother who does not share the inheritance with you seeing he is only the son of the same mother and there is therefore no natural jealousy between them must not be protected, nor must one allow oneself to be seduced by him into idolatry. This is all the more so if the brother is one with whom one shares the parental heritage, when there is reason to suspect that he is being given bad advice for ulterior motives.
   אשר לא ידעת אתה ואבותיך, “whom neither you nor your fathers have known of.” Rashi comments: “consider for a moment how despicable such advice is. He tells you to abandon a deity whom you and your fathers have served successfully, and suggests you try something totally unknown.”
    It is also possible  that the Torah here alludes to two separate aspects of faith. One is based on tradition, the other on intelligence. If someone believes because he has a tradition from his parents, this is a good form of faith though it is not perfect as he did not examine the premise this tradition is based on. Such a person lacks wisdom and is like someone who is blind and walks in the company of more blind people. They appear to get to their goal because each one holds on to the hand of his nearest companion. As long as this column of blind people have one seeing person at their head they will travel a well paved road seeing they all follow the seeing person. This is what happens to us if we rely completely on the faith handed down by our ancestors. Seeing that Moses was “seeing,” as long as we follow the tradition of Moses we cannot go wrong, seeing we heard the instructions from Moses directly and our fathers have told us about it if we were not around at the time. However, such a faith is not perfect. The problem with such a faith is that when the believer is challenged by people presenting a different viewpoint, a person who does not possess wisdom will be shaken in his belief, become unsure of himself and his forefathers as they did not equip him with the answers to the new challenges. A physically blind person no less than a spiritually blind person is by definition unsure of himself and a potential victim of the seducer mentioned in our verse. This is why it is not enough to accept the tradition handed down by our fathers but one must study it and thereby develop the insights necessary to counter arguments presented by theologians of different religions. Only in that way will one acquire a perfect אמונה, faith. This is what the sages in Avot 2,19 had in mind when they said: “try and study Torah in depth so that you will know how to answer the heretic.” This is why  the Torah refers here to two aspects of אמונה, one which lacks ידיעה by yourself, the other a faith not even handed down by your fathers.
    
    13,8. הקרובים אליך או הרחוקים ממך, “the ones close to you, or ones which are far removed from you” The Torah draws a comparison between the religions which are practiced by people physically near you to those practiced in distant countries. Just as you know that there is no substance to any religion of the pagans near you, there is no more substance to religions practiced by people further afield.
   מקצה הארץ עד קצה ארץ, “from one end of the globe to the other end.” An oblique reference to sun and moon each of which travels from one end of the earth to the other. 
    13,10. כי הרג תהרגנו, “you are to surely kill him.” Seeing that the words of Torah all express mercy of one kind or another, it is not possible to understand the words הרג תהרגנו as an instruction to take revenge on the individual who is to be executed. If that were the purpose of the execution the Torah would actually train us in developing a cruel streak in our character; this is clearly at odds with all the Torah wishes to teach us. The consideration underlying the Torah’s insistence is the mercy and loving concern the Torah extends to all those who know the guilty party. If he were allowed to get away with it many more people would follow in his footsteps with terrible results for them. To make this whole point clear, the Torah first wrote: “you shall not be compassionate with him;” afterwards the Torah explains its concern for the people by writing that the execution of such a seducer will cause the survivors to relate to G’d with the proper degree of reverence so as to preclude the need for any executions in the future.
    
    13,14. יצאו אנשים בני בליעל, “lawless men have emerged from your midst;” the word בליעל means “not capable of rising spiritually to the domain of G’d.” Alternatively, the word is not connected to על but to עול, “yoke,” people who refuse to wear the yoke of any restrictive legislation, rejection of the authority of heaven. Our sages understand the emphasis on the word אנשים to mean that the legislation spelled out here does not apply if the instigators were women (compare Sanhedrin 111). The words יושבי עירם, “inhabitants of their city, are also understood restrictively, i.e. only if they misled people of their own city does this city have to be destroyed.
    
    13,15. ודרשת וחקרת, “you will have to seek out and investigate thoroughly.” Witnesses who testified in capital crimes were subjected to questioning on seven cardinal points. 1) in which Shemittah cycle did the offense take place; 2) in which year; 3) in which month; 4) on which day of the month; 5) which day of the week; 6) what time of day or night; 7) where did the crime occur? These questions are known as חקירות. In addition the witnesses have to answer questions known as בדיקות, questions which do not pertain to the substance of the testimony and which do not invalidate the testimony if the witness is unsure of some of the answers. Examples of these בדיקות are: what kind of garments did the killer and the victim wear, i.e. white or black? What was the colour of the earth on which the victim was found white or red? It happened once that a witness testified that he had observed the crime being perpetrated at a certain place under a fig tree. The judges asked the witness to describe the colour of the figs, whether the figs had long or short stalks (compare Maimonides Hilchot Eydut 1,6). The mystical dimension of the requirement for the 7 חקירות is that they are perceived as representing the six extremities on the globe with the Holy Sanctuary at the centre of the globe, i.e. the opposite end of each extremity. [in baseball jargon, this could be described as “covering all the bases.” Ed,] The centre is the point at which the truth emerges.
    
    13,16. הכה תכה, “you shall surely smite.“ The Torah means that if one is unable for one reason or another to execute the inhabitants of this town by judicial process one must see to it that the people are killed even by other than accepted judicial procedures. This is why the verb הכה is repeated here (compare Baba Metzia 31)
    13,17. ואת כל שללה תקבוץ, ”and you are to collect all its loot (all the possessions).” Our sages in Sanhedrin 111 say that the word שללה “its loot,” excludes “the loot belonging to heaven” [a reference to donations the citizens had made to the Temple Treasury. Ed.] These are to be subject to redemption just like הקדשות of ordinary people in other towns. They are not to be burned. Included in such שלל שמים is the second tithe which normally is taken to Jerusalem to be consumed there by the owners (or its proceeds). Neither are holy writings such as Torah scrolls subject to this provision of all the possessions of the people in that city having to be burned. They need to be buried (Sanhedrin ibid.)
   כליל לה' אלו-היך, “completely for the Lord your G’d.” All of it henceforth belongs to G’d; no one has the right to use any of it for deriving any benefit from it whatsoever. On the same folio in Sanhedrin 111 Rabbi Shimon is quoted as saying in the name of G’d: “if you carry out the provisions written here concerning such an עיר הנדחת, a city which has to be obliterated, I will consider it as if you had offered a burnt-offering which the Torah describes as כליל לה'.” He based this on Exodus 32,29: מלאו ידכם היום לה' כי איש בבנו ובאחיו, “dedicate yourselves to the Lord this day, for each has opposed his son and his brother.”
    
    13,18. למען ישוב ה' מחרון אפו, “so that the Lord will turn back from His burning wrath.” In this instance, though the Torah speaks only of Hashem, the attribute of Justice is meant. The mystical dimension of the עיר הנדחת is referred to by the woman from Tekoah (Samuel II 14,14) [who pleaded that David allow Avshalom to return from exile by describing a fictional event. Ed.] She said (amongst other things) וחשב המלך מחשבות לבלתי ידח ממנו נדח, “(G’d will not take away the life) of one who makes plans so that no one may be kept banished.” The people of the עיר הנדחת had been cast out from the celestial domains. Burning all their former belongings was part of their expiation, just as we find that the congregation of Korach was not only killed by G’d but their belongings were burned (compare author’s comments on Numbers 16, 31-32). The site where this city used to be located will be a ruin forever never to be rebuilt even at the time when the Jewish people will experience resurrection of the dead. When the Torah continues about “that the Lord your G’d will grant you (the survivors) mercy, etc.,” this is similar to the promise by Yaakov (prayer) to his sons that on their second journey to Egypt the ruler (Joseph) should release Shimon and allow Binyamin to return home also. (compare author’s comments on that verse in Genesis 43,14). The words כי תשמע בקול ה' are to be understood as “in order that you will hearken to the voice of Hashem Who is your G’d, and observe all of His commandments; then you will do what is right in His eyes,” i.e. in the eyes of Hashem the attribute known as the tetragram.
    
    14,1.  בנים אתם לה' אלוקיך”You are children to the Lord your G’d.” The reason this paragraph follows immediately after the paragraph dealing with the עיר הנדחת is that it is forbidden to observe rites of mourning on behalf of any of the people of that city that have been executed, just as it is forbidden to observe mourning for anyone executed judicially by the court. The Torah continues to describe mourning rites which are forbidden to observe even for people for whom it is incumbent upon us to observe mourning under normal circumstances.
    The Torah forbids incisions in one’s flesh, לא תתגודדו, as a pagan rite of mourning practiced by the Emorites. They did this because they considered life on earth as the principal life of a person; therefore, they had no reason to consider his departure from earth as a promotion to a higher form of life in the celestial regions. Emorites were therefore correct to mourn their family members as losses never to be restored. 
    The Torah tells us here that our whole outlook on life is so radically different that we have nothing in common with them seeing that “you are children of the Lord your G’d.” It is customary for a father to leave his son as a bequest something which was very dear to him. Seeing that we are G’d’s children and He is our father, He leaves us the bequest of the world to come as His portion for us. Seeing Jews who die have such a bright future to look forward to in the hereafter it would be most inappropriate to overreact to our loss and ignore their promotion by making painful incisions on our flesh. Pulling out one’s hair and other such symbols of our grief are equally out of the question. The Torah adds: “for you are a holy nation;” the meaning of קדוש is “separate, apart,” i.e. of all the nations of the world you have been set apart in that we receive the reward for good deeds performed in this life in another life, a life which commences with the death of our bodies.
    14,3. לא תאכל כל תועבה, “Do not eat anything which is an abomination.” The reason the prohibition to eat certain creatures follows here is that this is part of the definition of maintaining a level of holiness. When the Torah spoke about the Jewish people being a holy nation (verse 2) this meant that this holiness has to be manifest both in deed and in the way one uses one’s mouth. (Ibn Ezra) Our sages in Chulin 114 explain the above words to mean that G’d is saying: “anything which I described as abominable for you must not eat.” This includes even matters which though permitted for consumption individually, separately, are forbidden as a mixture such as meat and milk. [this is an expansion of the meaning “abomination,” i.e. anything forbidden automatically comes under the heading “abominable.” Ed.]
    
    14,4. שור שה כשבים ושה עזים, “an ox, sheep, and goat.” The three mentioned so far are צאן, domesticated animals kept in flocks or herds. By adding איל, צבי, יחמור,אקו דישון, תאו and זמר we get an additional 7 species making a total of ten categories of animals fit for consumption by Jews. The last-named seven, while permitted for private consumption, are not permitted as offerings on the altar. (Zevachim 34) Any free-roaming animal, חיה, is by definition not permitted as a sacrifice [how could it serve in lieu of man who has not tamed it and exercised his authority over it? Ed.] The names of the seven last named animals reveal that they are “pure” i.e. possess the physical features described by the Torah as making them fit to eat. In Song of Songs 2,7 the first word השבעתי if read with the dot on the left side of the letter ש means that G’d provided as food ample supplies of  אילand צבי, proving these animals chew the cud and have split hooves The יחמור is alluded to in Chabakuk 3,15 where it is compared to many waters, something which is ritually pure. [I confess I do not follow this since in that same verse horses are compared to the ocean which is equally pure, whereas horses do not have split hooves. I will ignore the balance of this paragraph as I do not understand it. Ed.]
    
    14,7. השסועה, “which is split.” Our sages in Chulin 60 understand this word to refer to a species of animal having two spines and two backs. [I suppose the clue to this is the tone sign tipcha under the word הפרסה which precedes it and which separates it from the word השסועה. Ed.] This species chews the cud. Seeing that the list of animals permitted to eat, etc., has already been provided by the Torah in Leviticus chapter 11, why is it repeated here once more? The sages in Chulin 60 suggest it is because of the addition of the השסועה amongst the mammals and the ראה amongst the birds (Bechorot 6). On the other hand, the list of birds mentioned in Leviticus has a bird called דאה which is absent here. (Leviticus 11,14) The reason this bird is called ראה is supposedly because it has exceptionally good eyesight. According to Chulin 63 this bird can locate a carcass in the land of Israel while flying in the skies of Babylon. The Talmud also considers the names איה and דיה as two names for he same species of bird. Seeing this species is known by two names, the Torah repeated the entire list of birds here once more. Had it not done so, some people might consider the species not listed in Leviticus as permitted to eat, whereas others would reason that the species not mentioned in Deuteronomy is permitted to eat. The reason that the list of birds are the ones forbidden to eat, whereas the Torah listed the mammals which are permitted to eat  is that there are far more species of “pure” birds, i.e. the ones we may eat than forbidden ones, whereas with mammals the situation is the reverse. Our sages base themselves on the model of the Torah when they say that when teaching people one should always endeavour to be concise, brief (Chulin 63). The species of bird known as שלך is called thus as it catches fish in the water with its beak while they are swimming. (שלה, “to extricate, to draw out.”) The דוכיפת is a form of wild turkey, apparently it has sort of a double “chin”. (from the Hebrew כפות, “twin, double,” like כפות תמרים, the palm leaves which fold over.)
    
    14,21. לא תבשל גדי בחלב אמו, “do not boil  a kid in the milk of its mother.” I have explained the meaning of this verse in detail in Exodus 23,19. The reason it is written three times is that once it refers to the prohibition to eat such a mixture, once to the prohibition to merely boil it together, and once to the prohibition to derive indirect benefit from the result of boiling milk and meat together (Chulin 115). On folio 113 of Chulin the Talmud sees in the word גדי a restrictive clause, i.e. the prohibition does not apply to free-roaming beasts or to birds or to mammals of the kind which are forbidden for consumption by Jews. None of these are subject to this prohibition as a Biblical law though the Rabbis included the prohibition to cover all these cases. (Maimonides Hilchot Maachalot assurot 9,4)
    
    14,22. עשר תעשר, “pay both tithes.” According to the plain meaning of the text: “after you set aside and gave to the Levite the first tithe, set aside the second tithe for yourself and take it to Jerusalem to consume it there.
    14,23. למען תלמד ליראה, “so that you will learn to revere, etc.” When you will meet priests and Levites in Jerusalem, scholars who teach you Torah you will learn to revere the Lord.
    The Talmud Taanit 9 quotes Rabbi Yochanan as saying about the words עשר תעשר that the Torah implies you should give your tithe עשר, in order that as an eventual result תתעשר, you will become wealthy (the dot on the right side of the letter ש.) Actually the wording does not contain an allusion to עושר, wealth, seeing both the letters ש have their dot on the left side, imply passivity. What Rabbi Yochanan had in mind was not עשר בשביל שתתעשר, but עשר בשביל שתעשר, “give your (first time) tithe so that you will enjoy many years when you have what to tithe.” [when understanding it thus the dots on the letter ש remain on the left side. Ed.] This then is the “wealth” Rabbi Yochanan was speaking about. (Based on Raav’ad, but never printed separately in this form) 
    This is certainly something in the category of an experiment, i.e. appears to violate the commandment not to “test the Lord” (Deut. 6,16). Our sages in Taanit 9 were quite aware of this and this is why they quoted Maleachi 3,10 where the prophet apparently allows this one exception to the rule not to test the Lord.
    A Midrashic approach: The repetition of the words עשר תעשר are a veiled warning; if you do not give your tithes you will become impoverished rather than remain more wealthy by withholding the amount in question. The wording also contains a hint that people who travel overseas should donate 10% of their profits to the people who toil studying Torah (Tanchuma Re-ey 18). Another meaning of these words (Yalkut Shimoni  892): it is customary that when a person rents a field he has to give the owner at least a third or even half of the harvest. Seeing that we are “renting” the land from G’d and He provides rain clouds, dew, manure, etc., and demands only 10% of the harvest as His due we really have nothing to complain about. Considering all these facts Moses warned the people to be careful to observe this commandment meticulously. There was a farmer once who fulfilled his duty and tithed his harvest properly. As a result he was left  with  a net amount of 1000 measures of grain. When he was about to die he told his son to be careful to observe this commandment meticulously. He told him how much a particular field yielded annually and to be sure to give 10% of that amount to a Levite. He also told him that he himself had been able to subsist comfortably on the harvest of that field after he had set aside the tithe. The son, a miser by nature, sowed the field and in the first year it yielded the amount his father had told him about. After the first year’s harvest came in the son dutifully set aside the 10%. In the second year, he was too miserly to do this and set aside only 9% instead of 10%. He found that in the third year this field yielded only 90% of the regular harvest. Becoming upset about this he again decrease the amount he set aside for the tithe until after a number of years of such miserly conduct the field yielded only the amount which his father had given away to the Levite as a tithe. When his relatives and neighbours became aware of this they all dressed in white garments and approached this farmer. When he saw them, the son of that original owner was upset that these people apparently celebrated his misfortune. [wearing white is a symbol for celebrating. Ed.] The neighbours said that they certainly did not come to gloat but seeing that in the past he had been the owner and G’d the priest (the recipient of the tithe), now the tables had been turned and this farmer had become the priest (requiring the handout) and G’d had become the owner. This is what Moses meant when he warned: עשר תעשר את כל תבואת שדך, “if you do not give the tithe you will eventually have to be the recipient of a tithe (handout).”
   היוצא השדה, “which the field produces.” Tanchuma Re-ey 18 comments that “if you merit it you will go out and sow your field. If not היוצא השדה, the one known as “going out into the field,” (the Torah’s description of Esau) will harass you (compare Genesis 25,29).
   תבואת זרעך, “the produce of your sowing.” if you merit it the reason you go out to your field will be to examine if it needs rain and if so you will pray and G’d will respond. If you do not merit it the reason you will go out to the field will be to bury your dead. [the whole line is based on the words היוצא השדה really meaning “he who goes out to the field,” not “what comes out of the field.” Ed.] 
   מעשר דגנך תירושך, “the tithe of your grain harvest, your grape harvest, etc.” It is only “your” grain harvest, if you tithe it; if not it is “My” grain harvest. The same applies to the grape harvest and the “oil” harvest. This interpretation is based on Hoseah 2,11: “Assuredly I will take back My new grain in its time and My new wine in its season, etc.”
   שנה שנה, “year after year.” This means that one may not tithe from one year’s harvest for the following or the previous year’s harvest. Each harvest has to be tithed separately.
   ובכורות בקרך, “and the firstborn males of your cattle.” This does not mean that the (ordinary) Israelite is allowed to consume its flesh, seeing that first born male animals may be consumed only by the priests. It means that the people designated to eat these animals are encouraged to do so. We have to remember that such firstborn animals are perpetually sacred, i.e. even nowadays when there is no Temple and even in the Diaspora. Such animals may not be shorn, used as working beasts, and may be eaten only if they developed the kind of blemish which disqualifies them as a potential offering for the altar. This view does not correspond to that of Maimonides who wrote in Hilchot Bechorot 1,5 that the law of the sanctity of a firstborn male animal is not applicable nowadays except in the land of Israel. Raav’ad already attacked this comment of Maimonides stating that even according to the view of Rabbi Akiva who did hold this way he meant only that the firstborn male animal nowadays cannot be offered as a sacrifice. This does not mean, however, that the firstborn male animal does not have a sacred body even nowadays and even in the Diaspora and it is out of the question to permit it to be eaten unless it developed the blemish we mentioned. The proof for this view is cited from Sanhedrin 5,1 where Rabbi Chiyah said to Rav, the son of his sister that seeing his nephew decided to emigrate to Babylon whether Rav would ordain him to make rulings there? He was told that whereas he was authorised to make rulings in matters of foods which are forbidden or permitted and in judicial matters, his authority would not extend to make rulings concerning the status of such firstborn male animals. Clearly, Babylon is considered part of the Diaspora. The reason Rabbi Chiya’s nephew was denied such authority was that these laws of sanctity did apply there. If not, why did the question arise? There is yet another proof that this sanctity applies even in the Diaspora from Bechorot 31.
    
    14,28. מקצה שלש שנים, “at the end of three years, etc.” If a farmer had not allocated the tithes of the first and second year of the Shemittah cycle but had let them accumulate in his house, he has to remove them from there to Jerusalem in the third year, the year when the tithes for the poor are due (Rashi). Concerning the tithe of the first year he must recite the confession found in Deut. 26,28: “I have removed all sacred matters from my house.” The Levite may then help himself to the tithe from the first year, whereas the poor, etc., help themselves to the tithes which accumulated during the year of מעשר עני, the tithe for the poor was due (the third year). The owner is not permitted to eat the second tithe in Jerusalem as he had been allowed to do had he brought it there during the first or second year of the cycle. [The wording of our author in this paragraph is inaccurate, but I do not take it upon myself to correct it. Ed.]
    
    15,1. מקץ שבע שנים תעשה שמיטה, “At the end of seven years you will institute a remission.” Several commentators including Kimchi and Ibn Ezra understand the word מקץ as “at the beginning of a seven year cycle.” They base themselves on the fact that everything has two extremities, i.e. קצוות. They cite as proof for such a meaning of the word Exodus 26,28 מן הקצה אל הקצה, “from one extremity to the other extremity.” This proves that the word קץ is applicable both to “beginning” and to “end.”
    Our sages in Sifri Re-ey 111 do not agree with their view and claim that the verse means “at the end of a seven year cycle.” Had the Torah written מקץ השנה השביעית, we could have understood our verse as speaking of the beginning of a cycle, i.e. at the first extremity. The wording being what it is, however, it is clear that the last extremity, i.e. the end of the cycle is meant.
    This is also what our sages in Erchin 28 said  when they ruled that the remission of debts occurs only at the end of the seventh year. This is also how Onkelos renders our verse when he translates the word as מסוף. Our sages in Erchin 11 have a tradition that the destruction of the (1st) Temple occurred at the conclusion of the last year of the Shemittah cycle. They invoke the principle of מגלגלין זכות ליום זכאי וחובה ליום חייב, “if a day has a tradition of being a harbinger of evil tidings one arranges disasters to occur on such a day, whereas when a day has a tradition of being a day well remembered for fortuitous events, such a day is chosen to be the day on which other fortuitous events will occur. The destruction occurred on the eve of the ninth of Av. About the destruction of the second Temple we learned in Avodah Zarah 9 that this occurred 172 years before the end of the fourth millennium, seeing that  the first Temple was destroyed in 3421 after the creation. (the second Temple stood 420 years.) This is the opinion of Rabbeinu Tam whose view is best supported. Even though the greater part of the year was spent in building the Temple we count the year as belonging to the period when the Temple was destroyed seeing that this was the cataclysmic event during that year. [The author now switches to the time he lived in. Ed.] Today we are in the 52nd year of the sixth millennium. If we add these 52 years to the 172 prior to the conclusion of the fourth millennium, we have 1223 years that have elapsed since the destruction of the second Temple. If you deduct 24 Yovel years from that total, i.e. 2 years per century, seeing that this year is counted double, i.e. as belonging both to the just concluded cycle and as the first year of the new cycle, the number 23 will be expanded to 47 years resulting in the fact that 2 years from the time of writing will be a Shemittah year i.e. in the year 5053.
    According to the view held by Rashi that the Temple was destroyed in the year 420 (of its existence) the next Shemittah year will be in the year 5052.
    The expression תעשה שמטה, “make a remission,” refers to the soil which should be permitted to have a rest. The concept of Shemittah is the same whether applied to years or to the Sabbath day. The Sabbath day is a “shemittah” of days, whereas the seventh year is a Shemittah of years. I have already explained this on Leviticus 25,2
    
    15,2. וזה דבר השמטה, “and this is the matter of the remission;” our sages in Sheviit 10,8 explain that the lender tells the borrower who comes to him after the Shemittah year has elapsed (and he had failed to repay his loan on time), “I am releasing you from your debt.” If the borrower wants to voluntarily repay the sum he owes, the lender may accept it, seeing that the Torah did not forbid the borrower to repay his debt as opposed to loans with interest where the Torah specifically forbade both the payment of and the accepting of interest on loans between Jews (Deut. 23,8). In the case of the Shemittah, the Torah imposed restrictions only on the lender, i.e. he must not harass the borrower to pay him. The concept is that during that year we must not act as if we owned the earth but must demonstrate our awareness and agreement that the earth is the Lord’s by our behaviour in practice. This is the meaning of כי קרא שמטה לה', “for he proclaimed it a Shemittah for the Lord.”
    Our sages in Sheviit 10,9 have said that when someone (a borrower) repays the lender what he owes him even though the Shemiitah year has elapsed, the Rabbis will relate very positively to such a person. On the other hand, if the borrower does not repay his debts even though he is legally in the clear, he risks that the lender will shame him by spreading the word that this borrower took advantage of the good nature of the lender and simply ate up his money.
    There is a halachic provision whereby the borrower makes a declaration (entirely voluntarily) prior to receiving a loan that he waives his right not to repay the loan if for some reason he is unable to repay it before the Shemittah year ends. We have a general rule that all mutually agreed conditions involving money matters can override what the Torah wrote. Moreover, the lender is allowed to demand repayment during any time of the Shemittah year provided the year has not come to a close. This is why the Torah writes מקץ, “at the end.”
    If someone who is owed money which should have been repaid prior to the Shemittah year hands over the I.O.U he is holding to a court of law asking the court to act as his collector, he cannot subsequently release the debtor from his debt seeing that the debtor is already considered as having been harassed, נגוש, so that the Torah’s warning not to harass the borrower can no longer be fulfilled. In such a situation the lender foregoes the right to ask for repayment (personally) as soon as the Shemittah year ends. (unless he had made an agreement with the borrower concerning this eventuality). Orphans who are of age (by the end of the Shemittah) and who are in possession of I.O.U.’s left to them by  their father  do not need to prove that the borrower had waived his right of non repayment of the debt at the end of the Shemittah year (Choshen Mishpat 67,29). These orphans are considered as if they actually had the requisite documents in their possession (Shevuot 45).
    The laws pertaining to the release of overdue debts in the Shemittah year apply world-wide, as opposed to the laws pertaining to the earth and orchards, etc., which apply only in the land of Israel. The Rabbis decreed this in order that the whole concept of the Shemittah legislation not be forgotten during the long years of exile of the Jewish people.
    The reason that the sheviit, seventh year, is capable of overriding  certain oaths, is because the Torah writes here וזה דבר השמטה, using the word דבר, word, i.e. something uttered by the mouth. If someone swore to his creditor that he would pay him back the loan even though the Shemittah year would occur prior to the date of his repayment, even if he confirmed it in writing, etc., he need not keep his oath (Choshen Mishpat  67,6).
    There is a conceptual linkage between the shemittah of lands, etc., and shemittat kessaphim (monetary debts) seeing the Torah writes  the word תשמטנה)); in Exodus 23,11 the Torah had already spoken of releasing land, i.e. agricultural harvests, from the claims of ownership. It is fairly clear that in our portion another kind of shemittah, i.e. monetary debts, are referred to. Seeing that the applicability of this rule in the Diaspora is only rabbinic the Rabbis permitted the פרוזבול, the writing over of the debt to the Bet Hadin, court of law, as otherwise there would not be any people ready to extend interest-free loans which would prove uncollectable also. If someone borrows a sum of money for ten years the lender does not need to forgive the loan in the first shemittah year seeing it had not become due yet; you cannot release something to which you did not have a claim yet. If the loan is unpaid when the second shemittah year comes around, its laws apply  to that loan.
    
    15,3. ואשר יהיה לך את אחיך תשמט ידך, “whatever you have a claim on, if it is in the possession of your brother, remit it.” Sifri Re-ey 113 says that when you have a pawn belonging to the borrower in your control, this law does not apply, i.e. you do not have to release it to him as part of the shemittah legislation.
    
    15,4. אפס כי לא יהיה בך אביון, “However, may there be no destitute person among you.” When the Torah commanded you not to demand repayment from the borrower at the end of the Shemittah year, this will be of relevance only if you do not observe G’d’s commandments. If you do, there will not be anyone unable to repay his debts so that you would have to forego that money. Everybody will be wealthy and no one will have to borrow any money.
   והעבטת גוים רבים, “you will lend to many people.” The literal meaning is: “you will take pledges from them to protect your loans;”
     כי לא יחדל אביון, “but the destitutes will not cease from your land, “if you fail to keep the laws of the Torah.”
   כי ברך יברכך ה' אלו-היך בארץ אשר ה' אלו-היך נותן לך, “for the Lord your G’d will bless you in the land which the Lord your G’d is about to give to you.” The mystical dimension of this verse is quite clear, and is based on the fact that you are a holy nation to the Lord your G’d Who has chosen you to be His special nation. It is always this attribute of G’d, the Essence, that dispenses this blessing.
    
    15,7. לא תאמץ את לבבך, “do not make your heart hard;” do not fail to also try and speak soothingly to those less fortunate than you. Our sages in Baba Batra 9 said that comforting someone with words is the greatest gift of all.
   ולא תקפוץ את ידך, “and do not close your hand into a fist.” For he is your brother, he is destitute, and in need of everything.
    
    15,8. כי פתוח תפתח את ידך, “you shall keep on opening your hand for him,” even a hundred times (Sifri Re-ey 116). If he does not want to accept handouts, loan him repeatedly so as to preserve his self respect. 
   די מחסורו, “enough to cover his requirements.” You are not obligated to make him rich. 
   אשר יחסר לו, “in accordance with what he lacks.” Even if he needs a horse to ride on or a servant to run in front of him (to maintain his standard of living). לו, even if you have to get him a wife. (based on the wife of Adam being described as אעשה לו עזר כנגדו in Genesis 2,18.)
    
    15,10. נתון תתן לו, “You shall surely give him, etc.” The reason the Torah repeats the word נתן is to tell you that if you will give the poor in adequate measure, the Lord in turn will give you in adequate measure. Our sages interpreted the words to mean that even if you are called upon 100 times to support the same individual, do not refuse. The latter demand is based on your not having given the poor enough support the first time.
    Concerning this subject Solomon said in Proverbs 21,26: “while the righteous man gives without stint.” Solomon means that the righteous does not allow any considerations to deflect him from giving charity. Another nuance included in the wording of the Torah נתון תתן is that one should give charity in a pleasant manner, not grudgingly. Neither should one do so in an arrogant manner. By following all these implications contained in the Torah’s wording, one may merit that one’s own wealth will endure. Concerning this Solomon said in Proverbs 13,8: “the poor never heard a reproof.” When does a man retain his own wealth? When he does not make the poor believe that his misfortune may be of his own doing, and one gives charity with a pleasant countenance. This is reflected in the story told by our sages about Rabbi Yannai who said to a wealthy man who publicly gave an alms to a poor man: “it would have been better if you had not given to this man at all instead of publicly embarrassing him” (Chagigah 5).
   כי בגלל הדבר הזהת “for on account of this matter, etc.” Our sages in Shabbat 151 said that the reason the Torah did not use the word למען but בגלל is an allusion to the גלגל, “the wheel of fortune,” i.e. horoscopic influences which govern the way money travels from one person to another. G’d is threatening here that “if you do not share your wealth with the poor by giving charity generously, I will give the wheel of fortune a spin so that the wealth which devolved upon you up until now will devolve upon someone else. We have a verse in Scripture on this subject in Psalms 75,8: “for G’d it is Who gives judgment, He brings down one man and He lifts up another.” Our sages on the above mentioned folio of Shabbat say that a man should pray especially concerning this attribute of G’d, [that he should not be made to suffer from it. Ed.] for even if he himself may not suffer from it his son or grandson may be made to suffer from it.
   יברכך ה' אלו-היך, “the Lord your G’d will bless you;” the Torah set aside a special blessing for people who perform the commandment of being charitable. Solomon went so far as to say (Proverbs 11,24) “some people, though they appear to be wasteful with their money actually increase their wealth.” I want to urge you to appreciate another important principle concerning this most important and noble commandment which we have inherited already from our patriarch Avraham. He provided the foundation for the organised giving of charity and its mystical dimension. 
    We must appreciate that poor people, by reason of their dissatisfaction “spread around” the presence of the attribute of Justice so that it is poised over Israel ready to strike. This is what the psalm 102,1 תפלה לעני, “prayer of the poor,” is all about. The very word תפלה [as opposed to תחנה, בקשה and similar words, Ed.] represents a struggle, a wrangling. It has a negative connotation, is used when two litigants strive against one another. This is what prompted the sages to say that a poor man is considered like a dead man (Nedarim 64). The wealthy man, by contrast, spreads around the attribute of Mercy seeing wherever he goes he reflects blessings received. He may be compared to the sun which enables the moon to at least shine with reflected light. He who dispenses charity is as if illuminating the eyes of the poor when the latter receives his blessing through the rich man. This is why the Torah warns that all the paths of Torah should be paths of loveliness and peace, that people who claim to be Torah-oriented should practice the virtues associated with Torah, and by giving charity in the manner prescribed enable the attribute of Mercy to abound on earth. By doing so he will ensure that the attribute of Mercy at least becomes an integral part of the attribute of Justice which is already poised. This is what ensures the continued existence of the universe. The world cannot exist unless both these attributes are working side by side (Bereshit Rabbah 12,15).
    You are aware (of the kabbalistic concept) that the performance of acts of charity on earth will have impact on the attribute tzedek in the celestial regions. According to Zohar Bechukotai 113 the tree of knowledge represents death whereas the tree of life represents life. Giving charity (for the right reasons) saves from the clutches of death and results in the opposing forces of צדק and מלכות being able to function together in harmony for the benefit of all of mankind. Isaiah 1,21 speaks of צדק ילין בה the attribute צדק which once resided in Jerusalem being replaced through the murders committed in that city. The prophet tells the people how to rectify this situation where the Shechinah cannot feel at home anymore in Jerusalem, saying בצדק תכנני “you can be rehabilitated through charity.” (Isaiah 54,14). This attribute צדק is mystically identified with the כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of “Israel.” It is also the “mate” of the “Sabbath.” (compare Bereshit Rabbah 11,9). All of the above explains Moses’ concern with warning the people to be concerned with  fulfilling this מצוה very meticulously.
    If someone gives charity on earth he influences the relative position of the emanation צדק=מלכות, bringing it closer to the emanation צדקה=רחמים or vice versa. Concerning this phenomenon we must understand the statement by the Kabbalists that גדולה צדקה לשמה, “that charity when performed for the appropriate reasons is a great thing.” They meant that the emanation חסד also known as גדולה will pour out blessing on the terrestrial part of the universe, i.e. the emanation מלכות. In Psalms 119,48 David phrased this as ואשא כפי אל מצותיך אשר אהבתי, “I stretch out my palms to fulfill Your commandments (charity) which I love.”
    You also find a statement in Midrash Tehillim which is an allusion to this (Midrash Tehillim 17,14) on the verse אני בצדק אחזה פניך, “I will be able to behold Your ‘face’ by means of charity (performed).” The author writes: “observe the power of charity; a person donates a copper coin to a poor person and as a result he merits a vision of Shechinah,” whereas according to the norms prevailing in our world when a lady of great social standing wishes to welcome the king in her home, she makes elaborate and expensive preparations to demonstrate her regard for the honoured guest. Only after such elaborate preparations will she be able to entertain the king. Jews, by comparison, only have to make a minor contribution to charity or a person in need of charity, and already they are admitted to the king’s presence. The author of the Midrash proceeds to quote verse 14 in that chapter as proof.
    The reason this paragraph began with the words: “in one of your gates in your land,” and the paragraph also concludes with the words “in your land,” teaches that the Torah places the major emphasis on charity performed in Eretz Yisrael. Chapter 12 already started with the words: “these are the statutes and social laws which you are to observe and carry out in the land which the Lord your G’d gave to your ancestors.” Performance of the commandments of the Torah in the Diaspora basically only serves as a preservative measure, i.e. to ensure that during the long years of exile we do not forget the Torah and its commandments. This is the way Sifri explains Deut. 11,18: “put these My words on your heart;” The Torah refers to times when G’d’s words are incapable of being carried out except with our hearts, periods when we are exiled from Eretz Yisrael. We are to continue to lay Tefillin, put a mezuzah on our houses, etc., etc., in the Diaspora to ensure that we do not forget these laws.
    An alternative way of understanding the words: “in your land” is: even when you are in your land. “ Even in your land where you already demonstrated that you believe that the earth is the Lord’s through releasing debtor from debts, allowing all and sundry to pick the harvest of “your” field every seventh year, the Torah still commands you to perform deeds of charity as outlined in our paragraph. If you have to perform charity even in an environment where you demonstrated the virtue which charity symbolises, then when you are in the Diaspora and you cannot demonstrate this virtue in any other way you are most certainly obliged to practice charity even more meticulously. The commandment of charity is one that is called מצות הגוף, a commandment to be performed with one’s body, i.e. personally; as such its application is world-wide regardless of whether the Temple is standing or not.”
    The meaning of the subordinate clause introduced by the words (verse 9) “be on guard against yourself, etc.” i.e. that the Torah has to warn that we are urged to be meticulous with this commandment even in Eretz Yisrael, is to head off certain thoughts that might occur in your head. You might reason to yourself that seeing you have to release debtors from their debt to you, have to relinquish your field for a whole year, how could you be expected to fulfill the commandment to give charity according to the standards demanded by the Torah? Surely this will cause you to end up in the poor house yourself! In order to head off such thoughts the Torah promises  that on the contrary, G’d will extend His blessing to you precisely because you have meticulously performed these commandments, not in spite of it. If you were to allow the needy to appeal to G’d (instead of to you who has denied him) then, and only then will you be guilty of a sin. The Torah concludes by saying בארצך, “in your land,” meaning “even in your land,” where you have already given up so much of what you would normally consider yours, you are not to withhold your generous contributions to the poor. It follows that your duty to be generous to the poor while you are in the Diaspora is even greater as you have fewer means to demonstrate this good virtue. In other words, the word בארצך here is not to be understood as something restrictive, applying only in Eretz Yisrael. 
    
    Had the intention of the Torah been to use the word בארצך restrictively, the paragraph should have commenced with the words והיה כי תבואו אל הארץ, “it will be when you come to the land, etc.”
    
    15,12. כי ימכר לך אחיך העברי או העבריה, “If  your brother the Hebrew man or the Hebrew woman will be sold to you, etc.” Although the laws applying to Hebrew slaves (servants) have already been outlined in Exodus chapter 21,2-11, the Torah repeats the legislation here as it contains a new element telling us that a woman also leaves her employer by right at the conclusion of six years’ service. Also, the instruction to give the departing servant a stake to help him to financial independence was not mentioned in Exodus.
    
    15,14. הענק תעניק לו, ”make generous provisions for him, etc.”  The word הענקה describes “something beautiful.” The idea is that the released servant’s new status should be visible to all so that he will enjoy a standing in the community. The word appears in the sense of jewelry in Proverbs 1,9. Alternatively, the word is related to ענקים, giants, and the meaning would be to give him great gifts.
    
    15,15. וזכרת כי עבד היית, “You shall remember that you yourself used to be a slave;” G’d equipped you generously when you left Egypt, and when you gathered the loot  at the sea.
    
    15,17. ואף לאמתך תעשה כן, “and also to your servant maid you shall do likewise.” These words do not refer to the piercing of the ear-lobe of a female servant seeing there is no such procedure applicable to a woman. The words apply to the requirement to equip an outgoing female servant with a generous stake, not less than that of the male servant. Also the words: “if he (the master) did not do either of these three things for her,” (Exodus 21,11) do not refer to the words כסות ועונה which appear next to it, but apply to the words אשר יעדה והפדה. A third example of the Torah writing words out of the immediate context is found in Exodus 22,2 אם זרחה השמש עליו, where the words שלם ישלם refer to the previous verse that four or five-fold payment has to be made, and not that payment depends on the deed having occurred in daylight.
    
    15,18. כי משנה שכר שכיר עבדך שש שנים, “seeing that for six years he served you twice as much as a hired hand would have done.” Normally a person does not hire himself out for more than three years. (compare Choshen Mishpat 333,14 it is forbidden to hire himself out for more than three years) We have an allusion to this in Isaiah 16,14: “in three years, fixed like the years of a hired labourer.” Our sages derive from our verse that the Hebrew servant serves his master both by day and by night, seeing the master is allowed to give him his gentile slave-woman for him to sire children by her [a form of service, seeing the children will not be his. Ed.]. This is why the Torah described him as having performed double duty (compare Sifri Re-ey 123).
    
    15,19 .כל הבכור אשר יולד בבקרך ובצאנך הזכר תקדיש לה' אלו--היך, “every firstborn male animal which will be born among your cattle or sheep you shall sanctify for the Lord your G’d.” Although the firstborn animal already is holy from birth without need to be so designated, seeing the Torah makes its sanctity dependent on it being פטר רחם, “the opening of the womb,” the Torah wants the owner to also sanctify the animal by declaring it sacred with his mouth. (Erchin 29) The commandment includes use of the name of the Lord to Whom the animal is consecrated. If we find a verse (Leviticus 27,26) where the Torah writes: “a firstling which is the Lord’s  cannot be consecrated by anybody,” this means that it cannot be consecrated to serve as a different kind of offering.
    
    15,20. שנה בשנה, “year by year;” this does not mean that it is forbidden to eat it after it has attained its first birthday as it has been compared elsewhere to the second tithe (Deut. 14,23), but it means that preferably it is to be eaten before it has attained its first birthday.
    
    15,22. בשעריך תאכלנו, “you may consume it in your cities.” The Torah refers to people (priests) who are authorised to eat it and permits eating it outside the holy precincts of the Temple Mount.
   אתה וביתך, “you and your house,” i.e. the household of the priest.
    
    15,22. בשעריך תאכלנו, “you may eat it inside your gates;” a reference to the priest who may eat it outside the Temple. הטמא והטהור. “the ritually impure together with the ritually pure,” an exclamation, referring to the word תאכלנו, “you may eat it,” telling the priest that even if he is in a state of ritual impurity he is allowed to consume this animal. If the meat of the animal is ritually impure however, eating it is forbidden on pain of the karet penalty (Ibn Ezra).
    
    15,23. רק את דמו לא תאכל, “only its blood you may not eat.” The reason the Torah repeats this prohibition which was all inclusive anyway, is so that the priest should not think that seeing the whole subject is one dealing with something that had been originally forbidden [ while the animal had been unblemished, Ed.] becoming permitted, that this change in status included also the consumption of blood (compare Rashi).
    
    16,1. שמור את חדש האביב, “you shall observe the month of spring.” This is the month of Nissan during which the Exodus from Egypt took place. Our sages (Sifri) elaborate that the exhortation of the Torah means that we must make preparations for this month beforehand so that its arrival should coincide with the arrival of spring, a time when the offering of the first ripe barley is to take place on the 16th of that month. If this does not (at least) coincide with the spring solstice, the sages are to insert an extra month so that the spring solstice occurs before the 16th of Nissan
   ממצרים לילה, “from Egypt at night.” The actual departure was by day as we know from Numbers 33,3 that “the Israelites left on the morrow after the Passover.” Moreover, the Torah adds in Exodus 12,41 that בעצם היום הזה יצאו, “they departed on that very day,” i.e. during the hours of daylight of the 15th of Nissan. Why then does the Torah speak here about the Israelites departing at night? The answer is that seeing that permission had been given for them to depart they are considered as having left the state of enslavement already. Exodus 12,31 reported that Pharaoh called upon Moses and Aaron during the night and told them: “arise and leave!” Onkelos translates our verse here ועבד לך נסין בלילה, “and He performed miracles for you at night,” so that you should not be misled into thinking that the departure took place at night.
    
    16,2. וזבחת פסח לה' אלו-היך צאן ובקר, “you will slaughter a Passover for the Lord your G’d, flocks and herd.” The word צאן, meaning sheep, refers to the mandatory Passover offering, whereas the word בקר, “cattle,” refers to the peace-offerings which every Israelite was to offer on the holiday. This was necessary so that after eating from the meat of the peace-offering the Passover could be eaten על השובע, for the person consuming it becoming satiated by it (compare Pessachim 70).
    
    16,3. לא תאכל עליו חמץ, “Do not eat any leavened matter with it.” This refers already to the time when the Passover sacrifice may be slaughtered, i.e. about midday. At that time one must no longer own anything leavened (Ibn Ezra).
    
    16,6. בערב, כבוא השמש מועד, “in the evening, as the sun sets, the appointed time;” the Torah here mentions three separate times. 1) “in the evening;” the Passover is to be slaughtered beginning with a period which can be termed “evening,” i.e. after noon. 2) “when the sun sets,”  this is the time when you may eat it. 3) “at the appointed time;” if this time has passed any leftovers have to be burned (Berachot 9).
    
    16,7. ובשלת ואכלת, “you are to boil it and eat it.” The word ובשלת in this connection means “to barbecue it on a spit over an open fire” as we know already from Exodus 12,8. The word בשל occurs in the sense of “ripening, becoming ready for its destiny,” already in Genesis 40,7 when the butler described his dream with the grapes. Similarly, the meaning of Chronicles II 35,13 ויבשלו את הפסח, does not mean that the people boiled the Passover in water, but that they made it ready for eating.
   ופנית בבוקר, “you may turn (homeward bound) in the morning.” The second morning is considered a regular day, not part of the festival and its restrictions. If you live close to Jerusalem you may return home on that day. From there you may go to any part of the country  (Ibn Ezra verse 7). Our sages derive from this verse that the first night of the holiday must be spent inside Jerusalem (Sifri Re-ey 134). This is a display of respect for Jerusalem and the importance of the commandment of Passover.
    Our sages in the Sifri also derive from the words ופנית בבקר that departures from the Temple should always occur no earlier than in the mornings. The word לאהליך, “to your own tents, dwellings,”  is a kind of justification for the departure of the pilgrim already on the second day of Passover. If his “tent” i.e. residence were at the farthest corner of Israel he would have to leave that soon in order to make the next pilgrimage to Jerusalem in time for  Shavuot. This is the reason this legislation is written in connection with Passover, seeing that there is only a short interval between Passover and Shavuot. [the following is an illustration of the slow travel in those days. Ed.] The sages described the area of the land of Israel being 400 by 400 parssah. (400 times 4,45 km). The Temple is perceived as located at the centre of this area (Tanchuma Kedoshim 10). It follows that the person living furthest from the Temple had to travel a distance of approx. 900 km in one direction to get to Jerusalem. Assuming that one can cover a distance of 10 parssah per day (based on Pessachim 94) he would have a total of 49 days minus 8 Sabbath days between Pessach and Shavuot leaving a maximum of 40 days for travel The person in question would require the entire interval for traveling home and back again to Jerusalem.
    
    16,8. ששת ימים תאכל מצות, “for six days you shall eat unleavened bread.” How do we reconcile this verse with verse 3 earlier where the Torah commanded that in connection with the Passover we are to eat unleavened bread for seven days? Our sages in Pessachim 120 explained that the reason that the seventh day has been exempted from the general rule, meaning that eating unleavened bread on the seventh day of Pessach is not an obligation but is voluntary, derives from the fact that leavened bread is prohibited. The exemption is used as a model, teaching that just as it is not obligatory to eat unleavened bread on the seventh day, so what is written in our verse about eating unleavened bread during six days of the Passover holiday is also voluntary (though highly recommended). The only time the consumption of unleavened bread is obligatory is on the first evening when the Passover lamb is being consumed. This is why this legislation appears already in that connection in Exodus 12,18.
   וביום השביעי עצרת, “and on the seventh day is a concluding festival.” The reason the Torah chose the word עצרת to describe this day is that the people are perceived as “detained” by G’d for another day. They are all gathered in the various synagogues  and houses of study (compare Ibn Ezra on Leviticus 23,36). The people are detained in the sense of being unable to perform their regular activities, i.e. due to the work prohibition.”
    Onkelos translates the word as כנישו, ”festive assembly.” We (author) have explained the deeper significance of the word (and the meaning of the day) under the heading: a kabbalistic approach on Numbers 29,38. [See my translation pages 2287-2288. Ed.]
   לא תעשה מלאכה, “you are not to perform  work.” Whereas in connection with the Sabbath the work prohibition is described as “you must not do “any” work, the word “any” does not appear here. It could not have appeared seeing that on festivals preparation of food and work connected with it is permitted. (Ibn Ezra).
    
    16,9. שבעה שבועות תספר לך, “you are to count for yourself seven weeks.” The Torah here lists the three pilgrimage festivals in their consecutive order, Pessach, Shavuot, Sukkot. The holidays of New Year and Day of Atonement are not mentioned here as on those days the people did not assemble in the Temple. This is also why nowadays in our Mussaph prayers on those days we do not include the line: “we are unable to make the pilgrimage to the House of our Chosenness there to be seen, etc.”
    The reason the Torah wrote: “count for yourself” in the singular, whereas in Leviticus 23,16 the same directive is written in the plural, תספרו חמישים יום, is simply that the Torah often alternates between the singular and the plural. We find this especially if originally the law was addressed to the multitude, in the plural. The idea is that an individual should not have an excuse to say that as long as the community has fulfilled the commandment in question that he is covered by this seeing he is part of the community. He might reason that he would escape punishment for non-performance. The Torah therefore repeats the commandment using the singular to disabuse such an individual of the idea that he could use the community as his shield. Another prominent example of this is found in Numbers 15,38  in connection with the law of tzitzit where the Torah wrote  “they shall make as part of the fringes a tassle of blue wool;” subsequently in Deut. 22,12 the law appears as addressed to the individual, i.e. גדילים תעשה לך על ארבע כנפות כסותך, “make fringes for yourself on the four corners of your garment.” We find these switches from plural to singular and vice versa even within the same verse describing a single commandment. Leviticus 19,9 is one of numerous such examples.
    There is another reason why the Torah switches from plural to singular. If the Torah would write the commandment only in the plural I might conclude that the commandment was addressed  exclusively to the court. This is why the commandment also had to be formulated as addressed to individuals. We have an example of this in the commandment of using the four species of plants on the first day of Sukkot. The Torah writes in Leviticus 23,40 (using the plural) “take for yourselves on the first day, the fruit of the tree called Hadar,” etc., etc. Nowhere is mention made of this commandment in connection with an individual. I would have interpreted this commandment as subject to performance only by members of the Sanhedrin were it not for the fact that the Torah adds: “you shall be joyful in the presence of the Lord your G’d” (Deut. 16,12). Clearly, the commandment to be joyful cannot be meant for the members of the Sanhedrin only but must be meant for each and every individual Israelite. Moreover that part of the commandment has also been formulated in the singular in 16,14. If other commandments had been formulated only in the plural we would indeed have understood that they apply only collectively, to the Bet Din in its capacity as representatives of the people.
    Concerning the commandment to count from Pessach to Shavuot, our sages in Chagigah 17 said that the fact that the Torah speaks both of counting days and of counting weeks means that there are actually two commandments (according to some authorities). Some hold (“Sefer Ha-maor” end of Pessachim) that the “week” needs to be mentioned only after the previous week has been completed whereas others hold that as soon as the first week has been completed mention of the week is mandatory every evening, side by side with mention of the day of the count. The “weeks” are understood as an allusion to the seventh millennium and this is why it must be mentioned every evening (Ibn Ezra). (Bet Yosseph on Tur 489 brings an opinion quoted by Avi Haezri that only the weeks have to be counted mentioned in Rabbi Chavell’s glossary).
   מהחל חרמש בקמה תחל לספור, “you are to start counting from the time the sickle will begin cutting the standing crop.” This teaches that cutting the barley and beginning the count of the seven weeks is to occur simultaneously. Our sages (Sifri Re-ey 136) add that I might have thought that whereas the cutting and the counting have to occur simultaneously, offering of the “Omer” could take place whenever one wanted; to ensure that we would not understand the commandment in this way the Torah added מיום הביאכם, (Leviticus 23,15) that the day we start counting is to coincide with the day the offering is presented on the altar.
    The meaning of the words מיום הביאכם could also be that reaping, counting and presenting on the altar should all take place simultaneously, and  this is why the Torah does not write ביום, “on the day,” but מיום, “from the day.” The cutting and counting are to take place at night, whereas presentation of the offering on the altar takes place by day. The Torah wrote that “they shall be seven complete weeks” (Leviticus 23,15). They can only be complete if you start counting in the evening.
    Our sages also explain that the word בקמה, “in the standing corn,” may be read as בקומה, ‘that the counting of the days and weeks has to be performed while one is standing. [presumably the word בקמה was considered redundant otherwise as one always cuts standing corn, not “lying” corn. Ed.]
    There are a total of four commandments which have to be performed while standing: עומר, ציצית, מילה, לולב.  [The common denominator of these four commandments is the unnecessary word לכם. Seeing that we derive “standing” from the commandment of עומר, the Rabbis applied that rule to other commandments featuring that word לכם.]
    
    16,10. מסת נדבת ידך אשר תתן כאשר יברכך ה' אלו-היך, “offering your voluntary contribution commensurate with your individual generosity and the blessing the Lord your G’d bestows on you.” The word מסת means במסת, “according to.” The meaning of the phrase is that “your voluntary offerings shall correspond to your personal generosity combined with the blessing the Lord has given you.” This is why the word תתן, “you shall give,” was placed between the words מסת נדבת ידך and the words כאשר יברכך; the Torah meant that the criteria which determine the size and quality of your sacrificial offerings and the people you invite to share the meat with you are not part of the directives concerning the festival of Shavuot, but are a subject by itself. These words apply equally to all the other festivals. The reason that the Torah wrote this instruction here in connection with Shavuot may be  that seeing Pessach is a festival which lasts 7 days and Sukkot also lasts seven days whereas Shavuot is only one day, I might have thought that it does not rate the same stringent laws as do the other festivals. The Torah therefore  told us that our obligations regarding voluntary offerings on Shavuot are no less than on the other festivals..
    The people whom we described as the ones to be invited to share your meals, especially the sacrificial meats of the שלמי חגיגה, the peace-offerings in honour of the festival, are: the Levite, the proselyte, the widow and the orphan. When the Torah speaks about the גר, the “stranger,” it refers to a stranger who converted to Judaism. Just as the Levite is a בן ברית, the convert is no less a בן ברית, member of the eternal covenant between the Jewish people and G’d. 
    Our sages said: that G’d said: “four belong to Me parallel to four who are yours. The four who are Mine are the Levite, the proselyte, the widow and the orphan; the four who are yours are your son, your daughter, your servant, and your servant maid. If you ensure that those who are Mine can enjoy the festival, I in turn will make sure that those who are yours will enjoy the festival.” This is the meaning of the verse (11) “you shall enjoy the festival in the presence of the Lord your G’d; you, your son, your daughter, your servant and your maid servant, and the Levite in your gates, and the proselyte and the orphan and the widow who is among you, etc.”
    
    16,14. ושמחת בחגך, “you shall be joyous on your festival.” Our sages in Moed Katan 8 state that the meaning is not to get married on the intermediate days of the festival, as that would be mixing two kinds of joy together, something not appropriate. The Torah mentions here that the joy it has in mind is the joy with G’d’s blessing, for it adds: “for the Lord your G’d has blessed you with all your harvest,” etc. You will observe that the expression שמחה does not occur in connection with the Pessach festival. Neither is mention made of the word ברכה, blessing, in connection with that festival. The reason is that on the other two festivals different parts of the harvest are already at hand, i.e. G’d’s blessing has become manifest, something not yet apparent on Pessach. Seeing that on the other festivals the harvest is in the home it is possible to share it with the four categories of people mentioned in the Torah. This adds to the joy of the festival.
    On Pessach, not only has the new harvest not yet been brought in but the old harvest is just about depleted. It is therefore difficult to provide joy for the people with whom the Torah wants us to share our joy. By not demanding joy from us on Pessach, the Torah displayed a deep psychological insight into the minds of most of us, who, even though we might share with the Levite, etc. even at that time, would not do so joyously.
    Another reason why joy has not been mentioned by the Torah in connection with Pessach though it does appear in connection with Shavuot, and on Sukkot the Torah mentions joy no fewer than three times, is in line with the statement in Rosh Hashanah 16 that the world is judged on four occasions during the year, On Pessach G’d decides if the harvest (grain) will be bountiful; on Shavuot G’d decides if the harvest of the orchards will be bountiful; on Sukkot G’d decides on the water supply for the coming year, whereas on Rosh Hashanah G’d judges the fates of every individual for the forthcoming year. Seeing that Pessach is not only a day of judgment, but we do not know yet how this judgment will manifest itself  seeing the year is still ahead, it is not yet time for rejoicing (Pessikta de Rav Kahane 29). By the time Shavuot occurs it has already become clear that the barley and wheat have matured, etc. There is therefore ample reason for joy. By the time Sukkot comes around the other three judgments have also been seen to have been favourable; therefore the Torah mentions joy three times in connection with that festival.
    A kabbalistic approach: The three festivals listed here in their proper sequence correspond to the three patriarchs who represented the three attributes of חסד, דין, רחמים, “loving kindness” (undeserved), “Justice,” “Mercy” (allowance being made for man’s inadequacy). Pessach symbolises  that on the one hand G’d practiced judgments on the Egyptians when He killed their firstborn, whereas at the same time He extended kindness to us by “passing over” the houses of the Jewish people. [Remember that G’d did not entrust this task to an angel, as angels do not have the latitude to extend this kind of kindness when it is not warranted by some merits. Ed.]
    Onkelos translates the word ופסח, which we normally translate as “he passed over,” (Exodus 12,23) as ויחוס, “He displayed loving kindness.” This is also reflected in Psalms 136,10: “Who struck Egypt through their first-born, His steadfast love is eternal.” Whereas this plague was judgment meted out to the Egyptians, it was a great act of kindness for the Israelite firstborn. 
    Shavuot corresponds to the attribute of Mercy, an attribute which usually reconciles the opposing demands of the attributes of Chessed and Justice respectively. This is why the sages in Berachot 58 consider the term והתפארת  in Chronicles I 29,11 as referring to the giving of the Torah. The Torah was given under the exclusive aegis of the tetragram. Sukkot on the other hand, corresponds to the attribute of Justice.
    The very word סוכה is interpreted in Megillah 14 as “Holy Spirit” [Avraham was told by G’d to submit to the dictates of Sarah known already as יסכה when introduced in  Genesis 11,29. She was covered like a סוכה with Holy Spirit.] When  David writes in Psalms 68,18: “the Lord is among them (the myriads of chariots) at Sinai in holiness,” he referred to the difference between סיני בקדש and בקדש סיני respectively. Had the Torah written the latter formulation I would have thought that a place was assigned to the Lord. As it is, it is the reverse. He determines “place,” no one determines a place for Him. He is the “place” of the universe. Even the (whole) universe is not “His place.” The meaning of מקום עולמו is similar to בית עולמו. We find that בית is an allusion to חכמה already in the very first letter ב in the Torah, at the beginning of the Torah. Just as חכמה is known as בית, so סוכה is known as בית (compare Genesis 33,17); in other words סוכה symbolises חכמה. Solomon reinforces this concept in Proverbs 24,3: “a house is built by  wisdom.” The symbolism is extended by our author to include the three walls which the סוכה has to have and which are symbolised by the shape of the letter ב which is closed on three sides. [although the author sees the festival Sukkot as representing the attribute of Justice, presumably because it follows the activity of that attribute during the early part of the month of Tishrey, he goes out of his way to equate the procedures of building a Sukkah with the emanation חכמה which is only one rung below the highest emanation כתר, and several rungs above that of דין, Justice. Observance of the commandments then signifies that we have successfully contended with that attribute with the conclusion of Yom Kippur Ed.]
    
    16,15. והיית אך שמח, “you shall be completely joyous.”  Seeing the Torah had already written: “you shall rejoice on your festival,” why did it have to add the above words? It means that the joy shall extend throughout the whole seven days of the Sukkot festival. The numerical value of the letters in the word אך is 21; you are to maintain this level of joy until the 21st of the month of Tishrey, inclusive.
    An alternative meaning alluded to by the word אך which is always diminutive, restrictive, may be that joy in this world is never complete joy. Even while rejoicing on the festival we must remain conscious of the limitations of this terrestrial universe. The reminder is especially timely seeing that starting with Pessach followed by Shavuot we experience increasing amounts of joy seeing more and more of the life-sustaining harvest is secured, we might delude ourselves of reaching a state of serenity, living a life without challenges. The wording of the verse is designed to teach us to temper our joy in this imperfect world, the life our sages call חיי שעה, “a life of only hours.”
    Even while preoccupied with the fulfillment of the command-ments which ought to be fulfilled in a spirit of joy, we must never exclude the emotion of trembling that we are in the presence of our Creator. This is how our sages in Berachot 30 understood the call of Psalms 2,11: “serve the Lord in awe, tremble with fright.” The very word גילה, a form of joy, mentioned in that verse, embodies also a feeling of “fright.” The reason for all these negative sounding emotions is the fact that this world is inhabited also by the evil urge who constantly lies in wait for us. He is so consumed with seducing us by painting a picture of “joy” (joyous abandon) that we must be on our guard that what commences as the joy of performing מצות does not degenerate into something totally secular. True joy is reserved for the world of the future. This is what Isaiah 29,19 had in mind when he wrote: “then the humble shall have increasing joy through the Lord, and the neediest of men shall exult in the Holy One of Israel.”
   שופטים
    
   דרכיה דרכי נועם וכל נתיבותיה שלום, “Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. (Proverbs 3,17). Solomon informs us in the verse just quoted that the foundation of the Torah and its ongoing concern is peace. We find this demonstrated already at the very beginning of the creation and this is why the sages in Chulin 60 have taught that all phenomena were created as completed, matured phenomena at the very outset. They base this on Genesis 2,1 וכל צבאם, “complete with all their accessories.” 
    It is well known that the heavens were created first and that unless peace reigned in the universe this could not have succeeded seeing heaven is made of two opposite elements, “fire and water.” They could not coexist unless G’d had seen to it that peace reigned in the universe. This is why we read in Job 25,2 עושה שלום במרומיו, “He makes peace in His lofty heights.” One of G’d’s names is שלום, Peace, as we know from Judges 6,24 ויקרא לו ה' שלום, “he (Gideon) called the altar “G’d Who is peace.” We have a verse in Song of Songs 1,1 in which the Talmud interprets the words “Song of Songs by Solomon” to mean that the poem is dedicated to the Lord Who personifies “peace,” שלמה. (Shevuot 35). G’d chose the Jewish nation from among more than 70 nations all of which are His, and called us שולמית, (compare Song of Songs 7,1) where the author calls on the Jewish people to return to G’d, addressing it as שולמית, the nation representing peace. It is the nation that harbours within it the concept of universal peace. G’d gave the Torah to the Jewish people seeing that the Torah personifies the ideal of peace. This is the gist of our opening verse above, that ”all its paths are peace.”
    All the commandments in the Torah are aimed at ensuring peace for the body as well as for the soul. We know that the commandments are designed to provide peace for the body from Exodus 15,26: ”if you will heed the Lord your G’d diligently, doing what He says and what is upright in His sight, giving ear to His commandments and keeping all His laws, then I will not bring upon you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians, for I the Lord am your healer.” Proof that Torah also provides peace for the soul is derived from Psalms 19,8: “the Lord’s Torah is perfect,  restores the soul.” Performance of the commandments of the Torah enables the soul at the end of its sojourn in a body to return to its roots in a state of purity. The attribute of peace constantly yearns for the return of these souls to its domain. This concept enables us to understand the meaning of Ketuvot 104, that when the wicked die the angels of destruction “welcome” them by saying: “there is no peace for the wicked, says the Lord” (Isaiah 48,22). [in other words, there is no room for you in My domain. [The Talmud is a little more elaborate. Ed.]
    The attribute of peace is the greatest of all the attributes in that it is used as a “seal” on all requests and documents. It is the final benediction in our principal prayers, a thought inspired by the sacrificial offerings which the prayers try to emulate, the daily communal prayers known as תמידים.  When you observe the list of sacrificial offerings whose rituals are prescribed at the beginning of the Book of Leviticus you will find the שלמים, “peace-offerings” mentioned last. (Leviticus 7,18) Our sages in Torat Kohanim comment: “why were these offerings called “peace-offerings?’ They answer that the reason is that these offerings re-establish peace in the universe.” We find that Solomon “signed” (concluded) his Song of Songs with “peace,” seeing he wrote in 8,10: “I was in his eyes like someone who had found peace.” In Kohelet Solomon also refers to peace in the “times” he describes in chapter 3, concluding with “a time for peace.” Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 9,9) commented on this that peace is a requirement even in time of war as we know from Deuteronomy 20,10 that “when you approach a town (during war with a view to conquering it) you must first offer it “peace.” There is no need to emphasise that our terrestrial world is sorely in need of peace if even the celestial regions are in need of it as we know from Job 25,2: המשל ופחד עמו עשה שלום במרומיו, “Dominion and Dread are His; He imposes peace in His heights.” Our sages interpret the word המשל as a reference to the archangel Michael, whereas the word פחד refers to the archangel Gavriel. G’d Himself must make peace between these two angels. This is something which is easy to understand seeing that if there is need to establish (and maintain) peace in regions and domains which are not subject to competition and natural mutual animosity, this holds true even more so in regions and domains where such competitive forces are at work all the time.
    When G’d is described as “making peace in the heavens,” this includes not only peace between forces at work in the celestial regions but the celestial regions themselves, seeing they are composed of raw materials which clash, such as fire and water. Seeing that Michael is the presiding angel in the celestial spheres he is referred to in Job as “the Dominion;” he is the one who asks Mercy for Israel. There is no need to mention that the living are in need of peace seeing that even the dead are in need of it (Sifri Shoftim 199). We know this already from when G’d said to Avraham (Genesis 15,15) “as for you, you will come to your fathers in peace.” The attribute of peace was granted especially to Aaron (Sanhedrin 6,2) and by means of this attribute his descendants merited to be priests for all generations and to bless the people wishing them that G’d grant them peace (Numbers 6,26). Aaron himself exploited this attribute to keep people alive and to restore peace and harmony between feuding parties.
    You have learned that it is the attribute peace which ensures the continued existence of the world. Not only peace but also justice is an important factor in ensuring the continued existence of the universe. Were it not for the meting out of justice people would steal from each other, rob each other, and kill each other. As a result the world would perish. This is what the sages meant in Avot 1,12 that “the world endures owing to three things: judgment (justice), truth, and peace. We learn this from Zecharyah 8,16: “truth, justice and peace you shall judge within your gates.” The word  שעריכם refers to the judges, seeing it is they who ensure that a “formal” kind of peace reigns in civilised society, the lowest level of peace which the existence of mankind depends on. This is why the Torah commanded us to appoint courts in every “gate,” i.e. in every city.
    
    16,18. שופטים ושוטרים תתן לך בכל שעריך אשר ה' אלו-היך נותך לך לשבטיך ושפטו את העם משפט צדק. “Judges and law enforcers you shall appoint for yourself in all your towns which the Lord your G’d is about to give to you to your tribes, and you shall judge the people with fair judgment.” The reason that this paragraph follows the paragraph dealing with pilgrimage festivals  is to tell us that even though the Israelites make three pilgrimages annually to Jerusalem where there many priests well versed in justice, Levites, and Torah teachers, and the pilgrims can get instruction from these scholars how to conduct themselves, clearing up many matters about which they entertain doubts, this does not relieve them of the duty to appoint local courts throughout the land. Each city must have such a court. The judges are appointed on the basis of their knowledge of the law. The people called שוטרים in our verse are those who ensure that the judges’ decisions are carried out. Basically, the שוטרים are policemen equipped with batons, leather belts, to apply physical force when necessary. They patrol the cities and have authority to deal with obvious infringements of the law. They can challenge fraudulent weights and measures. They do all this after having been told to by the judges (Maimonides Hilchot Sanhedrin 1,1).
    The judicial system is divided into three levels: there is a court comprising 71 judges, known as Sanhedrin. There are courts comprising twenty three judges. Finally, there are courts comprising three judges. The courts of only three judges were instituted for communities numbering fewer than 120 Jews. (Sanhedrin 2). Our sages have said that a court cannot have fewer than three judges in order to enable there to be a majority and a minority and in order to prevent a tie vote between the judges. (Sanhedrin 3). The sages deduced all this from the mention of the word elohim three times in Exodus 22,7, Exodus 22,8 and Leviticus 19,15 when courts and judges are mentioned. Even though, a learned individual may hand down rulings by himself as a Biblical law, seeing that the Torah (Leviticus 19,15) wrote בצדק תשפוט עמיך, ‘judge your people fairly,’ (singular) the Rabbis amended Biblical law not to judge matters single-handedly (unless they did not involve a dispute such as releasing someone from a vow). It is considered arrogant to shoulder the entire burden of justice by oneself, something reserved only for G’d Who is alone and does not need advice. If however, the two litigants agree on a single individual to be their judge this is permitted. 
    The competence of such a court of three judges includes only matters involving financial damages. When two judges sit in judgment and hand down a decision such a decision is invalid. (Sanhedrin 6). The Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 1,11 points out that even the Lord Himself does not make judicial decisions single-handedly as we know from Kings I 22,19: “and all the hosts of heaven stood by Him.” [the prophet Michayu describing heavenly judgment on King Achav. Ed.] According to the Talmud, the angels on the right voiced arguments in defense of the king whereas the angels on the left of G’d voiced arguments supporting the prosecution’s case. Although G’d does not make decisions single-handedly, He does seal the decree all by Himself. We know this from Daniel 10,21.
    The court consisting of 23 judges is a Biblical institution known as the small Sanhedrin. Every town of over 120 Jewish people must arrange to have such a court. Its deliberations take place near the gate of the city, (Maimonides Hilchot Sanhedrin 1,3) i.e. in public as we know from Amos 5,15: “and establish justice in the gate.” Such a court is empowered to try cases involving capital punishment. No court in which fewer than 23 judges are present has the authority to hand down death sentences. This is based on a number of verses such as Numbers 35,24 ושפטו העדה, “the congregation shall judge,” and  Numbers 35,25 והצילו העדה, “the congregation shall save.” A “congregation” must number at least 10 male adults. In other words, unless there is at least one quorum of judges who could free the accused and another quorum who could vote guilty, the proceedings are invalid. In order to avoid a tie vote, the Rabbis added another 3 judges so that under all circumstances there would be a majority to exonerate the accused. Seeing that we need a majority of at least two votes to hand down a death sentence, a minimum of 23 judges is required (Exodus 23,2)
    The Supreme Court, Sanhedrin hagadol, comprises the 71 finest scholars of the nation The wisest of them is appointed president of this court, known a נשיא, “prince” in the language of the Mishnah and Gemara. He functioned in lieu of Moses in his time. The second-most revered person was called אב בית דין and used to sit on the right hand of the president. The other members of the court would all be given seats in accordance with their rank as scholars. The seating arrangement was similar to that of an orchestra nowadays, open semi-circle in three rows of 23 judges each, facing the president and vice-president to ensure that the president could observe the mien of each one of them during the deliberations (compare all of the above in Maimonides).
    A Midrashic approach to the words שופטים ושוטרים, based on Tanchuma Shoftim 2. The judges and enforcers needed each other. Law enforcement (policemen) without judges is a non-starter, whereas “justice” i.e. a judicial system without an apparatus to enforce such decisions is a mockery. If the people during the time of King David had not feared the authority of Yoav his commander-in-chief, David could not have dispensed justice. This is why the prophet (Samuel II 8, 15-16) describes the system in these words: “David would mete out justice and righteousness to his whole people while Yoav, son of Tzeruyah, was in charge of the army.” David and Yoav acted in tandem. Anyone who did not accept the judgment handed down by David would be handed over to Yoav. The judgment would then be enforced. We have a verse in Job 29, 16-17 in which Job describes his function during his days of prominence, saying: “I was a father to the needy, and I looked into the case of the stranger. I broke the jaws of the wrongdoer, and I wrested prey from his teeth.” Job meant that even prey which had already been consumed by the robber who had been sentenced to make restitution he would try and recover.
    The power of justice is great seeing that as long as men sit in judgment judging crime G’d (the attribute of Justice) does not bother to sit alongside of them but judges them by means of the attribute of Mercy. Should the system of justice on earth become corrupt, the attribute of Justice will judge mankind instead. We find an allusion to this in Psalms (Midrash Tehillim 62) ‘when justice is not practiced on earth it will be practiced in heaven;’ when it is not practiced on earth G’d will have to exercise His “vocation” of being a Judge. When man enacts Justice G’d is relieved of this duty. In appreciation of being relieved of this task G’d judges mankind with the attribute of Mercy. This is the deeper meaning of Leviticus 26,3: “if you will walk in My statutes....I will give your rain at its appropriate time.”
   תתן לך, “you shall appoint for yourself.” Seeing that Moses had risked his life in order that justice be performed on earth, the Torah associates the establishment of a judiciary with Moses personally, i.e. לך (Tanchuma Beshalach 10). He had killed the Egyptian who had slain a Hebrew man in Exodus 2,11-12. On another occasion Moses risked his life for the Torah and the Jewish people when he spent 40 days on the mountain trying to get forgiveness for the people and linking his survival on earth to the people being forgiven (Exodus 34,28; 32,32.). As a result of these various acts of selfless devotion the prophet Zecharyah speaks of remembering the Torah of “My servant Moses” (Maleachi 3,22) and G’d describes the Jewish people as Moses’ people in Exodus 32,7 when He said to Moses: “your people have become corrupt.” Here the judges also are described as belonging to Moses, hence the wording תתן לך, “appoint for yourself.”
   ושפטו את העם משפט צדק, “they shall judge the people with fair judgment.” This may be either a warning to the individual judge or to every individual Israelite not to appoint a judge who is not righteous as well as competent. If they fail to do so each Israelite will be an accessory to perversion of justice if and when it occurs.” The judgment is to be absolute. It is to correspond to Leviticus 15,15 בצדק תשפוט עמיתך, “you are to judge your fellow with righteousness.” Sanhedrin 6,2 phrased this as יקוב הדין את ההר, “let the judgment bore a hole into the mountain.” Rabbi Akiva adds that one does not mix mercy with justice (Ketuvot 84). [the aforementioned quotes mean that the time for possible arbitration is before a matter comes to court; once it has come to court only legal considerations are relevant. Ed.] The wordמשפט  implies something “in the middle,” i.e. a clear-cut decision between opposing claims. Compare Psalms 112,5: ”he conducts his affairs with equity.” Jeremiah 30,11 speaks of ויסרתיך במשפט, “He will discipline you with justice.” These applications of strict yardsticks are valid in the dispensation of justice by a human tribunal. 
    The expression צדק which also appears in our verses is reserved for application by G’d. G’d combines both attributes when He sits in judgment. This is why we find David say in Psalms 99,4: משפט וצדקה ביעקב אתה עשית, “justice and charity You applied in judging Yaakov.” משפט is known in kabbalistic terms as the קו האמצעי the “middle” line on the diagram of the emanations, and Yaakov is the patriarch who represents this line [to the left of חסד on the right, Avraham’s attribute, and to the right of גבורה,דין Yitzchak’s attribute. Ed.]
    This enables us to understand Jeremiah 10,24: יסרני ה' אך במשפט, אל באפך פן תמיעטני, “chastise me o Lord, but in measure; not in Your wrath, lest You reduce me to naught.” The prophet says that the attribute of Justice which is part even of the tetragarm should not be applied to him as otherwise he would not survive the chastisement. [the prophet utters a prayer by his people who are aware that the enemy army is close to capturing Jerusalem. Ed]  משפט as distinct from דין, is perceived as the mild aspect of justice at work, whereas אפך is the harsh aspect of justice at work. Tzedek is the attribute of Justice applied to the world, as we know from Psalms 9,9 והוא ישפוט תבל בצדק, “and He will judge the universe by employing צדק.” This attribute receives its input from a higher source known as elohim. This is the meaning of Psalms 58,12 אך יש אלו-הים שופטים בארץ, “there is indeed divine justice on earth.” The word שופטים in that verse in Psalms and the word שופטים in our verse here are mystically linked together. The Torah’s instructions here are to establish the mechanism demonstrating that there is divine justice on earth. If it sounds as if justice is to be tempered with mercy in a court of law, this is misleading. The truth is if the guilty receives sentence the innocent is exonerated and feels that righteousness has been done for him whereas justice has been done to the other litigant.
    
    16,19. לא תטה משפט, “Do not pervert judgment.” This is both a warning to the judge as well as to the individual not to appoint corrupt judges as otherwise they would become accessories to a system of perverted justice. Knowingly appointing a man unfit as judge is equal to building a grove for the worship of an idol. This is why the next verse spells out the prohibition to plant such an idolatrous tree. (compare Sanhedrin 7) You will find 6 negative commandments in this paragraph (16,19-171). The sages of Devarim Rabbah 5,5 referred to the six steps leading to the throne of King Solomon (Chronicles II 9,18) claiming that the announcer at the lowest step would proclaim (quoting our verse) “do not pervert justice.” The announcer flanking the second step would proclaim the verse: “do not respect someone’s presence. The announcer flanking the third step would proclaim: “do not accept a bribe.” The announcer flanking the fourth step would proclaim: “do not plant an idolatrous tree.” The announcer flanking the fifth step of Solomon’s throne would proclaim: “do not erect for yourselves a pillar” (verse 22), whereas the announcer flanking the sixth step would proclaim: “do not slaughter a blemished animal” (17,1).
   לא תכיר פנים, “do not recognise a person.” In practice this means that a wealthy man should not be offered a chair while his counterpart the poor litigant is made to remain standing. The demeanour of the judge vis-a-vis each of the litigants must be the same as otherwise this would disorient people‘s arguments.
    
   ולא תקח שוחד, “and do not accept bribes.” Even in order to hand down a true verdict. The reason is that once one has received the bribe one can no longer be neutral, objective, or as the Torah calls it: “the bribe blinds even the eyes of the wise.” Our sages in Ketuvot 105 dissect the word שחד into שהוא חד, meaning once one accepts a bribe the giver and the recipient become as one. After that the judge cannot recognise incriminating argu-ments against the giver. The recipient is called a רשע, a wicked person, as we know from Proverbs 17,23: “a wicked man pulls a bribe out of his bosom.” We also have another verse in Proverbs 21,14: “a bribe in private (bosom) pacifies strong rage.” A third verse compares bribes to stones; Proverbs 17,8  reads: “a bribe seems like a charm, אבן חן, to its owner.” The reason the bribe is compared to a stone, אבן is that whenever it falls it breaks (Tanchuma Toldot 8).
    
    16,20. צדק צדק תרדוף, “Righteousness, righteousness, you shall pursue.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah warns (by repeating) that one must strive to be righteous both in word and in deed. These are the two ways in which one may potentially inflict harm upon both oneself and upon others. Everyone who speaks righteously reflects the fact that his deeds are most likely righteous also; this is why it behooves every Jew to be both righteous in his speech and in his deeds. This sentiment is reflected in Tzefaniah 3,13 when he said of the remnant of the people of Israel that “they shall do no wrong or speak falsehood; a deceitful tongue shall not be in their mouths.”
    Alternatively, our verse addresses the people who are subject to litigation and exhorts them to strive for righteousness regardless of whether this will be financially beneficial or harmful to them. This is why the Torah repeats the exhortation.
    A kabbalistic approach, based on Nachmanides: the reason for repeating the word צדק is that the Torah reminds you that righteousness emanates from the emanation צדק. It promises the judge that if he strives to dispense the kind of justice which reflects righteousness, he in turn will be the recipient of input from that emanation. It is something like Exodus 15,16 where Moses prayed (in the song) תפול עליהם אימת-ה ופחד, “may fear and trepidation fall upon them” (the Gentile nations). The letter ה at the end of the word אימתה which is not really necessary, is an allusion to the final letter ה in the tetragram, the source of this fear in the part of the tetragram which represents the attribute of Justice. [Being imbued with such fear of the attribute צדק is not a threat but a promise in this instance. It is as if judges who practice righteousness will be rewarded with יראת שמים as a result. Ed.] You will find this approach echoed in the Sefer Habahir items 74-75 where the author, in commenting on the sequence of צדק צדק תרדוף למען  תחיה וירשת, explains that the repetition of the word  צדק reflects what is written in Psalms 18,13 מנגה נגדו, i.e.[a repetition of נגה and גחלי אש which are two different forms of intense heat, the latter one a weaker reflection of the former one] that the first time the word appears it refers to true righteousness, whereas the second time it is like an echo of the original righteousness practiced. He who strives to perform righteousness will find that it echoes all around him. The reason we call a proselyte who has sought to place himself under the כנפי השכינה, the protective wings of G’d’s presence, a גר צדק is that he has acquired the trepidation for this attribute of Justice which we normally refer to as יראת שמים, “awe of heaven.” [perhaps this point must be emphasised especially with the convert as he may think that conversion bestows only the welcome acceptance by the attribute of Mercy without simultaneously submitting to G’d as the attribute of Justice. Ed.] By submitting to that attribute one has embraced Judaism in the full meaning of the word.
   למען תחיה, “so that you will live,” a reference to the hereafter within the realm of the צדק עליון, the “attribute” צדק in the celestial regions. This region emanates the brilliant light reserved for the righteous.
   וירשת את הארץ, “and you will take possession of the land.” a reference to the echo of צדק available in our terrestrial world. Eretz Yisrael is perceived as “opposite” the region of the “true” צדק in the celestial regions. Concerning this concept, Solomon said in Proverbs 21,21 רודף צדקה וחסד ימצא חיים צדקה וכבוד, “he who strives to do righteousness, good deeds and kindness, attains life, righteousness and honour.” The meaning of this verse is that if a person while on earth endeavours to live by the standards of the attribute of חסד ה', he will find that he attains the true צדק in the celestial regions, i.e. eternal life.
    
    16,21. לא תטע לך אשרה, “do not plant for yourself an idolatrous tree.” How can a tree be idolatrous? The meaning is that the tree is intended to serve as a focus of worship. The new twist of our legislation here is that the Torah prohibits already the planting of such a tree on pain of the penalty of 39 lashes even if the tree had never served as an object of idolatry (compare Rashi). Isaiah 66,17 severely condemns people who engage in sanctifying themselves before entering such groves (in order to worship the trees). In other words, the practice of worshipping nature in such a manner was quite widespread.
    
    17,2. כי ימצא בקרבך, “If there will be found in your midst,” etc. Mention of the word בקרבך both here and at the end of this paragraph (verse 7) reflects the fact that most sinners try and commit their sins in secret; this is why extensive investigations have to be made to bring the facts to light. Once found out, these sinners who are equated with the evil they did have to be destroyed like the leavened matters before Pessach which has to be cleaned out of all the cracks in the walls and in the floor. This is why the Torah writes ובערת, “you are to destroy,” coupled with the word מקרבך, “from deep inside you.”
    It is also possible to understand the word מקרבך as an allusion to the relatives of the sinner, as if the Torah had written מקרוביך, “from among your kin.” When someone observes a family member sinning (purposely) he is to shame him and be the first one to administer the punishment when it is imposed; he must neither allow feelings of kinship nor embarrassment  to cause him to cover up such sins. This is the meaning of Psalms 15,3: “he must not be afraid to bear reproach for his relative’s acts and therefore cover up for him.” (compare Rashi).
    
    17,3. ולשמש או לירח או לכל צבא השמים אשר לא צויתי, “and to the sun or the moon or any host of heaven which I have not commanded;” it is so well known that G’d did not command us or anyone to worship idols that the Torah does not need to write this line. The words: “which I have not commanded” therefore must have a different meaning. The plain meaning is that seeing that the people who do perform acts of worship for sun, moon, etc., believe that by honouring G’d’s agents they honour Him and please Him, the Torah has to go on record that such thinking is erroneous. G’d never ordered acts of deference to be performed for any of His servants.
    Another meaning of these words  could be that that they have to be understood as if the Torah had written אשר צויתי לא, “which I expressly commanded not to.” The words are a repetition of part of the second of the Ten Commandments not to bow down to any of these phenomena. We have a parallel meaning of such phrasing in Deut. 32,5: שחת לו לא. This means that mankind and Israel has corrupted itself by means of לא, by violating the commandment not to eat from the tree of knowledge. We will elaborate when discussing that verse.
    A kabbalistic approach. The additional words: “which I did not command,” are to be in contrast to what G’d did command, i.e. to observe and carefully preserve His covenant as mentioned in the previous verse where violating the covenant is the subject dealt with. The verses may be understood in this sequence: “who has done evil by violating His covenant concluded at Sinai when G’d said: “now when you do hearken to My voice and observe My covenant” (Exodus 19,5). The covenant referred to in that verse is the one embracing both the attribute of “Day” and the attribute “Night.” The meaning of this is: “although, when I commanded you concerning the daily communal offerings that you should take two sheep, one for the morning (corresponding to the attribute “Day,” and one for the evening, corresponding to the attribute “Night,”) the attributes which exercise their influence on the light of Day and Night respectively, this does not mean that I commanded you to worship these luminaries.”
    
    17,4. ודרשת היטב, “you shall investigate thoroughly;” the numerical value of the word היטב equals the numerical value of the letters in the tetragram, i.e. 26. It is as if the Torah had written  “you shall investigate him in your capacity as the agent of Hashem.”
    
    17,6. על פי שנים עדים, “on the basis of the testimony of two eye-witnesses, etc.” It is well known that two witnesses carry as much weight as 100 witnesses (Makkot 5). Seeing that this is so, why did the Torah have to write that evidence by three witnesses is acceptable? If the Torah wanted to tell us that only one judge suffices to accept the testimony of the two witnesses, there is no hint of this in the verse in front of us. The verse does not address the question of who accepts the testimony but  who testifies.
    Nachmanides explains our verse as meaning that even though the whole proceedings have been concluded with the testimony of two witnesses (including capital crimes involving the death penalty), if there is another witness or two or three whose testimony has not been heard yet, the judges are to send for these witnesses and hear and examine their testimony. The assumption is that the more witnesses testify the clearer the facts will become. However, the verse reminds us that if there are only two witnesses or these two witnesses had already gone home when additional witnesses showed up, we rely on the testimony of the original two witnesses.
    Our sages in Makkot 5 explained the wording of our verse as follows: the Torah wanted to compare the validity of two witnesses to the validity of three or more. The testimony of three witnesses is a single unit, just as the testimony of two witnesses is a single unit. If the unit proves defective, all parts of the unit are considered as invalid. If one out of five witnesses who have come forward to give testimony on the same case contradicts himself, the testimony of the other four witnesses who were part of that group is disregarded also. The Talmud adds that the reason the Torah mentions a third witness is in order to tell us that if all three witnesses testified falsely, the one who was examined last cannot claim that seeing the testimony of his colleagues had already been disqualified his own testimony did not make any difference and he should not be considered liable as a false witness. Based on what we read here we have the authority to punish all three witnesses equally. The moral lesson learned from this verse is that if one is in the company of sinners one is liable to be punished in the same way as the sinners are punished. This piece of logic prompted Rabbi Akiva to say that even people who are merely fellow travelers of sinners are punished as if they had committed the same crimes, then people who keep the company of pious people should be given the reward as if they themselves had performed the good deeds performed by the pious people whose company they keep. Rabbi Akiva based himself on the principle that מדה טובה מרובה על מדת פורענות אחת על חמש מאות, “that the attribute of benevolence which G’d employs is 500 times stronger than the attribute of vengeance, retribution. We know this from Exodus 34,7 where G’d promises to favourably remember good deeds for 2,000 generations whereas in the same verse G’d is described as remembering the sins of the fathers for only 4 generations.
    17,8. כי יפלא ממך דבר, “if some matter  is hidden from you;” the word יפלא describes something concealed as we know already from Genesis 18,14 where the Torah makes the point that no future event (or past) is concealed from Hashem.
   בין דם לדם, “between blood and blood,” i.e. someone who shed blood and is guilty of bloodshed and someone who shed blood and is innocent (self-defense, for instance). 
   בין דין לדין, “between justice and justice,” in disputes concerning  financial matters; (Ibn Ezra)
   בין נגע לנגע, “between plague and plague;” injuries and liability for compensation for them (Ibn Ezra)
   דברי ריבות, “conflicting arguments;” this applies to all the above.
    
    17,9. ובאת אל הכהנים הלוים, “you will come to the priests, the Levites, etc.;” they are the teachers of the Torah.
   ואל השופט אשר יהיה בימים ההם, “and to the judge who officiates in those days;” the only judges who have authority to deal with your problems are the ones who are alive and officiate during your lifetime. A judge, such as Yiftach in his generation, (though he was relatively ignorant) has as much authority as the prophet Samuel in his period. (compare Rosh Hashanah 25); this is why the Torah wrote here: “who will be in those days;” it would not have required superior intelligence to know that one cannot submit a claim to a judge who is dead. The authority of a legally appointed judge is such that if he declares right (what you considered to be right) as being left or vice versa, you have to accept his decision. It goes without saying that if such a judge declares right to be right and left to be left, that his decision must be accepted.
    Nachmanides writes that there was a great need to legislate this commandment. The Torah that we have received was received in written form. We know that among us humans there are many shades of opinions concerning the same problems. If each Rabbi were allowed to hand down decisions in accordance with his subjective understanding of the Torah it would not be long before we would have many different documents each claiming to be the original Torah. It was imperative therefore for the Torah to legislate that there is a supreme authority in each generation which bases its decision upon an historically valid tradition going back to the time of Moses. This is why the Sanhedrin described in this paragraph is depicted as having its offices in the presence of the Lord your G’d. They are qualified to interpret what is written in the Torah even if you think that their interpretation differs from the truth as much as left from right. You must remember that the members of that Supreme Court are endowed with Holy Spirit so that they enjoy a divine assist in arriving at the correct decisions.
    
    17,12. והאיש אשר יעשה בזדון, “and the man  who will act deliberately contrary, etc.” the Torah refers to a judge, however competent,  who after the Sanhedrin has ruled on a matter under dispute hands down a dissenting decision. The matter under dispute concerns violations for which the karet penalty applies if they were committed deliberately. Such a judge or elder is known as זקן ממרא, “a rebellious Elder.” He becomes guilty of the death penalty by asphyxiation.
    
    17,13. וכל העם ישמעו וייראו, ”and all the people shall hear and be in awe,” at a time when all the people are present in Jerusalem, i.e. one waits with the trial until one of the pilgrimage festivals  (Sanhedrin 89).
    
    17,14. ככל הגוים אשר סביבותי, ‘like all the nations around me.” The reason for the word סביבותי, “surrounding me,” is that seeing the land of Israel straddles the “middle” line of the terrestrial, lower world, this means that all the other nations are situated all around that nation. We find a verse expressing a similar thought describing “Jerusalem as amid the nations I have placed it and the nations are all around it” (Ezekiel 5,5). If this is correct then the Jewish nation dwells literally surrounded by  the seventy nations which populate the globe. This is why the Torah wrote here ”like all the nations around me.” David also employs such wording in Psalms 118,10: ”all the nations who are around me (threateningly), by the name of the Lord, I will cut them down.” This refers to the fact that both on earth and in the celestial regions Israel is located centrally, surrounded in those regions by the seventy protective angels of those nations who flank the כנסת ישראל from all sides. This reflects a statement by Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 24 that G’d invited the 70 ministering angels which surround His throne to confuse the language of the various nations. This is the vision (Kings I 22,19) described by the prophet Michayu: “I saw the Lord seated on His throne with all the host of the heaven standing around Him to the right and to the left of Him.” This was a reference to these 70 angels who represent the nations of the world. The ones on the right of the throne represent celestial forces who cite Israel’s merits whereas the ones on the left are perceived as citing demerits. Psalms 89,8 reflects a similar thought when David says: “held in awe all around Him.” Keeping all this in mind David said in Psalms 118, 8-10: “it is better to put one’s trust in the Lord rather than in man; it is better to take refuge in the Lord rather than in the great; all the nations which surround  me have beset me; etc.“ The nations besetting me” are these seventy Gentile nations. G’d will cut them all down, i.e. "“in the name of the Lord I will cut them down.”
    
    17,15. שום תשים עליך מלך, “You shall surely appoint a king over yourself.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah commands the people to appoint a formal king at some time in the future. It is one of the three commandments which take effect after the people enter the land of Israel (Sanhedrin 20,2). Maimonides bases this on our verse here and states that the purpose of the election of this king is that he will lead the fight to exterminate Amalek (Deut. 25,19). The commandment becomes effective after G’d has given the people rest from all its surrounding enemies (ibid). The commandment to build a permanent Temple was implied in Deut. 12,8: “you shall seek out His presence, His residence.” This appointment of the king is to be accomplished before the building of the permanent Temple. Samuel makes this quite clear when he said to King Shaul: “G’d has appointed me to anoint you as king, now go and wipe out Amalek” (Samuel I 15,1). It is clear that the destruction of Amalek had to precede the building of the Temple from Samuel II 7,1-2: where David said to the prophet Natan that he thought the time had come for the Ark of the covenant to be accommodated in a building with a solid roof, seeing that he himself lived in a solid palace.
    This commandment is an example of G’d accommodating Himself to the wishes of the Jewish people. G’d knew that in the foreseeable future the people would demand to be ruled by a king of flesh and blood; although, basically, G’d prefers to be the direct king of the people of Israel. Seeing that only He can traverse all their camps and benevolently supervise the fate of every individual, there certainly is no objective need for a king of flesh and blood whose reign, however well intentioned, cannot match that of G’d Himself.
    This feeling that the wish of the people to have a king of flesh and blood was perceived by G’d as an insult directed at Him rather than at the prophet Samuel, was made clear to the prophet in Samuel I 8,7. Although G’d did give the people (through His prophet Samuel) King Shaul, this did not represent G’d’s first choice. In the event that we do not realise this, read Hoseah 8,4: “they have made kings, but not with My sanction; they have made officers but not of My choice.” We have an even more outspoken verse on the subject in Hoseah 13,11: “I give you kings in My anger, and take them away in My wrath.” The word באפי, “in My anger,” refers to King Shaul the first king, whereas the words ואקח בעברתי, “and I will take away in My wrath,” refer to Tzidkiyahu, last King of Yehudah. He was taken into captivity by Nevuchadnezzar who was granted permission to do that only because G’d was angry. 
    It would do well for us to study our history and to learn what happened to the Jewish people during the centuries when their political system was headed by a king of flesh and blood. Devarim Rabbah 5,11 sums it up in these words: the Jewish kings caused many of their people to fall in battle because of their faulty policies. Shaul caused many casualties at Gilboah (Samuel I 31,1) David caused a plague (Samuel II 24,15). Achav, King of Israel, became the cause of the three year famine (Kings I 17,1). Tzidkiyah’s policies became the immediate cause for the destruction of the Temple .
    How was it that the entire people [who had experienced a tremendous renaissance under the leadership of the prophet Samuel Ed.] agreed to ask for a king? The Talmud Sanhedrin 20 dissects the wording in Samuel I 8, pointing out that the elders of the people were motivated by pure considerations asking that the purpose of the king be “to judge us,” (rather than Samuel’s sons whom they did not consider fit). The common people were motivated by the desire for their king to be a general who would lead them in war, and their sin was in saying “like all the nations.” They spelled this out in greater detail in verse 20 of that chapter. The people were agreed that they wanted a king, but they differed regarding the tasks of that king.
    A Midrashic approach based on Sanhedrin 20: the emphasis in the line שום תשים עליך מלך, “be sure to appoint a king over yourself,” is that the fear of the authority of the king should pervade the people. One would not be allowed to ride on the king’s horse, sit on his chair, use his scepter or his crown, or any of the garments or implements used by the king; even if the king was modest and did not insist on these appurtenances of office to be his exclusively, i.e. was מוחל על כבודו, he was not allowed to waive his privileges and anyone violating these rules was guilty of insulting Royalty (Ketuvot 17). When the king died, all the utensils, garments, etc., which he had used would be burned so as not to be used by his successor. Only a successor king would be allowed to employ the servants of the former king. This is why Avishag, the woman from Shunem was permitted as a wife for Solomon whereas she was forbidden to Adoniah. (Maimonides Hilchot Melachim 2, 1-2). Even a prophet would have to remain standing in the presence of the king and bow his face to the ground in deference. When there was a need for the High Priest to consult the urim vetumim, the king could remain standing in his presence (Maimonides Hilchot Melachim 5,2).
    A kabbalistic approach: it is well known what the power of a king consists of, seeing he is perceived as the fourth leg of the merkavah, the “chariot supporting the Shechinah, i.e. he represents the emanation מלכות. The concept of the merkavah is comprised of the three “crowns,” כתרים, i.e. the heads, (like the highest emanationכתר (. In that concept the “crowns” are the patriarchs who support three “legs” of that “chariot.” (the lowest in the list of ten emanations is מלכות, “kingdom,” whereas the highest is כתר, “crown”) A king of Israel is supposed to act as this fourth leg of the merkavah, i.e. מלכות which is also known as צדק. We have an explicit verse in Isaiah 32,1 הן לצדק ימלך מלך,  i.e. that the purpose of a king’s rule is to ensure righteousness and fairness in his kingdom. Concerning such a kingdom (king) David said in Psalms 18,2: “a stone which had been rejected by the builders (as useless) has become the ‘chief cornerstone’.” This is the stone which completes the whole building. The “builders” who had rejected this stone are the אבות, the patriarchs, who were on such a high spiritual level, (higher emanations) that they did not think they needed that emanation מלכות, “kingdom,” and what it represents. In order for David to turn the stone which the builders had rejected into something fit to support the merkavah, he took excess spiritual values of the various patriarchs and distributed that excess to form part of the emanation מלכות, so that the excess plus the “king” together would form the fourth leg of the מרכבה, “the chariot” which  supports the Shechinah.
    Even though the king symbolises a higher level than the emanation מלכות, we do find that on occasion מלכות is equated with מלך such as in Isaiah 44,6 מלך ישראל וגואלו ה' צבאות, כה אמר ה', “thus says the Lord, the king of Israel and its redeemer the Lord of hosts,” as well as in Psalms 145,1 ארוממך אלוהי המלך, “I wish to exalt my G’d the King.” In both of these instances the concept of מלכות (represented by an attribute of G’d) is elevated to the level of מלך. When the word אלוהי in Psalms 145 is spelled with the letter ו, (something most unusual) this shows that the attribute of G’d meant by this word had to be “elevated, raised in spiritual stature” in order to be on the same level as מלך. 
    All the foregoing shows that the appointment of a king over the people of Israel is to be viewed as a positive development, a step in raising the Jewish people as a whole to a higher spiritual level. The proviso is that such an appointment is meant to further the interest of G’d, of heaven, not G’d forbid, to further the secular ambitions of the people. 
    We might have thought that the meaning of the words שום תשים, may either be “elect” or “appoint.” Actually, it is derived from סם, “quintessence, an elixir,” and hints to us that the king is supposed to be the elixir of life. Alternatively, -if the king does not live up to his task- he can turn into being the סם המות, the elixir of death, seeing he is the quintessence of everything. The repetition of the words שום תשים then are an allusion to the dual role of a king, depending on his character. If he is appointed from a sincere desire to advance the spiritual level of the Jewish people he will be an elixir of life, if not, G’d forbid, he will symbolise the opposite.
   אשר יבחר ה' אל-היך בו, “whom the Lord your G’d will choose.” This verse teaches that in the final analysis both the monarchy and the other lofty positions are all a reflection of the will of heaven. The “election” of which the Torah speaks was decisively influenced by divine forces. This is why our sages in Baba Batra 91  say that even if the king is someone appointed as leader of totally ignorant uncivilised people, he was placed in such a position by an act of G’d. This is also the meaning of Daniel 5,21: “until he knew that the Supreme G’d rules in the kingdom of men and sets over it whom He wishes.”
   מקרב אחיך תשים עליך מלך, “from amongst your brethren shall you appoint a king for yourself.” Our sages in Sotah 41 conclude from the wording that both the king’s father and the king’s mother must be Jewish. (compare Tossaphot). Anyone who is not your brother is not an Israelite, and anyone who is not an Israelite is described as נכרי, alien.
    
    17,16. רק לא ירבה לו סוסים, “only he shall not amass for himself horses, etc.”  The Torah now proceeds to list differences between Gentile kings’ prerogatives and those of a Jewish king. Jewish kings must not make the acquisition of many horses and chariots their policy. Neither must a Jewish king amass gold and silver or even wives. Gentile kings see in the acquisition of these possessions an end in itself and treat these possessions as the measure of their success instead of as something secondary as Jewish kings are asked to do. A Jewish king is to make preoccupation with the Torah his principal concern. This is why the Torah not only demands that he write a (2) Torah scrolls but read in it daily This will teach him reverence for the Lord (verse 19) and will ensure that he remains on the throne for many years.
    Sanhedrin 21 interprets the words “that he do not amass many horses” to mean that he should not amass more horses than he needs for transportation for himself and his soldiers. He should not have a selection of chariots at his disposal to ride in and alternate between them. The reason for these restrictions is spelled out, i.e. not to bring the people back to Egypt, the country from which horses were exported in those days. We read in Kings I 10,29 that the cost of a chariot imported from Egypt in those days was 600 silver shekels whereas the price of a horse was 150 shekels.
   וה' אמר לכם לא תוסיפון לשוב בדרך הזה עוד, “and the Lord has said to you: “you shall not return again on this way.” This commandment was valid only during the period when it was promulgated. It was intended to ensure that Israelites traveling to Egypt would not learn to copy the abominations practiced in that country as the Torah spells out in detail in Leviticus 18,3. This does not mean that there is a permanent prohibition for Jews to reside in Egypt. Had the Torah intended these words as a permanent prohibition it would be inconceivable that so many Torah scholars, pious individuals, made their home in Egypt after the destruction of the Temple. Even if individual Jews had ignored this prohibition and settled in Egypt, the sages would have spoken out against this and we would have records of their protest. The only people who were forbidden to dwell in Egypt were Jews who left the land of Israel to do so. [The author’s view is not shared unanimously as the Talmud quotes Abbaye as describing the extermination of the Jewish community in Alexandria by Alexander the Great as punishment for violation of the commandment in our verse (Sukkah 51). The scholars who disagree with Abbaye cite the fact that Daniel went to live in Egypt as proof that it was permitted. The Sefer Hayereyim quoted in Semag, (Sefer Mitzvot Gadol negative commandment 227) is one of the sources upon which our author bases himself. The words “to return on this way,” are interpreted to mean that people who have left Egypt to settle in the land of Israel are forbidden to return there. 
    
    17,17. ולא ירבה לו נשים, “and he shall not have too many wives.” Our sages (Sanhedrin 21) put the number of wives a king may have at 18. They base this on the number of wives David had, six of whom were mentioned by name (Samuel II 3,2-5). It says there: “if this is insufficient, I will add  for you כהנה וכהנה “twice more the same number,” i.e. another 12 (Samuel II 12,8). The reason the Torah gives for this limitation is: ולא יסור לבבו, “so his heart will not go astray.” It is assumed that a woman may seduce a man to turn from being G’d-fearing, seeing that the original woman Chavah had done exactly that when she seduced Adam into eating from the tree of knowledge (Genesis 3,6).
   וכסף וזהב לא ירבה לו מאד, “and he must not amass too much silver and gold.” Sanhedrin 21 defines the permissible amount as “sufficient to entertain visitors.” They mean that the king may amass sufficient money to pay the salaries of his servants, his soldiers that are employed by him on a year round basis. He must not, however, amass wealth the purpose of which is simply to lie in vaults, money not employed for a useful purpose. The reason for this limitation is to prevent the king from becoming arrogant vis-a-vis his fellow Jews. This latter reason (verse 17) applies to all three restrictions listed in our paragraph. People who amass excess wealth have a tendency of putting their faith in their wealth and simultaneously diminishing their reliance of G’d. A king is in greater danger of doing that as he is privileged. This is why he must make G’d his treasury and his fortress. Job 22,24-25 illustrates this when we read there (Eliphaz speaking) “if you regard treasure as dirt, Ophir-gold as stones of the wadi, and Shaddai be your treasure, and precious silver for you;”
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra says that the prohibition not to amass too much silver and gold is intended to lessen the tax burden on the people as this would be the source of the king’s wealth. Historically, we find that Solomon who was immensely rich, had imposed a heavy burden of taxes on his subjects. Wealth is compared to fire. The more wood the greater the flame of the fire. We find that the people were resentful of the tax burden and they said so to Solomon’s son Rechavam (Kings I 12,4). The matter became such a burning issue that they murdered the king’s tax collector Adoniram in his own house (Kings I 12,10). In order to appreciate the concerns of the Torah all we have to do is look at the wisest of kings, Solomon, (may be even wisest of men) who fell victim to all three of the prohibitions of the Torah mentioned here. He had no fewer than 40,000 stalls of horses for his chariotry (Kings I 5,7); He had 700 wives and 300 concubines (Kings I 11,3). He was so wealthy that silver is described as meaningless in terms of wealth during his reign (Kings 10,27). Silver was treated as if it were merely stones. He had thought that due to his superior wisdom he would not fall victim to he warnings expressed by the Torah. Alas, he was wrong.
    
    17,20. למען יאריך ימים על ממלכתו, “in order that he may enjoy a long reign, etc.” The Torah, while emphasising the positive, also implies the negative consequences if the king will fail to heed the Torah’s instructions. The best example is the first king of Israel, Shaul, who on account of a relatively minor sin, lost his kingdom and dynasty. The prophet Samuel had told him to wait for seven days for his arrival. Shaul failed to do so, (during the last hours of the seventh day) and the prophet not only chided him but told him that on account of this insubordination (described as foolishness) his kingdom would not endure (Samuel I 10,8 and 13,13-14). 
     הוא ובניו, “he and his sons, etc.” This verse teaches that the succession is by heredity and that there is no need to anoint the son of the previous king (Horiot 11). If there should break out a quarrel involving the succession, the choice that the people agree on will require anointing. This is the meaning of the words בקרב ישראל, i.e. there is a consensus amongst the Israelites who should ascend the throne after the death of the previous king. The reason Solomon was anointed was precisely because there had been a quarrel about which of David’s sons should rule after him (compare Horiot 11).
    
    18,2. ונחלה לא יהיה לו, “He shall not have an inheritance with Israel.”  The word נחלה in verse one refers to distribution of the land of the seven Canaanite tribes being dispossessed in the immediate future, whereas the same word in our verse refers to the land of the remaining three Canaanite tribes, the Kenizi, Keyni, and Kadmoni, which will become part of the land of Israel only in the future. 
   בקרב אחיו, “among his brothers;” this is a reference to his “full” brothers the other sons of Leah.
   ה' הוא נחלתו, “the Lord is his heritage;” Levi was the tenth of the brothers if one counts from the youngest to the oldest something I have elaborated on in Numbers 18,19. This is why this tribe is described as G’d’s heritage, and this is why the tithes are given to this tribe.
    
    18,3. וזה יהיה משפט הכהנים, “and this is to be “dues” of the priests.” The reason this paragraph follows the previous one is that in that paragraph we have been told already that the Levites have no regular heritage, i.e. that they do not share in the distribution of the land. Now the Torah tells us that the statutes defining the portions of the animals slaughtered and the harvest allocated to the priests are in lieu of the “landed heritage” allocated to the other tribes. Our sages in Chulin 132 interpret the words מאת העם, from the people, as “exclusive of the priests.”
   מאת זובחי הזבח, “from the  animals fit to be eaten;” the priest claims his respective portion from the slaughterer of the animal. אם שור אם שה, “be it an ox or a lamb;”  to exclude free-roaming animals from claims by the priests. הזרוע, “the front leg,” of the body, the two upper parts of that leg to the ankle. הלחיים, “the cheekbones,” including the tongue. והקבה, “and the stomach;” some of the interior parts of the animal, i.e. the fourth of the four stomachs. All of these parts are totally devoid of sanctity. This is the reason that these gifts were not listed in Numbers 18,1 where the priests’ shares are listed. In that chapter the Torah discussed matters which had some degree of sanctity, especially animal parts which were part of sacrificial animals. Even though the items listed here were not mentioned specifically in that chapter in Numbers, we can find allusions to them even there. We read in Numbers 18,12: ראשיתם אשר יתנו לה' לך נתתים, “their first which they give to Hashem, to you I have given them.” Sifri Korach 117 understands the word ראשיתם  in that verse as applying to the first shearing of the wool of the lambs, whereas the additional words אשר יתנו, “which they are to give,” is interpreted as referring to the parts of the animal mentioned in our verse here; the word לה' is understood as referring to חלה, the part of the dough given to the priests. The significance of just these parts of the animal being given to the priest is as follows: the foreleg represents the hand. The Torah, when describing Pinchas’ deed (Numbers 25,7) which saved the people of Israel, writes ויקח רומח בידו, “he took a spear in his hand.” The hand which performed the deed qualifies for the foreleg of the animal. The cheekbones symbolise the organ used for prayer. Pinchas prayed as we know from Psalms 106,30. Finally, the stomach is the organ which suffered the fatal blow as described in Numbers 25,8. (compare Sifri Korach 117). Maimonides in Moreh Nevuchim 3,39 describes all three of these organs as being ראשית, something primary of the particular parts of the body.  
    
    18,5. לעמוד לשרת, “to stand and perform service.” This verse teaches that service in the Temple must be performed while standing. The reason the Torah  adds the word בשם before writing the tetragram is that the word בשם is a reference to the attribute of Justice. It occurs in that form repeatedly, such as in Exodus 20,21 אזכיר את שמי, “I allow My name to be mentioned,” or Deut. 12,11 לשכן שמו שם, “to provide a residence for His Name there.”
    Onkelos also feels that every time that the word שם appears in connection with the name of G’d it indicates the Shechinah, i.e. a form of the attribute of Justice. This verse (“to stand and serve”) is the source of our sages saying that the High Priest would pronounce the 42-lettered name of G’d on the Day of Atonement seeing that day is one when the attribute of Mercy is co-opted to the attribute of Justice. [the letter ב and מ in the word בשם equal 42, whereas the letter ש =300 is the numerical value of the tetragram when the aleph bet is read backwards i.e. א=ת, ב=ש, ג=ר, etc. (We have mentioned repeatedly that whenever the letters in the tetragram appear in the reverse order this signifies the Justice aspect of that attribute. (Here you would get מצפ'ץ). You will note that this paragraph has 42 words, just as the first benediction of the Shmoneh Esreh prayer better known as עמידה, prayer-service to be performed while standing.
    18,8. חלק כחלק יאכלו, “portion for portion they shall eat it.” According to the plain meaning of the text these words mean that the priests shall eat all that is given to them and share it out equitably among themselves, including the skins of the burnt-offerings, and the meat of the sacrifices which were not burned up totally.
    
   לבד ממכריו על האבות, “except for transactions which had been arranged by the forefathers.” If a priest has sold his house which he had inherited from his parents as described in Leviticus 25,33, the other priests cannot deny him his place in the משמר, roster, by saying that seeing he had sold his house and was relatively affluent he was not entitled to share the sacrificial meats with them. This is Ibn Ezra’s interpretation of these words. As to the beginning of the paragraph commencing with the words: “when the Levite will come” (verse 6), this refers to a priest who is a member of the tribe of Levi. The verse does not speak at all about a Levite who is “only” a Levite, seeing the words: “who stands and performs service” could not apply to a mere Levite. When verse 6 continues ובא בכל אות נפש, “and he may come whenever he likes to the place, etc.,” this teaches that a priest may offer his personal sacrifices even out of turn, during the roster of other priests. Similarly, during the pilgrimage festivals Pessach, Shavuot, and Sukkot, every priest is entitled to participate in the sacrificial service and offer the respective offerings of his own on the festival. (Sifri Shoftim 168)
    A Midrashic approach:  the words חלק כחלק יאכלון mean that the priests share equally, as we pointed out already. This might lead me to believe that on the festivals all the priests are entitled to share equally also in such sacrifices as the daily public offerings, offerings which have nothing to do with the festivals. To tell us that this is not so the Torah added the words לבד ממכריו על האבות, i.e. except for the matters which were sold already in the days of the forefathers, i.e. at the time when King David organised the division of the משמרות, the “rosters,” i.e. that the priests have to take turns, each one belonging to one of 24 groups each of which had 2 weeks of service in the Temple allocated to it. At that time the priests were considered as “having sold” the rights to certain weeks of service to each of these various groups, rosters. (compare Sukkah 55-56). They would say to each other: “you serve during my week and I will serve during your week.” The “sale” was not one in which money changed hands. 
    We have to ask ourselves that seeing originally every priest was allowed to perform sacrificial service whenever he wanted to, what prompted King David and Samuel to change a system which had been functioning for 400 years? Why did they institute these  rosters which limited the periods of service by each priest to 2 weeks a year of which each priest actually served only on a single day of ‘his week?’ Besides, what was the reason for dividing these rosters into 24? According to the Talmud this division was so  absolute that a priest could under no circumstances switch, or exchange his membership in one roster to becoming a member of a different roster. We know of the absolute rigidity of this order from Sukkah 56  where the exact division of who was entitled to what is discussed if the festival occurred in the middle of the week, depriving at least one roster of part of its exclusive claim to that week. 
    The place in the courtyard of the Temple where the members of the roster divided their shares was allocated in such a way that all the onlookers could know which roster was the incoming one and which was the outgoing one. The members of each roster were known by names identifying their roster so as to enable easy identification. The Talmud relates that it happened that a member of a roster called Bilgah disgraced itself and that henceforth the authorities punished the entire roster by allocating a place to it during the entire week it was performing its service which made it appear as if this roster was about to finish its service on that day. It appears that the hands of the authorities were severely limited in the kind of punishment they could administer for laxity or deliberate misconduct by its members as these 24 rosters were perceived as paralleling similar rosters among the angels performing the service in the celestial counterpart of the Sanctuary on earth. According to the Sefer Habahir (item 107) there were 3 times 24 such rosters in the celestial regions corresponding to the three verse in Exodus 14, 19-21 each one of which has 72 letters, each if read vertically representing one of the 72-lettered name of G’d. It appears that whereas the “rosters” i.e. procedures in the celestial regions were fixed, G’d created new angels every day who would sing His praises prior to disappearing. The forefathers, i.e. David and Samuel (Taanit 27), in their wisdom decided to pattern service in the terrestrial Sanctuary to reflect as much as possible what they knew about what went on in the celestial spheres. The blessing pronounced by the members of the outgoing roster for the incoming roster included the following passage: “may the One who resides in this House  ensure that there is peace and mutual goodwill among you just as peace and goodwill prevails in the celestial regions where there is no jealousy or hatred between the angels, but they all co-exist in peace and comradeship” (Berachot 12). At any rate, we have seen that a great deal of thought was invested by the leaders of earlier generations in arriving at the arrangement of who does what and when in connection with the Temple service.
    
    18,9. לא תלמד לעשות, “You hall not learn to do, etc.” Our sages in Sifri Shoftim 170 construe the word לעשות, “to do,” as limiting the injunction of this verse to actually carrying out such abominations. It is permitted to study and investigate the abominations practiced by these pagan nations. One may even teach the subject matter (as theoretical knowledge). We find that the elders of the Supreme Court, Sanhedrin, had to be familiar with all these abominations, even with witchcraft, how else could they have been able to convict people of practicing these arts of wrongdoing? Lack of knowledge of even a single such discipline would disqualify such an elder.
    
    18,10-11. לא ימצא בך מעביר בנו ובתו באש, קוסם קסמים, מעונן, נחש, ומכשף. וחובר חבר, ושואל אוב וידעוני, ודורש אל המתים. “There shall not be found among you one who causes his son or daughter to pass through the fire; one who practices divinations, an astrologer, one who reads omens, a sorcerer. Or, an animal charmer, one who enquires of Ov or Yidoni, or one who consults the dead.” These two verses enumerate nine different varieties of תועבות, abominable practices which the Canaanites were in the habit of relying on.
    The Torah lists the practice the Moloch cult first, which involved exposing one’s children to the fire in order to assuage that deity’s feelings. There is no more despicable form of idolatry than to sacrifice one’s own flesh and blood to such cults. Seeing that this practice is so distasteful to G’d, anyone who is guilty of it is subject to the karet penalty (compare Leviticus 20,3). People who violate Torah law by committing any of the other abominations listed here only qualify for 39 lashes, i.e. corporal punishment. After the Torah concluded by warning us not to become guilty of such practices, the Torah continues by emphasising the positive, i.e. asking us תמים תהיה עם ה' אלו-היך, “you shall be wholehearted with the Lord your G’d” (verse 13).
    The expression מעביר used by the Torah describing the Moloch cult, means that the father makes the child walk between two columns of fire; I explained this already in connection with Leviticus 18,21.
   קוסם קסמים, “practicing divinations;” this is a person who takes a staff in his hand and says: “I will go to a certain place, or I will not go to a certain place” as the case may be; this is what the prophet Hoseah spoke about in Hoseah 4,12: ”My people, it consults its stick, its rods direct it.” [the idea is that decisions are based on the stick falling in a certain manner, pointing in a certain direction. Ed.]
   מעונן, the word can have one of three meanings; 1) it is derived from עונה, a certain period of time. 2) it is derived from עין eye; 3) It is derived from ענן, cloud. If it is derived from עונה this is the way Rabbi Akiva understood it, i.e. that the person (astrologer) says that certain dates in the calendar are propitious whereas others are not. People determine when to engage in certain enterprises and when not, based on such predictions. The sages who differ with Rabbi Akiva claim that the people who practice the form of sorcery described as מעונן engage in sleight of hand, i.e. they deceive our eyes. The third view, relating the word to ענן, cloud,  claim that the people engaging in this practice consult cloud patterns and presume to foretell future events based on this.
   מנחש, “someone who interprets signs,” such as if one’s bread fell out of one’s mouth, what does this portend? Or, if a deer crosses one’s path what does this signify? Some explain the word to mean that such people look at birds and their wings or try and interpret the twittering of the birds. They believe that when Kohelet 10,20 speaks about “for a bird of the skies may carry the sound, and some winged creature may betray the matter,” that Solomon spoke of people who through interpreting the movements of such birds could divine their message.
   ומכשף, “a sorcerer.” Nachmanides writes as follows concerning this term: “the Torah includes many different kinds of sorcery all under the heading of מכשף. The following words, i.e. חובר חבר, שואל אוב, שואל ידעוני, דורש אל המתים, are all sub-categories of the heading “sorceress.” It is prohibited to consult any of the above regarding one’s future or how to conduct oneself.
    It is important to appreciate in the context of this whole subject matter that when G’d created the universe out of “nothing,” He made the celestial beings into leaders of the terrestrial creatures who were below them. He established a kind of hierarchy in which “lower” creatures were subjected to input by “higher” creatures. Eventually, at some point, even these higher creatures become subject to direct input by totally abstract beings, angels, which have been assigned certain tasks by G’d. These angels, when they represent the nations on earth, for instance, may be perceived as the “soul” of their terrestrial protegees. This system is permanent for the duration of the terrestrial universe and the commander-in chief of these angels who represent these nations is the Lord Himself. However, G’d allowed these “protective” angels of the nations to “reverse direction,” (turn their faces around) on occasion in order to head off certain dangers threatening their potegees as a result of planetary, horoscopic forces. Just as the word ענג, “pleasure” when spelled נגע means “plague,” i.e. the reverse of its original meaning, so, without affecting any real changes, by merely turning their faces in a more propitious looking direction, these angels exert positive or negative influence on the fate of their protegees. This concept is reflected in Daniel 2,21 והוא מהשנא עדנ-יא וזמניא, “and He alters times and seasons.” Amos 5,8 spells out an example of this when he says: “who made Pleiades and Orion, who turns darkness into dawn and darkens day into night; who summons the waters of the sea and pours them out on the earth.” His name is “the Lord.” The prophet does not refer to regular phenomena, but to occasions when G’d exploits certain constellations and their relative positions to one another to effect changes for the benefit or detriment of His creatures on earth. By allowing such angels to “turn around” as it were, He minimises the need for overt interference in the laws of nature.
    The following is an excerpt of the Sefer Halevanah published by Bergamantzia and explaining the relevance of astrology, that if we observe [over a period of time Ed.] that when the moon faces in a certain direction that our undertakings prosper whereas when the moon faces in a different direction similar undertakings commenced at that time fail, then this is not proof of the independent power of the moon to influence events on earth but reflects indirect guidance by G’d of events on earth as opposed to direct guidance of events which the Jewish people enjoy, i.e. without the need to rely on intermediaries such as horoscopic constellations and what they appear to presage. The fact that G’d equipped the angels presiding over the nations with this ability to “turn their faces” in different directions at different times enables sorcerers to create the impression that they can foretell future events or even influence them. [The author discussed this in connection with Bileam’s prophetic powers, i.e. to be alert to times at which G’d would be angry, so that a curse which came true  would be attributed to his powers.] Similarly, expert astrologers who have a high rate of success in their predictions simply exploit the latitude G’d granted to these “agents “ of His in the universe to “turn their faces around” in order to meet the requirements of their protegees on earth. [I trust I portrayed the gist of this correctly. Ed.] If our sages accused sorcerers of “denying the system of celestial hierarchies,” what they meant is that they ignore G’d’s direct guidance of events in favour of indirect guidance of events by means of intermediaries such as the planetary system, etc. 
    We can understand therefore why the Torah had to prohibit sorcery. Although whatever information these sorcerers come up with, is not an outright falsehood seeing that it is based on known forces in the universe which G’d had created, and they are aware that G’d had created them, sorcerers try to relegate G’d Himself to the farthest  domains of heaven. They do not allow for G’d’s benevolent direct supervision of events in this universe.
    Such considerations also are at the root of the prohibition of כלאים, mixing of certain species. By grafting species which were meant to be separate inviolate species, new forces are added to the universe, forces which may have beneficial or destructive influences on nature, apart from constituting changes in the hierarchy prevailing in this universe. Thus far Nachmanides.
     I have read in a volume of astrology published by current astrologers called “letter of Galinus,” that if someone makes an iron replica of the planet Saturn, he should do so at a certain date and time of day or night when the horoscope is in a certain constellation, and if such a person will bury it beneath the store of a certain merchant, that that merchant will lose all his profit from the store. If the person who has constructed such an image at such a time as we mentioned buries it beneath the house of the owner of that store, all that owner’s affairs will turn sour. Anyone with eyes in his head knows that this “science” will lead to destruction of the world as we know it, and that the only way to live on earth is by allowing the forces of nature to guide us instead of trying to bend them to our will. These forces were provided by G’d for the benefit of mankind. (this is part of the quotation from “letter of Galinus).” The author of that volume writes further: “if someone is interested in attracting to himself the spiritual influence exerted by the planet Shabbtai (Saturn), a planet which exercises its domain on the Sabbath, he should eat a minimal amount of meat, diet very frugally, abstain from marital relations, wear black garments, construct a picture of a lion made out of copper and at the hour when the constellation of Saturn and that of the lamb intersect he should slaughter a cat. If he then approaches that idol and serves it and consults it concerning his future he will be given such information. Thus far the “letter of Galinus.” (compare also Parshat Vayishlach, Genesis 32,30 where the author copied  from books on philosophy.)
    It is clear that the Torah, which is most certainly concerned about our welfare and well being, commands us to do exactly the opposite of what is written in the “letter of Galinus.” On the Sabbath we are to eat well (meat) and drink well (wine), to dress in finery, to engage in marital relations with our wives and in general to call the Sabbath ענג, “a delight,” (Isaiah 58,13). Whereas the philosophy preached by Galinus results in man becoming depressed, adopting the ways of the Torah results in man becoming a happy personality. Instead of wearing black garments, we wear coloured garments in order to lift our spirits. Our sages base this on Isaiah 58,13 וכבדתו מעשות דרכיך, a references to garments which lend the wearer distinction in the eyes of others. Rabbi Yochanan, in Shabbat 30, used to refer to his clothing as מכבדי, “that which bestows honour upon me.” Thank the good Lord for having given us enough common sense through study of His commandments, thus saving us from falling victim to such foolish philosophies as those espoused in the book of Galinus. This same Torah has warned us not to pay heed to the constellations in the skies when it wrote (Deut. 4,19) “lest you raise your eyes towards the sky and behold the sun and the moon.” He has, instead, given us the heritage of His commandments, observance of which will result in our accumulating a great reward.
    
   וחובר חבר, “or an animal charmer.” According to Ibn Ezra this is someone who assembles demons and unites them, i.e. charms them; alternatively, it may be a snake-charmer, i.e. someone who can attract all these animals to one single location [pied piper of hamelin. Ed.] (compare Sifri Shoftim 172)
   ושואל אוב, “one who inquires of Ov.” a type of sorcerer reputedly able to establish contact with the dead and have them manifest themselves on earth. The dead appears to speak out of the armpit of such a person (Kimchi on Samuel I 28,25). There are many differing opinions regarding the authenticity of necro-mancers. Some hold that the story described in Samuel where King Shaul spoke to a manifestation of the dead prophet did not take place, that it is quite impossible to resurrect the dead in such  a fashion and that the woman in question recognised King Shaul immediately and put on an elaborate charade. She did not want to let on, and that is why she said to Shaul: “why did you try to trick me seeing that in reality you are King Shaul?” She demonstrated by her remark that when she had “conjured up” the image of the long deceased Samuel she had done so merely by employing her wisdom and knowledge of psychology.
    It is the manner of every woman practicing this art to hide a live human being who will speak solemnly and with a low voice  from his hiding place as described by Isaiah 29,4: “and you shall speak from below the  ground, your speech shall be humbler than the sod, your speech shall sound like a ghost’s from the ground.” The woman in the story in Samuel had hidden someone and told Shaul that the speaker was Samuel. When she made that hidden person say: “because you did not execute G’d’s wrath against Amalek,” this was something which was common knowledge and did not prove that Samuel was the speaker. When the Book of Samuel reports Shaul as “speaking to Samuel,“ this only describes that Shaul thought that he was speaking to Samuel. [actually the Book of Samuel does not even quote Shaul as addressing Samuel at all in these words.] When the woman told Shaul that: “tomorrow your sons and you will be with me,” (i.e. dead) this was all part of her psychology; she had previously instructed the person whom she hid to make this statement as she was well aware that the battle was going badly, and she knew that Shaul was being punished on account of his failure to heed the instructions in his war against Amalek. She considered it likely that he would fall into the hands of the Philistines as an act of retribution. 
    Others quoted by Rashi believe that the encounter described in the Book of Samuel between King Shaul and the spirit of Samuel was real and that Samuel indeed told Shaul all that is reported there in the text. Our sages in Chagigah 4 agree with the latter opinion. The problem with that interpretation is that if indeed Samuel really appeared to Shaul, how is it that a woman such as this necromancer was able to resurrect the dead by using the “science” called here שואל אוב?
    The opinion of both Rav Hai gaon and Rav Saadyah gaon is that the woman claiming to be a necromancer most certainly did not resurrect Samuel, but that G’d did so. They write as follows according to Kimchi on our verses (end of commentary on verse 25) in the Book of Samuel. This is what the gaonim are reported as having said: it is quite far-fetched to assume that the woman knew the future nor that she knew how to resurrect the dead using methods attributed to necromancers. G’d revived Samuel in order for him to tell Shaul what would happen to him. The woman knew nothing of this at all. This is why she became so frightened and exclaimed: with a loud voice (verse 12-13) “why did you trick me when in fact you are Shaul?!”...she then said: “I have seen “elohim” rise from the earth.” The fact that she had asked in verse 11 “whom shall I raise for you?” was a figure of speech used by necromancers all the time and did not mean that they had the actual power to do so. So far the quote of Rabbi Saadyah gaon in the commentary by Kimchi.
    The text appears to agree with both the opinions expressed in Chagigah and those expressed by these gaonim as well as by what our intelligence dictates, i.e. that Samuel was alive while he spoke to Shaul and that the woman had not brought him to life, seeing that it is not within the power of any ordinary human being to perform such an act. Only G’d Himself, or a prophet especially granted such a power can do this. Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra also agrees with this view.
    There is still another view held by a few of the scholars of the Talmud according to which necromancers are indeed able to bring back the dead during the first 12 months after they had died. [or at least they know at what time the souls return to those bodies] We find the following story in Shabbat 152: A certain heretic said to Rabbi Avuhu: “seeing that you people claim that the souls of the righteous are stored beneath the throne of the Lord, how could Samuel appear to Shaul as described in the Book of Samuel? Rabbi Avuhu answered this heretic that what is described in the Book of Samuel took place within less than 12 months after Samuel’s death, and we have a Baraitha according to which the soul of the departed commutes to the body of the righteous departed during the first 12 months after it had left that body. After that time the body disintegrates so that there is nothing for the soul to return to.” 
     You should know that the commuting of the soul described in the Baraitha does not depend on the state of preservation of the body. Even if the body has completely rotted away during the first three days after death, the soul still does the commuting described in the Baraitha. By the same token, if the body has been embalmed and therefore remains intact way beyond the 12 months described in the Baraitha, the soul still ceases commuting to it. The meaning of the words in the Baraitha “its body remains intact,” is simply “the body that the soul was used to inhabit.” It had been its container. This affinity comes to an end after 12 months.
   וידעוני, this refers to the skill of introducing the bone of an animal called ידוע into one’s mouth and making it appear as if it could talk independently, using some means of witchcraft to do so. (Sanhedrin 65). This animal is also known as בני השדה and is referred to as such in Job 5,23: “for you will have a pact with the rocks in the field and the beasts of the field will be your allies.” The letter א in the words אבני השדה in that verse is superfluous, leading to this interpretation, i.e. that the true reading ought to have been בני השדה.
   ודורש אל המתים, this refers to people who lift the skull of the dead when consulting them as if they were oracles. (compare Sanhedrin 65)
    
    18,12. כי תועבת ה' כל עושה אלה, “for anyone who does these is an abomination of Hashem;” anyone of the nine cults mentioned previously. ובגלל התועבות האלה, “and on account of these abominations, etc.,” with which the people perpetrating them disgust the Lord your G’d Who is above all such forces as the planetary constellations and disciplines concerning their movements and influences on terrestrial earth, the very planetary system, גלגל, is apt to be upset. The word בגלל is chosen by the Torah to remind us of the planetary systems. According to Shabbat 151 the function of these systems is to revolve in their orbits without deviating from their assigned paths. The expression also occurs in connection with צדקה, the practice of charity (Deut. 15,10) where we already mentioned that money has a way of “orbiting” from one person to another, especially if the owner is not charitable. The lesson to be learned is that we must detest anything of which we know that G’d detests it. We must be wholehearted in our service of the Lord as per verse 13. This means to serve the Lord without any intellectual reservations, both by fulfilling His positive commandments and by refraining from violating any of the negative commandments. The expression תמים means that one’s exterior, the visible part of a person, should reflect his interior. The verse also implies reciprocity by G’d. If we behave towards G’d sincerely, then He in turn will reciprocate, as for instance in Exodus 34,28: “G’d remained with Moses.” We have a similar verse in Daniel 2,22: “He reveals the deep and the mysterious, knows what is in the dark, and light dwells within Him.” Midrash Eychah Rabbati 1,51 views this as a promise to people who have attained the level of “being wholehearted” with G’d. King David also referred to this theme in Psalms 41,13: “You will support me because of my integrity and let me abide in Your presence forever.”
    
    18,14. ואתה לא כן, “as for you, not so.” Moses means: “you who are part of G’d’s direct supervision, are not dependent on all these intermediaries, you have no call to resort to sorcerers, diviners, etc. If you need to know something about the future, G’d will provide a prophet from among your own people (next verse).
    This is a tremendous advantage. There is no true prognosis of the future which will not prove deceptive in that it disappoints the people to whom it has been promised except positive promises made by a prophet. This is why prophecy has been compared to grain which has already been sifted from the straw. This is the meaning of Jeremiah 23,28: “how can straw be compared to grain, says the Lord of Hosts?” The prophet compares false prophecy to straw, which, though it may contain a few ears of wheat, is mostly useless, whereas true prophecy is compared to wheat. The reason the prophet does not choose the word חטה, wheat, or דגן, corn, etc., is that the word בר is related to ברר, sifting, separating. In true prophecy the truth has been distilled already, whereas in false prophecy a little truth is submerged in a lot of untruths, chaff.
    Seeing that when G’d created the universe He divided it into three parts, the תחתיים, the “lower” terrestrial universe, the middle region consisting of the atmosphere and the planetary system, and the “higher” universe containing only disembodied beings, He made man as a combination of all three parts of the universe with input from each. He did so as He wanted to give man wisdom which would enable him to have some knowledge of the future of all parts of the universe. Each part of the universe is equipped with media through which some of the future is disclosed. In the case of terrestrial earth certain birds and demons have been equipped with some such knowledge. Man derives some knowledge of the future originating in the universe of the planets by means of “seers” (astrologers); he derives information about the future derived from the “higher world” by means of the prophets who receive their information of future events through the angels inhabiting those celestial spheres. All prophets except for Moses received their information by means of these celestial intermediaries (Maimonides Hilchot Yessodey Hatorah 6,6).
    Future events predicted by the “seers” are unreliable; in the words of our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 85,2 based on Isaiah 47,13 החוזים בכוכבים מודעים לחדשים מאשר יבאו עליך, “the scanners of the heaven, the star-gazers, who announce month by month some of what will come upon you.” The word מאשר instead of אשר means that only part of the forecasts of these astrologers will come true. There is no need to tell you that future events divined by means of birds or demons are even less reliable. The only reliable forecast of future events is that made by authentic prophets, seeing that they receive their input from the “highest world.” Seeing that G’d will provide us with such prophets you have no need to consult the dead, etc., to tell the living what is in store (compare Isaiah 8,19).
    You should know a general rule, that each part of the three worlds receives whatever knowledge of the future it secures only from the next higher world. The power of being a “higher” world is manifest in that world being able to influence “exchange information” concerning the events in the next lower world. This concept is alluded to in Genesis 28,13 where Hashem is described as standing on top of the ladder. The ladder is a simile for the three levels of the universe. we described. (compare our author’s commentary on Genesis 28,12 “a rational approach,” our translation page 435) You will then understand why predictions based on demons or birds are inferior, less reliable than those of astrologers, and why predictions based on astrology are less reliable than those of an authentic prophet. The only exceptions to the reliability of authentic prophets are when catastrophes or tragedies are predicted such as by Jonah concerning Nineveh and Isaiah concerning King Chizkiyahu. Such predictions were subject to change as they related to the conduct of the people about whom they were made. If an authentic prophet promises something positive it is 100% reliable. 
    
    18,15. נביא מקרבך מאחיך כמוני, “A prophet, from among your brethren, like me.” Moses referred to Joshua, seeing he said: “listen to him.” We find that the Book of Joshua 22,11 reports: “the Children of Israel  listened to him.”
    Alternatively, the word נביא in our verse is to be understood as a plural, in which case the additional definition כמוני,” such as myself,” is to exclude prophets who are from the descendants of Esau or Ishmael. We do find that the Israelites described the Edomites, the descendants of Esau as אחיך, “your brethren,” (Numbers 20,14) and therefore there could have been a misunderstanding. The word כמוני, precludes prophets of any but Jewish birth. Prophecy does not exist amongst those nations.
    There are a total of four distinctions which have been reserved exclusively for the Jewish people; the gift of prophecy; the Torah; Eretz Yisrael; resurrection of the dead. I plan to elaborate on this when discussing the last Parshah on the Torah, seeing that three out of these four distinctions are mentioned in that portion. (compare pages 2855-2857 our translation)
    Another meaning of the word כמוני, is restrictive. Any prophet should emulate me by neither adding nor subtracting anything from the Torah except if he is an established prophet and does so only as a temporary emergency measure. If the prophet declares any Torah law as permanently abrogated the people must not follow his instructions seeing that our faith in prophets is not based on the miracles they perform (Sanhedrin 90, Maimonides Hilchot Yessodey Hatorah 9,1). The reason we acknowledge Moses as a true prophet is that he communicated to us the word of G’d as spelled out in the Torah (Exodus 19,5) (G’d speaking) “Here I come to you in the thick cloud in order that the people hear when I speak to you and they will have enduring faith in you (Moses).” This is the way Maimonides understood this verse
    
    19,2. שלש ערים תבדיל לך בתוך ארצך, “Three cities you shall set aside for yourself in the midst of your land;” together with the three towns which Moses had already designated as cities of refuge on the east bank of the Jordan as reported in Deut. 4,41-43, this makes a total of 6 such cities. It is essential that these cities are regular, populated cities with all the normal amenities of a city, seeing the Torah wrote in verse 3 תכין לך הדרך, “prepare the way for yourself,” and the Talmud Makkot 10 understands these words to mean that signs with the word מקלט, “refuge,” must be posted on all the roads leading to such cities. This is in order for the unintentional killer not to lose time while trying to escape the vengeance of the slain man’s family. On Psalms 25,8: “Good and upright is the Lord; therefore He shows the sinners the way,” the sages say that these signs are designed to help unintentional sinners seeing their sin was inadvertent. We have another verse along similar lines in Job 36,22: “See, G’d is beyond reach in power; Who governs like Him?” The author refers to the unique attribute of G’d who helps the inadvertent sinner to rehabilitate himself. 
    The reason why the Torah continues with: “you shall divide your territory into three parts is that the cities of refuge should be situated so that their location effectively divides the land into three parts which are equi-distant from one another. We should appreciate that the total number of 6 such cities reflects the principle of the 6 extremities of terrestrial earth (six directions) which we discussed already repeatedly. The first three cities which Moses set apart for this purpose on the east bank of the Jordan were quite unable to fulfill their function until they had been joined by these additional three cities on the west bank of which the Torah speaks here and which are as yet unnamed. There is a mystical element connected to this number 6 which also symbolises 6 extremities in the celestial regions of the universe in which the soul of the sinner will have to receive his pardon from the loving kindness extended to it by Hashem.
    Although the three cities which Moses had already set aside were by themselves incapable of performing their function until there were six such cities, when Moses designated them as such he had in mind that they should represent the three letters in the tetragram י-ה-ו. We find that seven letters in the aleph bet are described in the Sefer Yetzirah as כפולות, as having a dual function. In chapter 4, Mishnah 12, of that book we read: “whereas with two stones one can only build two houses, with three stones (read letters) one can build six houses, whereas with four stones one can build 24 houses.” [Although I do not profess to understand the deeper meaning of these progressions, or צירופים, permutations, as they are called in kabbalistic terms, it is clear that our author means that the three original cities set aside by Moses enabled the other three cities to become operational when they would be established and as such perform a dual function also. Mishnah 13 in Sefer Yetzirah chapter one, deals with the permutations of the three letters of the tetragram. Ed.] It appears that whereas three cities are intended as a refuge for the body, the other three complement the whole function by being a refuge for the soul. In terms of what happens to the person who killed unintentionally when he arrives in the hereafter then, it is essential that at the time when he was in a city of refuge on earth there had been 6 such cities (although the killer can only live in one of them.) [I am omitting the balance of this paragraph (6 lines) as I do not understand it. It describes the progression of the souls in the hereafter from one part of “Gan Eden” to another. Ed.] The words תכין לך הדרך, are perceived as a preparation for such killers to escape this world for the world to come.
    
    19,3. ושלשת את גבול ארצך, “you shall divide the territory of your land into three sections.” The simile continues, i.e. in order to make a total of six cities of refuge together with the three on the east bank; they are to correspond to the six extremities in our universe. [The author understands this division in terms of the three parts of the universe we described earlier. The celestial regions are perceived as the topmost of these three parts of ארצך. Having attained that level in his penitence, the unintentional killer will begin his ascent to spiritual rehabilitation. This is the meaning of והיה לנוס שמה כל רוצח, the letters of the tetragram are perceived as “open” letters, allowing easy access for the fleeing killer.[I believe the whole allegorical approach is based on the fact that this legislation had been spelled out in Numbers 35,9-34. The author may feel that the repetition is meant to allude to the mystical element of how it is possible to completely rehabilitate oneself for killing a person seeing one cannot bring him back to life. Ed.]
    
    19,8. ואם ירחיב ה' אלו-היך את גבולך, “and if the Lord your G’d will expand your borders, etc.” This paragraph is a promise pertaining to the more distant future. It deals with aspects of what G’d had promised Avraham at the covenant between the pieces in Genesis 15,18: “to your descendants I have given this land from the river of Egypt until the great river, the river Euphrates.” In that connection G’d mentioned ten tribes all of whom would be dispossessed in favour of the Israelites. Seven of these nations were dispossessed in the days of Joshua whereas the other three the Keyni, Kenizi, and Kadmoni have never been conquered by the Jewish people, though they will be conquered in due course.
     In this instance the word ואם at the beginning of our verse is not to be understood as something conditional but as definitive. We must translate it as “when G’d will expand, etc.,” not “if G’d will expand.” The proof that this is the meaning of the word ואם in our verse are the words כאשר נשבע, "as He has sworn.” There was never anything “iffy” about this oath by G’d to our patriarchs. This is not the only instance in which the word אם means “when” instead of “if.” Another example is Exodus 20,22:ואם מזבח אבנים  תעשה לי, where the meaning is: “when you make an altar of stones for Me;” a third example of the word אם meaning “when,” is in Exodus 22,24 אם כסף תלוה את עמי, where the meaning is not “if you will lend money to My people,” but “when you will lend money to My people.” Still another example of this meaning of the word אם is found in Leviticus 2,14 ואם תקריב מנחת בכורים, “when you offer a meal-offering of first ripe grain, etc.” (compare Mechilta בחודש 11 Parshat Yitro).
    
    19,9. ויספת לך עוד שלש ערים, “then you shall add three more cities to these three.” A third group of three cities of refuge in addition to the two groups of three already established (in the territory which used to belong to seven of the ten tribes).
    
    19,11. וכי יהיה איש שונא לרעהו וארב לו וקם עליו והכהו נפש, “if there will be a man who hates his fellow and he sets an ambush or him and rises up against him and strikes him fatally;” because he hates him he eventually spills his blood; he started with the relatively minor offense of hating a fellow Jew which led to the serious offense of murder (compare Sifri Shoftim 186).
    
    19,13. לא תחוס עינך עליו,”your eye shall not pity him,” that you refuse to hand him over to the blood-avenger. You should not argue: “what is the point in another person being killed seeing the first one cannot be brought back.” This is one instance when pity is not only misplaced but is a form of cruelty.
    
    
    19,14. לא תסיג גבול רעך, “do not move the boundary of your fellow.” According to Rashi the meaning of our verse is moving markers between fields, etc., surreptitiously depriving one’s neighbour while enlarging one’s own property. This prohibition, though spelled out separately, would be part of the general prohibition not to rob. The Torah repeated this only to tell us that when one moves such borders inside Eretz Yisrael one has violated two commandments instead of merely one. This is why the Torah added the words בנחלתך אשר תנחל, “in your inheritance which you shall inherit.”
    Nachmanides writes that this is a warning not to tamper with the distribution of the plots of land within tribal boundaries which had been allocated by lottery, The tribal chief was in charge of these distributions to individual families. The Torah warns that one must not defy the tribal chief’s decisions in this matter. This is why the Torah added the words אשר גבלו ראשונים, “which the earlier ones had determined,” the “earlier ones” being  the tribal chiefs in the days of Joshua whose decisions were made with the approval of the High Priest Eleazar and the national leader Joshua. The reason why this commandment has been recorded is to teach that a person does not have the right to accuse the people who had made the original delineation as having erred.
    It is also possible to understand the whole verse in terms of whether the universe as we know it preceded G’d. Anyone who believes this is described as משיג גבול, “having the wrong priorities.” He turns the clock backward (philosophically speaking), seeing that he makes G’d the totally free and unlimited, subject to the limitations of time and space. The ראשונים mentioned in our verse are none other than the אביך וזקניך, “your father and your elders” mentioned in Deut. 32,7 who have taught you in response to your inquiry that G’d preceded all phenomena which we call universe. There is no need for that verse to testify to the truth of Moses and his prophecy seeing the people had been eye witnesses to that. Why would they have had to ask their fathers and elders? The reason the verse adds here בנחלתך אשר תנחל, [an obvious reference to something which is yet to happen, Ed.] is to stress that the whole focus of our existence on earth is ארץ ישראל which is the אמצעות העולם, “the centre of the universe.”
    The reason why this verse was written immediately following the discussion of murder, etc., is to remind us that just as such border violations will eventually lead to murder, i.e. a situation described in verse 11 as והכהו נפש, “he will kill a soul (deliberately), and will have no place to escape to, so heretical views about the universe having preceded the Creator will also result in the soul of a person believing this not having anywhere to escape to. The six extremities (boundaries) of both the physical and celestial world will not find room to accommodate the soul of such heretics.
    
    19,15. לא יקום עד אחד באיש, “A single witness shall not stand up against any man, etc.;” this verse follows the legislation about moving boundaries to teach that if an owner of a field accuses his neighbour of having moved the mutual boundary between their  fields, he has to bring no less than two witnesses to substantiate his accusation. The words of a single witness have no value as testimony, neither when matters of corporal punishment nor monetary punishment is involved.
   לכל עון ולכל חטאת, “for any iniquity or for any error;” such as if the single witness testifies that the party he has seen committed a sin against the Lord, such as a violation of the Sabbath, be it intentional or unintentional.
   בכל חטא, “of any sin.” This refers to sins involving only words between himself and his fellow. אשר יחטא, this refers to sins involving money between one person and another. In all of these situations the testimony of a single witness is legally meaningless. Only the testimony of two witnesses can result in the accused being punished.
    Our sages in Shevuot 40 interpret the words לכל עון ולכל חטאת restrictively, i.e. only in order to testify concerning sins committed by an action is a single witness useless; however regarding matters of oaths, the testimony of a single witness is not irrelevant at all. Example: Reuven claims that Shimon owes him a sum of money and Shimon denies it. A single witness, Levi, testifies that Shimon does owe Reuven the money. In that instance the testimony of Levi is enough for Shimon to have to repeat his denial on oath.
   על פי שנים עדים, “according to two witnesses, etc.” our sages in Gittin 71 interpret the words על פי in our verse as meaning only oral testimony; written depositions are not acceptable as valid testimony. How do we reconcile this with the halachah that money may be extracted by the court on the basis of the signature of witnesses on a document such as an I.O.U? This is a Rabbinic decree designed to help potential borrowers obtain loans. If the Rabbis had not made this concession, many lenders might refuse to lend fearing that when the time comes there would be no witnesses around to testify orally on their behalf. 
    
    19,16. כי יקום עד חמס באיש, “If a false witness stands up against a man, etc.;” whenever the Torah speaks of עד without identifying the number of witnesses, 2 witnesses are meant. The meaning of our verse is that if two false witnesses testify against someone, i.e. claiming that something had been done which had never occurred that is the meaning of the word סרה, i.e. the witness is removed, הוסר, from such testimony. For instance, if two witnesses confront the original witnesses saying “how could you testify to an occurrence in such and such a place on such and such a date when in fact you were in our company on that date in a totally different place?” (Makkot 5)
    
    19,17. ועמדו שני האנשים, “then the two men shall stand, etc.” the “men” are the witnesses. The verse teaches that testimony has to be given while standing. Also, the word האנשים means that women do not qualify as witnesses.
   אשר להם הריב, “the ones who have a grievance;” the litigants. לפני ה', “in the presence of the Lord.” The Torah warns the parties that when they are in court before a judge or judges they should consider themselves as standing in front of the Lord. This is why Assaph says (Psalms 82,1) בקרב אלו-הים ישפוט, “G’d is present among the judges.” Had the Torah here meant that G’d, i.e. the Sanhedrin, must judge every case it should have written בקרב ה' אלו-הים ישפוט, Had the Torah used the attributes ה' אלו-הים here as it does throughout the Book of Deuteronomy, I would have concluded that all litigants have to go to the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem for every case of litigation. This would have been the meaning of the words לפני ה' אלו-היך. The words (pertaining to the court)) אשר יהיו בימים ההם, “who (pl) will be in those days,” makes it clear that any of the courts in the various cities is included in that description. The words לפני הכהנים לפני ה' are all designed to prevent us misunderstanding what is meant. We find already with Moses that people seeking out his advice or judgment are described by the Torah as והיה כל מבקש ה', “anyone seeking the Lord.” (compare Exodus 33,7) at a time when Moses had put up his tent outside the camp of the Israelites. Even the angels are occasionally referred to by the tetragram, such as in Exodus 20,3 and 33,7 as I have mentioned on several occasions.
    
    19,18. ודרשו השופטים היטב, “and the judges shall investi-gate thoroughly;” by means of the second set of witnesses who claim that the first witnesses could not have witnessed what they say they did. They employ the means of investigation we have described in detail  in 13,15.
    והנה עד שקר העד “and it emerges that the original witnesses were liars.” They were both lying.
    
    19,19. ועשיתם לו כאשר זמם, “you shall do unto them as they had planned to do.” The testimony of the second set of witnesses is believed even if the original witnesses numbered 100. (compare Makkot 5). This is something very peculiar. What logical reason is there to trust the testimony of the latter witnesses more than that of the first? It appears to be an arbitrary decree by the Torah. Actually, the reason may well be that the two groups of witnesses do not contradict each other on the substance of the testimony. If they did, there is no question that their testimonies would cancel each other out. The second group of witnesses do not dispute the facts of the case; all they dispute is the ability of the first witnesses to testify to something they could not possibly have witnessed.
    Our sages in Makkot 5 also comment on the peculiar wording כאשר זמם, “as they had planned;” they derive from there if the plan of the first set of witnesses, namely to cause the execution of the person or persons whom they accuse, has already been carried out by the time the second set of witnesses arrive and testify, no action is taken against the second set of witnesses even if they turn out to have been false witnesses. If the second set of witnesses arrived before the execution, they are executed instead if they had tried to frame the first set of witnesses, if also their testimony is contradicted by another set of witnesses.
    The reason for this strange-sounding procedure is that we rely on the Holy Spirit which is present when the judges of the Sanhedrin conduct their deliberations. It is presumed that this Holy Spirit would not allow them to become guilty of spilling innocent blood, i.e. if they ordered the accused to be executed, he must have been guilty of a capital crime (even if not the one for which he was executed). When there has been such an evident involvement by G’d in this judgment, we leave the second set of witnesses alone, assuming that they may even have spoken the truth. However, assuming that the executed person had really been innocent, we know that G’d has many agents and that sooner or later He will take care of these lying witnesses on the basis of whose testimony we executed someone. At any rate, on the basis of כי המשפט לאלו-הים הוא, that in the final analysis judgment belongs to G’d, the lying witnesses had actually testified against a “dead man,” i.e. someone guilty of death. Seeing that they had been the ones on whose account the accused had been executed there is no point in executing them as a preventive measure.
    One may raise the following objection to this whole process of reasoning: granted that the party who was executed was in fact guilty though not proven guilty by judicial process of law, what does his guilt have to do with the testimony of the עדים זוממים who have in the meantime been found liars and who by rights ought to pay the penalty for framing someone? Our sages simply feel that we have no authority to execute them seeing the Torah phrased the legislation in such a way that only “what they planned to do” makes them subject to our retribution by a human tribunal.
    One of the Tossaphists, the Re’e (Rabbi Yitzchak ben Shemuel) claims that  the reason for the principle of הרגו אין נהרגים if the testimony of the עדים זוממים resulted in their victim’s execution they are not executed themselves is that we are dealing here with three groups of witnesses. 1) The final group of witnesses have claimed that the second group were liars. The testimony of the first group of witnesses has never been refuted except that their testimony was not the kind that could convict. Moreover the original accused most certainly claimed to be innocent. Seeing that we wind up with four litigants, i.e. 2 sets against 2 sets, we must disregard the entire testimony now and cannot convict the second set on the basis of the last set of witnesses. The witnesses who were executed were in the minority of 2 against three. [This whole argument is most amazing after we have learned that there is no difference between 2 or 100 witnesses to the same facts. Ed.]
    
    20.1. כי תצא למלחמה על אויבך, “when you go out to war against your enemies;“ this verse speaks of what is known as מלחמת מצוה, an obligatory war, usually a defensive war against invaders. The paragraph follows one which  demands from us not to display pity, detailing “eye for eye, tooth for tooth, or leg for leg.” The message of the Torah writing this sequence is that people who are minus a leg or eye, etc., do not go to war (compare Rashi). [In this instance the definition of מלחמת רשות would apply only to expansionary wars such as the ones conducted by David. Campaigns designed to forestall invasions threatened by enemies, even if waged outside the boundaries of Eretz Yisrael would come under the heading of מלחמת מצוה. The difference is who has to be mobilised. [Compare Malbim on our verse. Ed.] Another message implied by the sequence of what is written here is: “if you will practice righteousness and justice, then, if you have to go to war you will certainly be victorious.”
   לא תירא מהם כי ה' אלו-היך עמך, “do not be afraid of them for the Lord your G’d is with you.” It is important that the fear of G’d should be stronger than the fear of the enemy nation. The Torah elaborates on this fear of opposing nations in verse 3 when we read: ‘do not be afraid and do not panic.’ Anyone fearing creatures of  flesh and blood is considered as having forgotten the Almighty. This is what the prophet Isaiah 51,12-13 had in mind when he said: “what ails you that you fear man who must die, mortals who fare like grass? You have forgotten the Lord your Maker, etc.” Solomon is also on record on this subject when he says in Proverbs 29,25: “a man’s fears become a trap for him, but he who trusts in the Lord will be safeguarded.”
    
    20,2. ונגש הכהן, “the priest shall approach;” this is the משוח מלחמה, the priest anointed for this task in war. ודבר אל העם, “and he shall address the people,” in Hebrew. (Sotah 42).
    
    20,3. שמע ישראל, אתם קרבים היום למלחמה, “Hear o Israel! Today you are approaching battle.” The priest implies that the intoning of the Keriyat Shema will be a major factor in securing victory as this paragraph deals with the Oneness, Uniqueness, and Unity of Hashem. אל תיראו, “do not be afraid,” in your heart. ואל תחפזו, “and do not panic.” This is an expression describing an accelerated heartbeat due to fear. The word  appears as meaning speed in Samuel I 23,26 נחפזת ללכת, “you were in too much of hurry to go.” ואל תערצו, “and do not become broken,” i.e. physically.
    
    20,4. להושיע אתכם, “to save you.” This promise refers to total salvation, i.e. that the Israelites would not suffer casualties in their war of conquest against the seven Canaanite nations. It will be just like the punitive campaign against Midian when not a single Israelite soldier was even hurt (Numbers 31,49). It is customary that even victorious armies sustain many casualtis in battle. A war fought as a divine commandment is one when the people carrying out the commandments will prove immune. This is why Joshua was so upset when in the first battle of Ai his army sustained 36 casualties (Joshua 7,5-7). Actually, according to a commentary in Sanhedrin 44, the “36” casualties were merely a single soldier named Yair ben Menashe, who was such an outstanding person that he was considered as equivalent to 36 members of the 71-member Sanhedrin.
    
    20,5. מי האיש אשר בנה בית חדש ולא חנכו, “who is the man who has built a new house and has not yet consecrated it?” The expression חנך used here by the Torah for moving into one’s private home is the same as that used by the Torah for the consecration of the Altar in the Tabernacle, i.e. חנכת המזבח. 
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes: “seeing such a man’s heart and his craving is so dedicated to consecrating his new house he cannot concentrate on the battle as a soldier should. He may therefore become a liability by fleeing, and other comrades may follow his example, the result being demoralisation of the army.”
    In connection with the new vineyard the Torah speaks of it not having been חללו instead of חנכו. The word חללו is similar to חליל, flute; it was customary to dance to the accompaniment of flutes when the first harvest of a new vineyard was brought in.
    Our sages in Pessikta Zutrata, quoted by Rashi, understand the word as חולין, “secular, profane  i.e. after the grapes during the fourth year were holy, now in the fifth year they were available, freely, to the owner for the first time. In the previous year they could be eaten only after having been redeemed, etc.
    
    20,7. פן ימות במלחמה, “lest he die in battle.” The Torah refers to his premature death. This is clear proof that all the people who die in battle died before the time allocated as their life span at birth. We have still more direct proof of this in Samuel I 26,10: ”or his ‘day’ will come and he will die, or he will go down to battle and will die.”
    
    20,8. מי האיש הירא, “who is the man who is afraid?” to kill others; ורך הלבב, “and faint of heart,” to be killed (Ibn Ezra).
    
    20,9. ופקדו שרי צבאות, “and the commanders of the armies shall take command.” The term פקד means the same as מנוי, “appointee,” according to Ibn Ezra. These officers were to be at the head of the army, marching in front. Although, from an onlooker’s point of view, the Jewish army did not seem too different from any other conquering army, G’d performed “hidden” miracles which determined the outcome of the battles.
    The three types of property mentioned here as causes for deferment of the recruit, i.e. a new house, a new vineyard and a fiancee, represent man’s most cherished accomplishments. They are likely to change a person’s focus so much that by thinking about them his mind cannot be on the requirements of battle. An army, in order to maintain its morale, must first and foremost concentrate wholeheartedly on its immediate objective in order to perform at its optimum. Being burdened with “soldiers” whose mind is preoccupied with personal concerns does not only not improve the strength of an army but, on the contrary, weakens its collective resolve. 
    If you will examine this paragraph more closely you will discover that it also contains a mystical element. House, vineyard and wife are allusions to the “structure, בנין” of the letters in the Holy name, and their ramifications. You may understand the words of the verse as: “who has built a house and not consecrated it,” as “who has built the house of the Lord and not yet prayed in it?” Such a person should return home and properly dedicate his house so that he will not be struck for his negligence by the attribute of Justice while in battle. His soul would then have to be assigned to another body for the new person to fulfill that soul’s task on earth. Similar considerations apply to people who have planted a vineyard. They  have not yet learned that though the Presence of G’d may make its residence on earth, this is in order for us to elevate ourselves to holiness, not for holiness to “descend” to our level. If someone has betrothed a wife to himself but has not yet consummated the marriage, he too has not yet had a chance to translate that union into a higher spiritual level. During the period of betrothal, instead of elevating himself though his marriage to become a whole person, enabling him to pursue דבקות ה', cleaving to Hashem, he has taken only a preliminary step which actually represents a הפרדה, separation from Hashem.
    When the priest continues calling out: “who is afraid, etc.,” this is an allusion to the sins he knows he is guilty of; seeing he has not expiated for them he is afraid of falling victim to the attribute of Justice when he is in danger anyway while engaged in battle. He is sent home to rehabilitate himself.
    The priest whom we described as the הכהן המשוח, is one who has been anointed with the same oil as the High Priest. The anointing ceremony was as if conferring a crown on his head, just as the Kings of Yehudah would be anointed with such oil on  their heads. Compare Numbers 7,7 where the Torah uses this expression “crown” in connection with the procedure of anointing.
    This priest would expound and explain how the help from G’d would be channeled to the soldiers through a number of channels by means of which G’d instructs His agents to do this. The meaning of ופקדו שרי צבאות בראש העם, is that after receiving all these lessons by the כהן המשוח, the “real” commanders of these soldiers would be the angels appointed by G’d who would lead them into battle.
    
    20,10. כי תקרב אל עיר להלחם עליה וקראת אליה לשלום, “when you approach a city against which you are planning to make war, you shall (first) call to the city to (surrender) peacefully.” In this instance the Torah speaks about a war which, though it has been sanctioned by G’d via instructions given to the High Priest, is not an obligatory war. The standard name for such a war is מלחמת רשות. In such wars, peaceful surrender is offered first. When confronting the seven nations residing in Canaan, which the Israelites were under orders to conquer, no such peaceful surrender is offered first. (compare Rashi)
    The fact is that the Torah does not spell out here whether a מלחמת רשות or a מלחמת מצוה is referred to in our paragraph. I am certain that any city in any war is included in this legislation, that peaceful surrender must be offered first with the exception of the wars against Ammon and Moav, concerning whom the Torah specifically wrote that “you must not seek their peace or their welfare” (Deut. 23.7). If, however, Ammon or Moav to whom no peaceful overtures are to be made by the Israelites volunteer peace, such overtures are accepted (Maimonides Hilchot Melachim 6,6). All of this teaches how powerful an objective peace is.
    The whole paragraph is to be understood as a warning to the Jewish people not to launch an attack on any nation unless they had first explored the chance to settle their differences peacefully. If these people accept the offer of peace and take upon themselves to observe the 7 Noachide laws, none of them is killed. This applies both to מלחמת מצוה and to מלחמת רשות. They must also agree to pay taxes imposed by the Jewish King. This is based on verse 11 “they shall pay taxes to you and serve you.”
    The “tax” spoken of in this chapter is that they are prepared to serve the king both with their bodies and their possessions. Examples are: participation in building walls around the cities, reinforcing watchtowers, and building the king’s palace. This too is spelled out in Kings I 9,15: ”this was the purpose of the forced labour which Solomon imposed. It was to build the House of the Lord, his own palace, the Milo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and to fortify Chazzor, Megiddo, and Gezer.”
    If the people under threat of attack from the Jewish army would refuse  to make peace or would be prepared to make peace without obligating themselves to observe G’d’s seven basic laws, then, in the event of a מלחמת רשות, their adult males would be killed, as the Torah writes in verses 12-23. (our chapter) Minors and women would be spared as the Torah spells this out, i.e. “only the women and the children and the livestock and everything that will be in the city--all its booty--may you plunder for yourselves” (verse 14). 
    However, in the case of a מלחמת מצוה against any of the seven Canaanite nations of which the Torah writes that “any of their cities of the nations which the Lord your G’d gives to you (verse 16),” the Torah stipulates לא תחיה כל נשמה, “you must not let a single soul remain alive.”
    The reason for the distinction is that in a מלחמת רשות our objective is to exploit our right to vanquish the power of the horoscopic forces protecting these nations. We are not allowed, however, to uproot the celestial protective angel representing these people in heaven. These people must only become subservient to us.. 
    When dealing with a מלחמת מצוה, a war which we have been commanded to engage in, the underlying purpose is to uproot the  protectors, representatives of these nations in the celestial spheres. In order for G’d to completely neutralise the celestial influence of these people, we ourselves must eliminate them completely  in the terrestrial spheres. This is why the Torah made these distinctions between  what is called מלחמת רשות and what is called מלחמת מצוה. If your heart is revolted by the instructions to kill “innocent” children who have not done any harm to anyone, remember that this is a heavenly decree. G’d does not need to take us into His confidence of why He legislated this.
    Furthermore, seeing that G’d destroyed any power these people enjoyed in the celestial spheres, it is clear that whatever we do to them on earth is meaningless as their fate had already been sealed. When we kill them we kill in effect people who are already as good a dead though they may still go through the motions of “being alive.” 
    Sanhedrin 96 describes the process of killing them as “grinding ground flour.” As a result, no injustice has been done to these children seeing that G’d has already decreed that they should die forthwith. Even if we do not avail ourselves of this argument, the fact is that minors are considered as shoots off the main trunk. In this instance they are part of a trunk which has gone rotten and we may assume that if allowed to live these shoots will take after their original trunk. The Torah even spelled this out when it wrote in verse 18: “so that they will not teach you to commit all their abominations.” In other words, Torah psychology foresees the sinister historical effect of allowing the spiritually depraved children of such parents to live. If you were to argue that if raised in a Jewish society these children when they grow may embrace Judaism and keep G’d’s commandments, you only need to reflect who it is who instructed us to spill their blood. It is none other than G’d Himself. Surely He knows if any moral/ethical adults will grow out of these children. He decreed their death because He knows that they will not become penitents. Consider the following verse in Isaiah 14,21: “prepare a slaugthering block for his sons because of the guilt of their father so that they will not arise and possess the earth and fill the face of the earth with cities.”
    In view of the foregoing, the Canaanites whom the Israelites allowed to survive became a source of terrible physical and spiritual damage to the Jewish people. It is no more than logical that people prefer to do things which result in potentially smaller damage than that they take a chance by exposing themselves to greater damage. A man trapped in a blazing building will rather jump out and risk breaking his bones than face certain death by burning. A person will rather drink a terribly tasting medicine than put up indefinitely with a debilitating sickness. In fact, drinking such a medicine is at least not doing violence to himself, whereas refusing to drink it is equivalent to inflicting harm upon oneself. Seeing that one cannot force a person to inflict harm upon himself, ordering him to let these children survive [especially when they will become aware that you have killed their parents, Ed.] it is certainly better to commit minor damage in order to forestall larger damage at a later stage.
    At any rate, the permission to kill women and children is applicable only when these people did not initiate or respond to your offer of peace (as the case may be). If they did, subject to the conditions we outlined, they may live, even if they were members of the seven Canaanite nations as we know from Joshua 11,19-20. It is clear from there that just as the Chivites, inhabitants of Giveon, who had made peace with the Israelites were allowed to live, (including the men even though they had tricked the Israelites) so would the other tribes have been allowed to live under similar circumstances. G’d had allowed these pagans to be obstinate enough not to use the escape route offered by Torah law which would have enabled them to survive.
    We read the following on this subject in Jerusalem Talmud Sheviit 6,1: “Joshua sent three letters before entering the Holy Land. In the first letter he suggested that they come forward and submit to Jewish sovereignty and the conditions we described earlier. In the second letter he offered that anyone wishing to emigrate from Canaan would be allowed to do so. In his third letter he wrote that those who wanted to fight him were welcome to do so. The Talmud reports that whereas the Chivites from Giveon responded positively to Joshua’s first letter, the tribe of the Girgashite decided to emigrate. We know what happened to the remaining tribes, i.e. 31 kings fought Joshua and lost and were wiped out.
    
    20,17. כי החרם תחרימם החתי והאמורי, ”rather, you shall utterly destroy them; the Chivite, the Emorite, etc.” In this instance the Torah enumerated only six of the seven nations omitting  the Girgashi, seeing that tribe had emigrated as we mentioned earlier.
    
    20,19. ואותו לא תכרת כי האדם עץ השדה, “but it (the tree) you must not cut down for is then the tree a man?” Ibn Ezra and other commentators understand the lines as “for man’s life and livelihood depends on the trees in the field.” It is comparable to Deut. 24,6 כי נפש הוא חובל, “for he would take as a pledge something his life depends on.” This is the reason the Torah commands us not to destroy fruit-bearing trees, as it would be equivalent to destroying G’d’s blessing.
    Personally, I believe that the word האדם belongs to the earlier part of the verse and is part of the instruction “do not cut down.” The meaning of the whole verse would then be: “for the trees are not man that you could cut them down as if they were your enemies. It is not the mark of an intelligent people to destroy something which does not confer any benefit on it by doing so. This is why you must not only not destroy such trees but do whatever you can to preserve them and their usefulness. You are to eat its fruit, not destroy the tree. Our sages in Taanit 7 interpret the words כי ממנו תאכל, “for you eat from it,” as an allusion to the Torah scholars whose words of Torah are comparable to the fruit yielded by fruit-bearing trees. If such a Torah scholar does not conduct himself in the manner a Torah scholar should, abandon him. 
    21,1. כי ימצא חלל באדמה, “If a slain person is found lying on the earth, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the legislation about breaking the neck of the עגלה ערופה, the calf the Torah commands to be killed publicly and to be thrown into a virgin valley, is supposed to be a great trick designed to reveal the identity of the murderer. Maimonides in Moreh Nevuchim 3,40 writes as follows: “the people killing this calf are from the town nearest where the murdered person has been found. In most instances the murderer is a local resident. The elders of that town testify that they had not been negligent in maintaining all the services which are part of a civilised town. It is hoped that the publicity which this procedure attracts will lead to information disclosing the identity of the culprit.”
    The sages are already on record that even an unsub-stantiated statement by a lowly slave-woman claiming that a certain person is the murderer is sufficient to halt these proceedings (Jerusalem Talmud Sotah 9,1.) If the identity of the murderer was known but the townspeople were part of a conspiracy of silence, and they have the audacity to testify in front of their Creator that they did not know the identity of the murderer, this is a great sin and anyone (from outside) who acquires knowledge is called upon to make public what he knows, so that the guilty party will be dealt with either by a court of law, the king, or the relative who is the blood-avenger. The whole incident assumes additional significance in that the site where the calf was killed will forever have to remain virgin earth so that people who observe that this earth is not being used for anything will make inquiries about this. Thus far Maimonides/
    The expression וערפו means that they are to remove the neck of this calf (Ibn Ezra). The reason why all of this has to take place in the town nearest the slain person is that in our estimation the murderer comes from that city, or that people of that town had been guilty of a similar crime; otherwise such a disaster would not have happened near their town.
    Some explain the words נחל איתן, as a place of דשן ושמן, a very fertile valley. Now that this tragedy has occurred, the Torah forbids us to again make use of that land. Our sages in Sotah 15 also understand the words אשר לא יעבד בו ולא יזרע as referring to the future; after the calf has been killed there, this site is to be treated as if out of bounds completely.
    The Mishnah in Sotah 45 says that although this site is forbidden to be sown, one is allowed to comb flax on that site or to chisel stones there seeing that these activities are not performed with the actual soil. According to this latter explanation every one of us must be careful to maintain roads in such a condition including security patrols, so that murder cannot occur and the murderer escape. Once a property owner knows that if such a murder has occurred nearby they may all forfeit use of their property as a result he will cooperate in supervising his town and what is around it. (based on the father of David Kimchi in the Sefer Hashoroshim).
    A Midrashic approach to the subject of עגלה ערופה, based on Sotah 46: G’d said: “let the yearling calf whose neck is broken serve as a symbol and have her neck broken in a place which will not produce fruit (any produce) in order to atone for the slain person whose life has been cut short so that he will no longer be able to produce “fruit.”
    Other commentators dealing with the legislation surrounding the עגלה ערופה claim that the reason the calf in question must be one that has never born a yoke or performed labour for man, and that it has to be brought to a valley which has no traces of ever having been worked by man is so the calf will not recognise the site. There is to be no paved path through that valley so that the calf is not tempted to leave that area. The priests would hit it on its neck in order to encourage it to escape that valley and show us the way to the murderer. This is the meaning of the words (verse 4) וערפו שם את העגלה בנחל. Prior to that the elders of the town washed their hands over the calf, saying: ”our hands have not spilled this blood.” The priests would then respond: “grant atonement for Your people Israel.” The expression כפר in this instance includes a request for the facts to come to light, for the murderer to be found. If the Israelites of that generation were generally Torah-observant, the calf would walk to the house of the murderer, stop, and the priests would proceed to kill the calf at that spot. This is the meaning of the words: “and the blood shall be atoned for them.”
    If the people of that generation were generally not Torah-observant, and therefore entitled to identify and deal with the murderer, and as a result the calf would not seek out a specific house before coming to a halt, the priests would hit the neck of the calf with an axe, severing the neck. This is the meaning of ונכפר להם הדם, “the blood (guilt) will be atoned for them.” G’d would have to do the atoning then.
    A rational approach to this legislation: the calf which is being killed, עגלה ערופה, is a similar phenomenon to the שעיר לעזאזל, the scape-goat, which is killed after it (symbolically) carries the sins of the entire Jewish people (Leviticus 16,10). Both wind up in a totally barren environment. Something similar happens to one of the birds offered by the person who has been declared cured of the dreaded skin disease tzoraat. It is released into the air after its partner has been slaughtered and the surviving bird’s blood has been dipped in the blood of the bird which has been slaughtered (Leviticus 14,51-53). The surviving bird is perceived as carrying the guilt of the person for whom it atones into certain nether regions inhabited by demons and the like. All of the three phenomena we listed have as their purpose to blunt possible accusations by spiritually negative forces which abound in the world and which look for any excuse to assume the role of prosecuting attorney against the Jewish people. 
    From a technical point of view it would have been enough for the Torah to write that the valley in question should be one which has neither been worked nor sown, i.e. לא יעבד ולא יזרע. Why did the Torah add the extra word בו (verse 4)? The Torah wanted to make clear that not only the valley but also the calf itself must not have performed any kind of work. By being so totally undomesticated, the animal is perceived as (still) belonging to the domain of the forces appointed by G’d to rule in the desert and similar inhospitable places (as we explained on other occasions). When the calf’s neck is broken then it occurs in the domain of these demonic forces. The very word איתן implies that the valley is very harsh, hard, tough.
    The reason that the Torah spelled the word שפכה with the letter ה at the end, instead of the letter ו which we would have expected, may be an allusion to the fact that if one kills a person one deprives him of his five senses. By doing so, the murderer has destroyed an entire world. The world had been created with the last letter ה of the tetragram (Bereshit Rabbah 12,9). The reason for this somewhat exaggerated sounding description of the murder of a single individual is the fact that G’d created only a single human being at the beginning. If he had been killed prematurely, the human race would have been exterminated as the result of such a single act of killing. 
    The reason for the words כפר לעמך ישראל אשר פדית ה', “provide atonement for Your people Israel, whom You have redeemed o Lord” (verse 8), is simple. The procedure of killing this calf resulted in our providing these demonic forces with a delight. This enhances the power of these forces to act as advocates for the prosecution against Israel. As a result, we have to ask forgiveness, כפרה, from Hashem for having been forced to make use of this legislation. Similar considerations are valid  in connection with the שעיר לעזאזל. In Leviticus 16,33, at the conclusion of the whole procedure, the Torah writes: “He shall bring atonement upon the Holy of Holies, and upon the Tent of meeting and the Altar; he will bring atonement for the priests and all the people.” In other words, after the whole Yom Kippur service has been dealt with the Torah had to write these words to show that having somehow caused satisfaction to the Azzazel, the people and all concerned are in need of atonement for this.
    There is yet another aspect embodied in the procedures of the עגלה ערופה, and that is that the procedures teach us something about the nature of a murdered person. The procedures leading to atonement of this crime comprise three elements. 1) the breaking of the calf’s neck; 2) the location where this has to take place, i.e. a totally barren area, one which has never been useful. 3) the recital of a confession by the priests: “our hands did not spill this blood. Please atone for Your people of Israel.”
    Every intelligent person realises that the murderer achieved his objective only by means of separating, detaching his victim from three “souls,” life-forces. He separated him from the animalistic soul, from the soul which enables vegetable matter to grow, and, finally, he separated him from the נפש השכלית, the abstract life-force we call “soul.” We know that the first soul which departs from the slain person is the animalistic soul. This is why the Torah selected a calf for this procedure, seeing that it (the mother) symbolises animalism. Killing it removes that “soul.” The location, i.e. one that does not produce any growth, symbolises the “vegetable” soul, i.e. its absence. Finally, the confession and request for atonement symbolise the loss of the abstract soul of the slain person.
    I have heard that the carcass of the calf generates worms which will attack the murderer wherever he is. This is a mystery of nature related to the barren valley, the domain of the demons we mentioned.
    A kabbalistic approach: the whole procedure of “sacrificing” the עגלה ערופה to the attribute of Justice in its most severe manifestation aims at preventing this attribute which is poised to strike the community in whose proximity the murder occurred from causing harm. The reason the neck of the animal was chosen as the point of death is that it represents the “hardest,” most unbending part of the personality. Seeing that at this time G’d, as it were, turns His back (neck) on us, this calf does not have its throat slit as do the animals which are ritually slaughtered. The reason why this whole legislation is described in such detail is that the murder has occurred in Eretz Yisrael, on holy soil. The reason the Torah added the word בקר to the word עגלת בקר (a calf is always a junior בקר) is that this animal symbolises the חיה with the face of an ox in the prophet’s vision in Ezekiel 1,10. Sometimes the חיה described there as on the ”left,” does appear on the right, i.e. represents the attribute of Mercy.
    Although the calf must not have been worked, borne a yoke, it may impose such a yoke, burden on others (symbolically speaking).
    As to the words והורדו, “they shall bring it (the calf) down” (verse 4), this means that the elders shall drag the calf down to that valley. The words וערפו שם, reminds us of Genesis 49,24 משם רועה אבן ישראל, [if I understand correctly a reference to Joseph dragging down his family to Egypt, Joseph representing the “ox,” בכור שורו. Ed.] The words  את העגלה בנחל, mean that the calf is to be submerged in the waters of the brook of that valley. These waters are called נחלי אל, a reference to the emanations. The reason the Torah refers to the murdered person as חלל, usually understood as an empty space, is that he has been deprived of his souls, thus effectively making him “empty,” חלול.
    The word is also related to חולין, something profane, devoid of sanctity. The procedure is designed to eliminate the spirit of impurity outside the town in the field. This is why the Torah emphasises נופל בשדה, “fallen in the field” (verse 1). The word חלל is an allusion to orbit, i.e. the revolving planets in their orbits; the slain person is perceived as having been on earth before in a different body. This may be the reason the Torah speaks of חלל באדמה instead of חלל בארץ.
    This whole procedure was performed by the priests, the Levites, seeing it is their function to settle strife and plague (verse 5). The words ריב and נגע refer to strife both in the terrestrial regions and in the celestial regions. The waters with which the elders wash their hands (verse 6) represent the waters of the attribute חסד which have their origin in a domain above that of the עגלה. The washing of the hands is to ensure that the elders will not be harmed by the attribute of Justice.
    21,7. וענו, “they shall respond;” the priests, speaking in Hebrew. ואמרו, they shall say ידינו לא שפכו את הדם הזה, “our hands did not spill this blood.” The prayer of the priests was addressed to the attribute Hashem, the attribute which had orchestrated the Exodus from Egypt. This is why the words אשר פדית ה', “which You, the attribute of Hashem have redeemed,” are appended to the priests’ prayer for atonement. When they continue: ואל תתן דם נקי בקרב עמך ישראל, “do not place innocent blood in the midst of Your people of Israel,” is an appeal to the attribute of Mercy not to allow the attribute of Justice to go into action on account of this murder.
    
    21,8. כפר לעמך, “grant atonement for Your people.” According to Pessikta (and Sifri) on our verse the word כפר refers to the living who can attain atonement by means of their money. The words פדית, “whom You redeemed,” refer to the already dead who will achieve their atonement by charity given by the living (in their name). The verse teaches that  the donations made to the Temple treasury by the living on behalf of their dead accomplish something. This is so in an increased measure if the son donates in his father’s name; it is considered a merit for the departed father. The same applies to the recital of Kaddish by the son for his father. The concept is based on the fact that the son “eats” the “fruits” of his father. The same applies to the son acting as reader in the synagogue during his year of mourning. There is a Baraitha in Massechet Kallah chapter 2 involving Rabbi Akiva rescuing the soul of a departed from purgatory through the son becoming pious, etc., although the father of that child had been the worst kind of sinner.
    
    21,9. ואתה תבער הדם הנקי, “and you shall remove innocent blood from your midst.” You are to remove the threat of punishment for innocent blood having been spilled. Alternatively, ”you are to destroy the one who has spilled innocent blood if possible.”
   כי תעשה הישר בעיני ה', ”when you do what is right in the eyes of the Lord.” In the eyes of the Lord Who took you out of Egypt on condition that you do not allow innocent blood to be spilled, and generally do what is right in His eyes. We encounter here again the absence of the expression ה' אלו-היך as the redemption from Egypt took place under the aegis of the attribute of Mercy, i.e. Hashem (only).
    It is also possible to interpret this verse as a promise for the future. G’d is saying: “if you do what is right in the eyes of the Lord there will not be any murders of innocent people.” This in turn will serve to hasten the arrival of a period when murder, warfare, etc., will be banished from this earth. At that time the prophecy of Isaiah 2,4: ”and they beat their swords into ploughshares,” will be fulfilled. People will no longer teach the art of warfare; no nation will raise a hand against its neighbour. There will be an abundance of peace and serenity, as alluded to in Song of Songs 7,1. People will offer their sacrifices to the attribute Hashem which is also known as שלום as we know from Genesis 32,18 ויבא יעקב שלם. The author cites a few more verses implying that G’d’s name is שלום.
    
    
    
   כי  תצא
    
    
    
   תנה בני לבך לי ועיניך דרכי תצורנה, “Give your heart to me my son, and let your eyes observe my ways.” (Proverbs 23,26)  In this verse Solomon warns that we should devote our hearts to the service of the Lord, and distance ourselves from the allurements of this world, the ones to which the heart and eyes are so attracted. This is why he says: “give your heart to Me, i.e. to the part of the world which concerns service to your Creator and not to the alternative, the transient pleasures of terrestrial earth. Seeing that we do possess these urges, we are asked to channel them into permissible paths, i.e. service of the Lord. When we do this (wholeheartedly, not merely ‘giving to religion its due’) then our service to the Lord will be received with goodwill, seeing it reflects true reverence and love for G’d. Use of the pleasures of this world should be designed only to better serve the Lord and to better understand His Torah, at least the מושכלות, the laws accessible to our intelligence. Since many of the pleasurable experiences in this world are directly connected to the performance of commandments, what matters is the intent which governs the use one makes of these pleasures. 
    David summed up his own lifestyle and what prompted it in these words: ה', נגדך כל תאותי, “Lord, all my (natural) desires are focused in Your direction.” He complimented himself that he had been able to sublimate the enjoyment inherent in partaking of the pleasures of this world so that they became religious experiences for him. It is a well known fact that the various organs, limbs, in our body are agents of the heart and the eyes. They merely carry out what the eyes and heart desire. Of the two, the heart is the primary element. If one’s heart is whole with Hashem, everything is wholehearted. If the heart is not wholly devoted to G’d everything one does is blemished. This is the meaning of רחמנא לבא בעי, ‘G’d requires one’s heart’ (Sanhedrin 106).
    A Midrashic approach understands the verse in Proverbs as an admonition by G’d to the  people of Israel. G’d says to Israel: “if you will give me your heart and your eyes, I will know that you are truly Mine. If not, you are not Mine.” The essence of all this is that the heart and the eyes are the true root which determines either our rapprochement to G’d or vice versa. They are the “brokers” of the sins We know this from Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 1,8: “proof that the heart and eyes are the “brokers” of sin is what the Torah writes in Numbers 15,39: “do not explore after your hearts and after your eyes which you tend to stray after.” The expression זונים , “straying,” is the same as זונה, a harlot, a woman who strays after men not her husband. By using this term the Torah makes it plain that whoever is motivated in his actions by the dominance of his heart or his eyes is equated with a harlot. He allows himself to be seduced by his evil urge, as does a harlot. When Solomon follows up in Proverbs 23,27 with “for a harlot is a deep pit, a forbidden (alien) woman is a narrow well,” he suggests that he who approaches the entrance of the house of a harlot will not escape the trap and damage which harlotry entails, just as someone who falls into a narrow well will not escape some damage. The same happens to anyone who gives in to the dictates of his hearts and eyes. 
    The simile of the alien woman being compared to a narrow deep well means that even if the alien woman is not engaged in promiscuous sexual activity, the fact is that if someone has his eyes on that well (woman) all the time and draws water from it, it is in the nature of things that the water he draws will be replaced by other water, perpetuating the inquisitiveness of the person confronted with the narrow well.
    Solomon defines the allure of a woman as initially the making of conversation, שיחה, i.e. spelling the word שיחה (with the dot on the right side of the letter ש with a sin instead). Having engaged in conversation with such an alien woman, the next step is to look at her, followed by desiring her in one’s fantasies; this will eventually result in one’s touching such a woman, and the next step is the reversal of the sin again to a shin, i.e. שיחה, meaning “pit,” the pit of sin. Solomon wrote these two verses sequentially in order to drive home the point to the people that they should devote their hearts and eyes to the spiritual part of life, to G’d and not to the material part of life characterised by our cravings. It is these cravings, or rather our giving in to them, which result in people forfeiting both their life on earth and their hereafter. The brief enjoyment resulting from indulging one’s cravings is not worth what we have to give up in exchange.
    The Torah goes to great length in legislating against anything which could result in harlotry as the sexual promiscuity and perverseness of the Canaanites was proverbial. Even the army of the Jewish people had to maintain standards of sanctity in war, so much so that the Torah did not permit the converting of prisoners of war to Judaism (for the purpose of marriage) until after a whole string of special conditions had been met.
    
    21,10. כי תצא למלחמה על אויביך ונתנו ה' אלו-היך בידך ושבית שביו, “When you go into battle against your enemies and the Lord your G’d delivers him into your hand and you take as (its) prisoner.” We would have expected the Torah to write ונתנם, “and He will deliver them into your hand,” instead of “and He will deliver him into your hands.” The Torah means that the defeat of your enemies will be so drastic as if they had all been only one man. Alternatively, the word ונתנו refers to the protective angel of the enemy nation in the celestial regions. The words ושבית שביו refer to the enemies here on earth.
    
    21,11. אשת יפת תאר, “a woman of beautiful form.” The reason the Torah writes the word אשת i.e. the possessive form, is that even if the woman in question had been married already it is halachically permitted to marry her after proper conversion and marriage ritual; the reason is that sleeping with a Cannanite is not forbidden on account of her marital status which halachah does not recognise. (Maimonides Hilchot Melachim 8,3). Her conversion is valid even if due to fear rather than a genuine love of Judaism.
   והבאת אל תוך ביתך, “and you will bring her into your house.” Our sages teach, based on this verse, that the soldier must not rape this prisoner as an act of war, but must conduct relations with her on a basis of mutual consent in a private location. Only the first such sexual relation is permitted. Any subsequent sexual relations with the prisoner may only take place after she has converted and become the soldier’s wife. (compare Kidushin 21 and 22) This is what is meant by 23,15 ולא יראה בך ערות דבר, “He will not see a shameful thing among you.” 
    The reason the Torah did permit the first sexual encounter with the Gentile prisoner prior to her conversion is an accommodation to the evil urge. The Torah, the master psychologist, recognised that if it did not make this concession to the infatuation of the soldier he would ignore the prohibition and not pay attention to all the other strictures imposed by the Torah in the next several verses either. This is why the Torah prefaced these rules with the words: “when you bring her to your house.” [According to this view] The Torah assumes that prior to the soldier bringing his prisoner to his house he had not slept with her. He is now permitted to sleep with her once, after which all the details about the woman in question shaving her hair, cutting her nails, mourning her parents for a month, etc., all take effect. During this entire period her captor is not allowed to touch her.
    This is the reason why Tamar was legally permitted for Amnon son of David to marry, seeing that her mother Maachah had become pregnant by David from a sexual relation prior to her becoming converted so that she was not really a sister or half-sister to Amnon. This is why she had said to Amnon (Samuel II 13,13) “speak to the king; he will not refuse me to you.” Unless her mother had not been Jewish at the time she was conceived, how could she have made such a statement! (compare Sanhedrin 21) Technically, she was a בת כותית, Gentile, and our sages have ruled that “the son of your son born of a Gentile mother is not considered your son but her son” (Kidushin 68).
    
    21,13. ובכתה את אביה ואת אמה ירח ימים, “and she shall weep for her father and mother for a month.” According to the plain meaning of the text there are a number of advantages in the Torah setting aside a whole month for this mourning period. 1) During this period the prisoner may observe the mourning rites of the Jewish people if she heard that father or mother had been killed during that war while she was still of prisoner status (i.e. not Jewish). Any normal human being, Jewish or not, is supposed to observe the commandment to honour father and mother both while they are alive and after they have died. 2) The Torah hopes that during the period of 30 days the infatuation of the Jewish soldier for his prisoner will cool, especially when he observes her daily without the benefit of makeup, etc., deprived of her hair, finger nails, etc. [some say that the nails have to be allowed to grow. Ed.] Being dressed in mourner’s clothing also does not add to her allure for her captor. When he observes the woman cry and generally deport herself as unhappy in her new environment the ardor of her soldier-suitor may evaporate and he may send her home. 3) During that period her pagan mannerisms and expressions may be uprooted and she will gradually forget her past and adjust to her new environment and the fact that she has found a future. She will learn to appreciate her good fortune compared to her compatriots and resolve to become a dutiful wife to her captor. She will then be ready to immerse herself in a ritual bath and recite the appropriate benediction accompanying her conversion.
    As to why the Torah does not make any mention of this immersion in a ritual bath, this may be explained by Numbers 31,19 where the immersion of the prisoners in a ritual bath has already been standardised.
    A Midrashic approach found in the Sifri: the purpose of the line: “and she will weep for her father and mother,” is a reference to her saying good-bye to paganism. We find that pagan deities are referred to as “parents” in Jeremiah 2,27: “they say to wood and stone ‘you are my father, you have given birth to me.’” In Yevamot 48 Rabbi Akiva also said that these words refer to weeping for Avodah Zarah, the same verse in Jeremiah being quoted. I believe that the point the Midrash wanted to make was to account for the periodירח ימים  a “lunar orbit.” This round number includes the various repetitive cycles. The sun orbits daily, the orbits of the seven fixed stars are counted in terms of each dominating one day of the week. The moon orbits in 30 days (approx.) All of these phenomena are reminiscent of one kind or another of idolatry based on celestial phenomena. The woman prisoner is given a month to divest herself of this philosophy. The word: “her father,” is a simile for the sun, whereas the word: “her mother,” is a simile for the moon. The word את each time includes the various stars-planets which also are part of these patterns of idolatry. According to this view, the woman has to observe this month of mourning and weeping even if her biological parents are known to be alive still. Her new status (impending) demands that she put a full stop to all previous connections with idolatry (including her biological parents). Seeing that as a member of the Gentile nations she had not been forbidden to acknowledge these intermediaries as her deities previously, she is allowed to take official leave of her former religion.
    A rational approach (allegorical philosophy): This whole paragraph contains distinct allusions to the evil urge. It is this urge which causes man to sin on an ongoing basis and it usually approaches him in the guise of some irresistible female. This allure is employed by the evil urge to lure men into satiating their various cravings for the forbidden. When our sages in Kidushin 21 said לא דברה תורה אלא כנגד יצר הרע, “that the Torah (in this paragraph) addressed specifically the danger of being seduced by the evil urge,” this is what they had in mind. They perceive the אשת יפת תאר as the personification of the evil urge. The Torah provides the antidote to the lure of the evil urge in the manner it suggests it be treated. One way of ridding oneself of it is that man strips the evil urge of his physical power which is represented by his hair (as we know from Samson). This is why the Torah commands that  we shave off the hair of  the יפת תאר. The word גלוח suggests destruction of the hair so that it does not grow back again. Prior to Adam’s sin, his clothing consisted of nails (a tough skin). When the Torah speaks about the אשת יפת תאר having to “do her nails,” this is an allusion to man’s objective to regain the status of Adam who wore “nails.” The contrast is the removal of the garments of the אשת יפת תאר, read: “evil urge. One is not to indulge in any of the pleasures of this world, unless they are specifically permitted, gratifying only those urges that are condoned by the Torah. The words וישבה בביתך, “she will sit in your house,” are a simile for keeping tight control of these urges just as one keeps control of everything under one’s roof. The way to accomplish all this is to first weaken the urges, i.e. to “weep for father and mother for a whole month.” Having sufficiently weakened these cravings, the words ואחר כן תבוא אליה apply, i.e. you may then gingerly make use of these urges provided it is within the framework of what is permissible under Torah law.
    
    21,14. לא תתעמר בה, “you shall not enslave her.” The meaning of this word with the letter ע is the same as the similar sounding word with the letter א, i.e. תתאמר. We find the word in a similar meaning in Deut. 26,17: את ה' האמרת היום, “you have enslaved yourself to the Lord this day.” It is not unusual for the letters א and ע to be used interchangeably. Not only in scripture but also in the language of our sages are the letters ע and א used interchangeably such as in עריס or אריס, both being given as “tenant-farmer.” The prisoner who originally was captured for the sake of becoming the soldier’s wife must not be demoted to be treated as a slave in his household once his infatuation for her has waned. It is morally not acceptable This is a basic moral lesson the Torah teaches us here.
    The next paragraph which describes a situation in the home of someone who has two wives one of whom he loves whereas he harbours hostile feelings towards the other, teaches that the Torah did not easily agree to permitting the אשת יפת תאר to the Jewish soldier, seeing it foresaw that introducing her into the soldier’s household was likely to result in friction in that home. Had it not been the Torah’s wish to help the soldier sublimate his carnal lust for that woman, the Torah would not have done so, seeing the chances that her husband will eventually hate such a woman are statistically quite high. Moreover, if he has a son from her, the chances that the son will become a delinquent (בן סורר ומורה) [even if not in the strictly halachic sense of the word. Ed.] are not insignificant. This is why the paragraph about such a delinquent follows in short order.
    We find that the Torah’s psychology was justified when we look at the life of King David. (compare Tanchuma Ki Teytze 1) He had taken Maacha, the daughter of Talmai, the King of Geshur as one of his wives (Samuel II 3,3) after he had gone out to war against him. She bore Avshalom for David. Avshalom rebelled against his father and tried to kill him; he slept with David’s concubines. He murdered one of David’s sons, and generally became the focus of political strife in Israel and responsible for the death of tens of thousands of Israelites. The prophet Nathan was told to tell David that G’d would make evil arise against David out of his own house. (Samuel II 12,11, see commentary by Kimchi).
    Another paragraph which is appended to the foregoing one because it is a warning, is verse 22 in which the procedure of preserving even the dignity of the body of someone who has been legally executed for a crime committed is discussed. The sequences of our passages in this chapter are reminiscent of Isaiah 24,18 where the prophet tells us that when one has managed to escape one kind of terror, one will find oneself entrapped by a different kind of trap. The sum total of the moral/ethical teaching of these verses is that even marriages which are permitted by the Torah are not necessarily suitable unions. The marriages to prisoners of war are a prime example of such unions. 
    Even though the women in question have converted to Judaism, this is not considered a complete (ideal) conversion. It is assumed that the woman in question converted out of fear, i.e. physical fear of otherwise being executed. Even when someone volunteers to become a proselyte with no pressure from any causes which we can detect, the sages (Yevamot 47) have instructed the judges performing the conversion to carefully examine the prospective proselyte’s background to determine if  he or she is converting for ulterior motives, i.e. not because of genuine religious conviction. Money, position, etc., may all be reasons which attract a Gentile to become Jewish. In the case of males more likely than not they have their eyes on a Jewish girl whom they wish to marry.
    Judaism is different from other religions which are soul-snatchers, missionary by definition. The reason is that we are a national religion, not one which wishes to embrace all of mankind. Some of the other religions, Islam in particular, are imbued with the fervor to ram their beliefs down the throats of people whom they perceive to be pagans. [in some editions the author refers to “two” religions, i.e. Christianity also. Ed.] Sometimes all kinds of enticements, both material and spiritual, are offered to the potential convert in order to get him to embrace a particular new faith. This is what Daniel already prophesied about (Daniel 7,20) “and a mouth speaking haughty words.” Daniel 7,25 also deals with the same phenomenon describing efforts at converting others to one’s belief being made my leaders of religious cults. In Daniel 11,36 Daniel harps on the same subject once more.
    Once the prospective convert to Judaism has been checked out and no ulterior motives have been discovered which would make us doubt his sincerity, he is advised of the yoke of Torah legislation and what is implied by joining the Jewish people. (Maimonides Hilchot Issurey Bi-ah 13,14). All of this is designed to make the prospective convert reconsider his plans to become Jewish.
    During the reign of David prospective converts were rejected as it was suspected that these converts were inspired by fear of the growing power of the Jewish state. In Solomon’s time they were also not accepted as it was suspected that they were motivated by the affluence and security offered by King Solomon’s empire. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Issurey Bi-ah 13,14-15)
    Despite these rulings, there were many converts during the reign of David and Solomon, and once local courts had conducted such conversions and the converts had undergone ritual immersion the higher courts did not revoke these conversions. Although Solomon who married numerous women of pagan ancestry converted all them of them prior to marrying them, and Shimshon too did not marry until after the lady had been converted, seeing these conversions were due to ulterior motives, scripture continues to describe the women in question as if they had remained Gentiles and sleeping with them was forbidden. The outcome of these “marriages” testifies to the fact that they were flawed from the beginning. The Book of Kings accuses Solomon of building altars for the former deities his various foreign-born wives served, although he personally did nothing of the sort. The fact that he did not interfere with such goings on is placed at his doorstep. (compare Kings I chapter 11)
    In view of all the above we can understand the statement of our sages in Yevamot 47 that converts are as serious a plague for the Jewish people as is the dreaded skin disease tzoraaat. The reason for this attitude is that experience has shown that the majority of converts abandoned their former religion only because of material advantages to be attained by becoming Jewish. Not only that, these converts have a habit of leading natural born Jews astray. Once these people have become legal converts it is practically impossible to isolate them and to ostracise them. The first time such converts led the natural born Jews astray was during the episode of the golden calf, whereas a short time later the same thing occurred in Numbers 11,4 when a group of people described by the Torah as אספסף instigated the craving for meat as a result of which tens of thousands of Israelites died a miserable death. Sifri Behaalotcha 86 attributes all this to these converts. Time and again such fair-weather converts have become the bane of our people.
    Just as we learned from the order in which these last few paragraphs have been arranged that one sin brings in its wake another sin, we can learn from another sequence of paragraphs that one commandment meticulously observed will bring in its wake the fulfillment of other commandments.
    In 22,6 we read about the commandment to release a mother bird before taking her chicks, followed by the commandment to install a railing on the roof of a new house. Following this the Torah instructs us not to mix certain species of seed, etc., etc. The message is that once we observe one commandment it will be easier to observe other commandments 
    
    21,18. כי יהיה לאיש בן סורר ומורה, “When a man has a son who is wayward and rebellious, etc.” The expression סורר is also found in Hoseah 4,16 כפרה סוררה, “like a wayward cow.” It refers to an animal which refuses to respond to training. The word מורה means to be rebellious with words and doing the reverse of what his father tells him.
    Nachmanides writes: that this boy is guilty of being punished for two misdemeanours. 1) He ignored his father’s instructions thereby insulting him. 2) He stole wine and meat from his father and ate like a glutton and drank like drunkard. He violated the commandment to honour his father (Exodus 20,12), and he also violated the commandment to “be holy” (Leviticus 19,2). The meaning of “to be holy” is to abstain from indulging one’s cravings. Also, we are to endeavour to understand the ways of the Lord G’d in all His ways. Anyone who is a glutton and a drunkard has no idea of the Lord’s ways.
    Seeing that at this time the offenses committed by this boy are not deserving the death penalty, the Torah does not order him executed because of the severity of his sin but because it wants his death to serve as a warning to the community at large. This is the reason why the Torah adds: “all of Israel must  hear about it and be afraid.” You find a similar verse after the Torah describes the execution of the rebellious elder, זקן ממרא. There, too, the offense committed by the man is certainly not a capital offense by itself. Seeing that his execution is of a deterrent nature for other potential dissident scholars, the Torah demands that the people all be informed of what happened. Dissent from recognised authority must be discouraged most emphatically once it exceeds the academic level and threatens the executive branch of the rule of law. A third instance where the Torah demands the widest publicity for an execution based on similar considerations are the עדים זוממים, witnesses who framed someone but who at the last moment have been found out. The facts to which they claimed to have testified have not actually been disproved but their evil intent makes them liable to such punishment that although their intended victim went free they must be made an example of. The same is true of the מסית, the person who tried to seduce family members into serving idols. He is not executed for a deed but merely for abuse of his tongue. Here too the Torah demands the widest publicity for his execution in order to deter others from ever engaging in such a crime.
   ויסרו אותו, “and they shall discipline him.” They administer corporal punishment after having duly warned the guilty party of what is in store for him if  he persists. (Sanhedrin 71)
    
    21,19. ותפשו בו אביו ואמו, “his father and his mother are to take hold of him, etc.” The procedure suggested by the Torah can be enacted only if both father and mother are willing to testify against their own son before the court. If, even during the legal proceedings, father and mother forgive their son, he goes free (Sanhedrin 88).
    
    21,20. ואמרו אל זקני העיר בננו זה סורר ומורה, and they will say to the elders of the city: “this son of ours is wayward and rebellious.” At the beginning father and mother bring this child to a court composed of three judges. They produce two valid witnesses that he has stolen from his father and used the proceeds to buy meat and wine and that he has consumed same. The court sentences the boy to corporal punishment of 39 lashes if he had been duly warned. If he repeats the crime the parents take the boy to a tribunal of 23 judges who have authority to preside over capital offenses, and they bring their witnesses with them. His trial is then concluded and the boy will be stoned to death (Maimonides Hilchot Mamrim 7,7).
    
    21,21. ורגמוהו כל אנשי עירו, “and all the men of his town will stone him, etc.;” in this verse the Torah tells us only of the penalty. Where did the Torah spell out the prohibition, i.e. the warning? After all, we have a principle that the death penalty by man can be enacted only if we have both the warning not to commit the sin in question as well as the penalty spelled out in the written Torah. The verse applicable is the warning not to eat something על הדם, “the result of which could be blood-guilt,” i.e. death by execution (Leviticus 19,26). No one other than the בן סורר ומורה is in line for execution for merely eating a forbidden meal. This is the meaning of the words זולל וסובא, that he ate meat to the value of 50 dinars in a ravenous manner, and washed it down with half a log of wine in the manner of drunkards.
    A tradition going back to the time of the prophets teaches that the בן סורר ומורה is not guilty of the death penalty until he has stolen money from his father and spent it on the food and drink we just described and has eaten it outside the premises of his father in the company of other people all known to be useless members of society, and the meat he ate was half raw, partially cooked in the manner thieves who are in a hurry cook their meat. Also the wine must have been only partially diluted, i.e. show evidence that the person who drank it was in a great hurry, revealing that the person drinking it was unable to temper his craving.
    If, however, the son had obtained the father’s permission to consume this food, or he had stolen the money from someone other than his parents, or he ate the meat completely raw and drank undiluted wine, he is free from the penalty prescribed by the Torah. The reason is that this is a method which is most unlikely to become habitual. The son cannot always find strangers to steal from, etc. He can however, go on stealing from his father and indulge himself. The period during which the execution of a בן סורר ומורה is theoretically possible is only when he is between 13, and 13 years and 3 months old. (compare most of the details mentioned in Maimonides Hilchot Mamrim chapter 7 and in Sanhedrin 70) This is based on the Torah writing: כי תהיה לאיש בן. This means that until the boy is at least of age (13) he is not subject to this penalty. At the same time, the Torah does not punish an adult son at the instigation of his father, seeing he is no longer under the authority of the father. Therefore the sages in Sanhedrin 69 accepted it as given that the Torah had in mind only a thirteen year old who had demonstrated proof of puberty and was not yet more than 3 months past that time. Once he had brought evidence of puberty he is fit to father children and the fetus which he helped conceive becomes visible after 3 months pregnancy of the potential mother. Seeing that the Torah wrote “when a man will have a son,” etc., this precludes someone already capable of being a father. The word בן also excludes בת, i.e. the legislation discussed here does not apply to females, to daughters. The reason is simply that girls are not in the habit of indulging such cravings for eating and drinking intoxicating liquids.
   וכל ישראל ישמעו וייראו, “and the whole people of Israel shall hear and become afraid.” The judgment of such a wayward son would be proclaimed publicly throughout the country giving name, time, and place of the execution and the sin the execution was for. (Maimonides Hilchot Mamrim 7,13) 
    We have a Baraithah in Sanhedrin 71 according to which the execution of a בן סורר ומורה never occurred; similarly there was never such a thing as an עיר הנדחת, nor would there ever be either phenomenon. The Torah wrote the legislation for both as hypothetical scenarios only in order for the people studying same to accumulate the merit of having studied it. If that is so, we are entitled to ask why was it so important for the Torah to record such hypothetical legislation at all? However, this is part of the divine wisdom of the Torah to teach the people to what extent they must love G’d. There is no greater love than a father and a mother have  for their son. If their son violates a commandment of G’d it is the usual practice of parents to excuse such behaviour by their children as due to foolishness. If the Torah demands that parents overcome their love for their son and hand him over for the ultimate punishment because he violated a relatively minor rule of the invisible G’d, this is proof that these parents are truly devoted to Torah and G’d.
    This kind of obedience for G’d has already been demon-strated in practice by Avraham at the Akeidah when he had to demonstrate that he was ready to kill his son at G’d’s command, although Yitzchak had not been guilty of anything at all! Seeing that Avraham’s love for G’d was so absolute, exceeding his love for his only son, G’d described him as אברהם אוהבי. (Isaiah 41,8) After Avraham had done this his overriding love for G’d became world-famous. This is why the sages said concerning the hypothetical legislation involving execution of a wayward son at the instigation of his own parents that the purpose of the Torah is to make us study these laws and their moral implications. This is what I have heard from my teacher Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet may he live long! We must, however, contrast this with an opinion offered by Rabbi Yonathan on the same folio as the Baraitha we quoted. Rabbi Yonathan testifies that he personally had sat on the grave of a person who had been executed as a בן סורר ומורה, as well as on the site which had once been part of an עיר הנדחת. Either Rabbi Yonathan did not consider the Baraitha as authentic, or we would have to say that the grave of the בן סורר ומורה upon which Rabbi Yonathan sat was not that of a בן סורר ומורה in the precise meaning of the term, but that it was someone more like Avshalom, i.e. a wayward son who had indeed been executed but for more serious crimes and at an older age.
    21,23. לא תלין נבלתו על העץ, “do not leave his body on the gallows overnight.” This is a warning that the body which was hanged after execution should not be allowed to remain on display overnight. Our sages used this verse to expand the law that a dead person should not remain unburied overnight. (Sanhedrin 46). Sifri Ki Teytze states flatly that leaving a body unburied overnight is an infringement of the law not to leave the body of an executed person on the gallows overnight. It would be a double insult to leave man on the tree seeing the tree was meant in his honour, i.e. to provide the coffin for his body. Unless leaving the body overnight in order to supply it with shrouds, a coffin, etc., it woulld be an infringment of the law not to allow a dead corpse to remain unburied overnight.
    The general rule applicable to this commandment is that in the land of Israel if one leaves a person on the gallows overnight one has violated both a positive and a negative commandment. The negative commandment is spelled out here in the words לא תלין נבלתו על העץ, whereas the positive aspect of the commandment are the words כי קבור תקברנו ביום ההוא, “but you are surely to bury him on that day.”
    It seems to me that seeing Adam’s sin had been the cause that he did not spend the night in Gan Eden as we know from Psalms 49,13 אדם ביקר בל ילין, “Adam does not even spend a single night in the precious place” (as interpreted in Sanhedrin 38), man should not have qualified for all this consideration, but, on the contrary, his body deserved to be displayed overnight. The Torah teaches us with this legislation that despite such considerations it applies different yardsticks in its immeasurable wisdom as explained by the words 
   כי קללת אלו-הים תלוי, “someone left hanging is a curse in the eyes of G’d.” According to the plain meaning of these words the implication is that it is proof that the person whose body has been hung must have blasphemed G’d the Creator, or he must have been guilty of serving idols. Otherwise he would not have been on display overnight. [legally speaking, according to the majority opinion in Sanhedrin 45, only the body of a blasphemer was hung on the gallows for the balance of the day of his execution. Ed.] We may therefore understand the word קללת as having a dual meaning, i.e. קללה, “curse,” and קלה, “treating lightly, as being of no value, belittling.” He who serves idols treats the Creator as if He were irrelevant.
    Our sages in Sanhedrin 46 describe a person when he is in a depressed state of mind as saying קל עלי עלמא, “the world is ‘light’ for me,” as really meaning that the world is too heavy for him, but he does not want to utter something that could be self-incriminating. Similarly, here. The Shechinah does not want to “incriminate“ itself. Therefore the Torah phrases this sentiment as if it were bemoaning its own fate, whereas in reality it is expressing its pain at the fate that befell one of its creatures. G’d experiences pain when man has to die. We know this already from Exodus 3,7 where G’d tells Moses concerning the pain experienced by the Jewish people כי ידעתי את מכאוביו, “for I am keenly aware of its pains.” Another verse testifying to this empathy of G’d with the pain of the Jewish people is found in Isaiah 63,9 בכל צרתם לו צר, “in all its troubles, G’d is troubled.” We have to understand the words קללת אלו-הים in a similar fashion, describing G’d’s empathy with this particular individual’s fate.
    The Talmud in Sanhedrin raises questions against the peculiar wording saying that if indeed this is the correct interpretation the Torah should have written קלת instead of קללת. The answer given is that the reason the Torah wrote the extra letter ל was to give the word both meanings (as we already mentioned) .
    Ibn Ezra writes that the words קללת אלו-הים תלוי mean that any area adjacent to the body on the gallows will be a source of negative fallout for anyone coming into contact with it so that the sooner the body is removed the safer the area will be for people. G’d uses the body to disseminate these negative vibes, poisons, etc. Furthermore, writes Ibn Ezra, there is a mystical element attached to the life-force of a person (נפש) which causes infection? This is the reason why the dead cause ritual impurity. And this is why the Torah writes that we must not cause such impurity in our land by allowing corpses to remain above ground overnight. [in other words, the legislation is less for the sake of the body of the sinner who has been executed, than for preserving the land of Israel in its purity. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach based on Sanhedrin 46: “picture two brothers who were very much alike. One of them became king, whereas his brother was caught as a robber and hung. Seeing that they look so much alike, passers by seeing the hung body will think that the king had been hung. 
    A Kabbalistic approach: the meaning of the verse and the parable mentioned in the Midrash is that the “king” described there represents the attribute כבוד, better known as צלם אלו-הים, “the image of G’d.” In other words, the “image” is separate from the essence, i.e. it is an עבד אלו-הים, “a subsidiary of the Lord.” Seeing that the body hung on the gallows was someone symbolising this צלם אלו-הים, he would become a קללת אלו-הים a provocation to the negative side of Elohim, unless buried on the day he was executed and not left there till night time which is the domain of the attribute of Justice; it is presumed therefore from the wording of the Torah that leaving he body there only during the day would not provoke the attribute of Justice.
    
    22,1. השב תשיבם לאחיך, “be sure to restore them to your brother.” The Torah commands that we be very cautious to observe the commandment to restore lost property to its owners. Concerning the repetition of the words השב תשיבם, “be sure to restore,” our sages in Baba Metzia 30 explain that one has to keep doing this even 100 times if necessary. All of this is part of the paths of mercy and kindness which we are to practice vis-a-vis each other seeing we are all the sons of one father. As such each one of us is vitally interested in what is useful for his fellow. We express our pity for lost property of our brother in practical terms by restoring it to him whenever possible. It matters not whether our brother has lost inert possessions or livestock such as his ox or donkey. Any kind of lost property is included in the Torah’s directive to restore it to the loser. This wording refers to minor utensils worth less than a garment, livestock, etc., which we have found and which can be identified by the loser. The positive commandment is followed by the negative one not to try and escape this obligation by turning a blind eye and not picking up the lost object for oneself either.
    There is more to the commandment to restore lost property than merely the act of restoring it. If a person is in a position to perform a useful service for his fellow and to thereby protect his fellow against financial loss, this is all part of the commandment under discussion here. All of this is part of the “umbrella” commandment in Leviticus 19,18: “love what is your fellow’s as if it were your own!”
    Concerning the practical ramification of the words: “you must not hide yourself” (from your brother’s lost property), and the subsequent semi phrase (verse 4) “you may hide your self from them,” the sages in Sifri have this to say: if the finder is an aged individual, a scholar, and it is not in keeping with his dignity to carry a bulky object in order to fulfill the commandment (personally) to restore this object to its owner, the Torah permits such a person to turn a blind eye to the object he has found. Ordinary individuals, on the other hand, are not permitted to use this ruse.
    A Midrashic approach. The words: “you will hide yourself from them,” refers to what you may succeed in doing vis-a-vis your brother, vis-a-vis human beings; the words: “you must not hide yourself from them,” refer to G’d who knows your motivation and whom you cannot fool by pretending not to have found the object or animal the return of which would cause you inconvenience or expense.
    If you investigate this commandment still further you will derive from it encouragement regarding the subject of the resurrection. G’d will practice this commandment personally by restoring the souls of the departed bodies to their original owners in due course after the redemption and the arrival of the messiah. Each person will resume his or her original role in the universe. At that time “lost” property will truly be restored to its original owner. The most recent owner of that property will give it to the previous owner and so forth until it will be eventually restored to the very first owner [who had not deliberately abandoned it, Ed.] This is what is alluded to in Psalms 139,16: ”your eyes saw my unformed limbs.” David describes that Adam’s mental eye had been shown every human being ever to be to be born [G’d had shown him the history of mankind in capsule form prior to his sin. This is why he donated 70 years of his life to enable David to be born alive at all as he had been shown a stillborn David. Since G’d had foreseen it, it was included in the book of the descendants of Adam he showed to Adam. The entire verse in Psalms 139,16 deals with this phenomenon. I refer the reader to an analysis by Rabbi Moshe Alshich in his commentary on Tehillim, this editor’s translation page 1005. Ed.]
    It is not clear whether at that time the original wife will be restored to her original husband [assuming she had remarried, or to her last husband on earth, or, whether G’d will add to such bodies by splitting the raw material much as we know that a light can be split.]
    All our sages are agreed that the commandment to restore lost property applies only to property belonging to Jews, not to that belonging to Gentiles. This is why the Torah stresses repeatedly אבדת אחיך, “lost property of your brother,” and “restore it to your brother.” Gentiles are perceived as part and parcel of אלו-הי נכר הארץ, part of the alien deities of “earth,” a system of life which does not know of an hereafter or resurrection, etc. The Jewish people who are “G’d’s share and inheritance,” have a claim to eternal life and therefore it is mandatory that seeing their property is not lost permanently, that it be restored in due course. Regarding the resurrection of the dead, the Jewish people have been told (Isaiah 26,19) “Oh, let your dead revive, let corpses arise!” whereas in verse 14 of that same chapter the prophet says “they are dead, they can never live; shades, they can never rise” (referring to the Gentiles).
    Seeing that in connection with lost objects or animals the Torah employed the expression נדחים, “cast off, rejected,” the Torah continues in verse 3 with the statement: “you must not hide yourself (if you found it). The moral lesson is: “do not hide yourself from the Lord, so that when the time comes He will not hide Himself from you,”  i.e. become someone whom you have “lost.”. (compare Samuel II 14,13-14).
    
    22,4. לא תראה את חמור אחיך, “You must not see the donkey of your brother ..fall;” in a similarly worded commandment in Exodus 23,5 the Torah uses the expression חמור שונאך, “the donkey of one who hates you.” The promise contained in our verse is that if you assist your enemy with his falling donkey he will eventually appreciate you and become אחיך, “your brother.” When you assist him he will forget the “hatred” between you and only remember the bond of love that unites brothers.
    
    22,5. לא יהיה כלי גבר על אשה, “male apparel shall not be on a woman.” The principal concern of our verse is to deny the woman the right to bear arms (Sifri 227, Nazir 59). She is not to go to war and become a cause for immorality rampant during war. Similar considerations, i.e. the prevention of creating opportunities for sexual promiscuity- are the reason males are forbidden to wear women’s garments. Both of these apparent role reversals of the sexes are an abomination to the Lord. 
    Our sages in Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 6,1 understand this wording to mean that “garments which will result in, or lead to abominations being perpetrated are forbidden.” (compare Yoreh Deyah 156,2) Jewelry which is associated specifically with women is forbidden to be worn by men, as are mannerisms practiced especially by women, such as looking in the mirror. Seeing that they were one of three things which the rabbis had to give a special dispensation to for the household of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi, it is clear that generally speaking male Jews are not supposed to admire themselves in a mirror. If a barber, in order to trim the client’s hair, needs to look into the mirror to better see the hairs he is looking for, this is in order. If a person was sick and he wishes to reassure himself that he is on the way to recovery by consulting a mirror and confirming that he looks healthier, this too is in order. The last mentioned examples are not uses for the enhancement of one’s exterior, for “dolling oneself up.” Our sages in Shabbat 94 also stated that if one picks a single white hair out of the black hairs in one’s beard one is guilty of violating the basic prohibition not to wear women’s clothing. A further illustration of this subject is found in Yalkut Shimoni on Judges  item 56, that the reason Yael slew Siserah with a nail instead of with a knife was that she did not want to violate the commandment of using implements reserved for males.
    
    22,7. שלח תשלח את האם ואת הבנים תקח לך, “you must be sure to send away the mother and take the young for yourself.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah’s directive here is designed to protect the species from extermination. Even though the Torah permitted slaughtering of living creatures for the enhancement of man’s lifestyle, the Torah did not mean to give a carte blanche for exterminating any species thereby. If one were to take both mother bird together with her young (and eat them) it would be symbolically similar to exterminating that particular species (Nachmanides). The Torah adds the words: “in order that that it will be good for you,” i.e. if you will display concern for the survival of the species of these birds, G’d in turn will display His pity for you and will increase your days on earth as compensation for not having wiped out that family (species) of birds. (Ibn Ezra)
    When the Torah chose the expression והאם רובצת על האפרוחים או על הביצים, “and the mother is roosting (reclining) on the chicks or the eggs,” (verse 6) the Torah revealed to us by that  that the “eggs” mentioned here are equivalent to the “young ones” mentioned in verse 7 seeing that eventually the young chicks will emerge from these eggs. This also teaches that the command to dispatch the mother bird is applicable only when the eggs have advanced to the stage where it is practically certain that healthy young chicks will emerge from them (Chulin 109). If the eggs are broken or otherwise show signs that they will not be hatched, there is no need to send away the mother bird in order to take the eggs. The reason the Torah mentions both the chicks and the eggs in the plural is because this is the normal scenario. Even if the mother bird is brooding over only a single egg or chick the same legislation applies (Chulin 109). 
    Maimonides, in his More Nevuchim 3,48, offers the following rationale for this commandment. The Torah does not want the mother bird to experience the anguish of watching to see herself being deprived of her chicks. The situation is analogous to the prohibition of not slaughtering the calf and its mother on the same day (Leviticus 22,25), so that the cow does not watch the death of its calf. The love of a mother animal for its young is not determined by intellectually rationalised feelings but by something more profound in the psyche of the animal. It reflects its power of imagination. If the Torah is so concerned with the feelings of birds and four-legged domesticated animals, how much more is it concerned with the feelings of human beings! The legislation therefore is designed to teach us not to practise cruelty even when such cruelty is only of an emotional nature.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Ki Teytze 2:  There is no commandment which is easier to fulfill than sending away the mother bird. Compare the reward offered by the Torah for a commandment which requires so little effort to fulfill: “in order that it will be good for you and will prolong your days.” We may appreciate this better by reference to a parable. A king employed a number of labourers to work in his field to plant there and he did not tell them exactly what their wages would be. In the evening, every labourer who had planted a tree was given one gold coin. When the labourers observed this (extraordinarily large payment) they were amazed and concluded that if planting a single tree, an undemanding task,  was worth a gold coin to the king, how much greater would be the payment for labourers who planted a number of trees per day. The commandment of שלוח הקן, the sending off of the mother bird, is similar. It does not require financial cost in order for us to fulfill it and yet the reward is great. We may extrapolate from that what kind of reward G’d will grant us for the fulfillment of commandments which require the spending of a lot of money, physical exertion, and possibly involve saving someone’s life. The reason that G’d spelled out the reward for only a few of the commandments is to encourage us to fulfill all of them. We may compare the commandments to trees producing fruit. Some tree may produce a fruit which is superior to the fruit of another tree. Similarly, there are commandments the reward for which is greater than the reward for fulfilling some other commandment.
    We know, for instance that the reward for being hospitable and providing food and shelter for strangers is having children. We have proof of this from our matriarch Sarah (Genesis 18, 6-10) and we also know this from the woman in Shunem who was blessed with a child by a promise from the prophet Elisha whom she hosted on a regular basis (Kings II, 4-16). Other commandments such as honouring father and mother are rewarded by long life (Exodus 20,12), as is the commandment to send away the mother bird even though the principal meaning of  this long life is understood to refer to life in a world beyond this terrestrial life on earth, 
    [In the following list of verses from scripture the author illustrates allegorically the eventual fate of the Gentile nations as retribution for their not having observed this commandment in their relationship to the Jewish people. Ed.] Isaiah 16,2 writes: “like fugitive birds, like nestlings driven away, Moav’s villagers linger by the fords of Arnon.” The prophet refers to Jeremiah 17,11: “like a partridge hatching what she did not lay, so is one who amasses wealth by unjust means, in the middle of his life it will leave him, and in the end he will be proved a fool.” Immediately after this Jeremiah continues: “O throne of Glory exalted from of old. Our sacred shrine! O Hope of Israel, O Lord!” How do these verses form a continuation from what the prophet wrote before? The partridge brings eggs belonging to other species of birds and broods on them until they hatch from their shells. When these chicks hatch, the chicks feed on the partridge plucking its feathers and making it defenseless until they eventually devour it. Who is the cause of the partridge’s misfortune? None other than the partridge itself. If it had not stolen other birds’ eggs this would never have happened to it. This is what is going to happen to the nations of the world who dared stretch out their talons against the throne of G’d, i.e. destroy our Temple. They destroyed and burned G’d’s Sanctuary, exiled the Jewish people and, as a result, in the words of Tzefaniah 2,9, “Assuredly, as I live, declares the Lord of Hosts, the G’d of Israel: ‘Moav shall become like Sodom, and the Ammonites like Gomorrah; clumps of weeds and patches of salt and desolation evermore. The remnants of My people shall plunder them, the remainder of My nation shall possess them.’” Thus far the Midrash.
    We find that Solomon drew a comparison between two commandments, treating them as one. This is what he meant when he said in Proverbs 30,17: “the eye that mocks a father and disdains homage due a mother, the ravens of the brook will gouge it out, young eagles will devour it.” Concerning the above verse the Jerusalem Talmud Peah, chapter 1 declares that the eye mocking the father is a reference to the commandment to honour father and mother. The words “and disdains the homage due a mother” are a reference to the commandment of dispatching the mother bird prior to taking her young. Whereas in the Torah we read about the reward for observing these commandments, Solomon informs us about the punishment in store for violating it. 
    An investigative/scientific approach: the reason behind the commandment to dispatch the mother bird is to teach us empathy and to encourage us to turn our backs on all forms of cruelty. The latter is a negative virtue. The commandment is parallel to that of not slaughtering the calf on the same day as its mother. It is in line with what we learned in the oral Torah that the reason ritual slaughter of animals has to be performed by cutting the animal’s throat is because this is the least painful method of killing the beast. Killing the animal by hitting it on the neck (such as the עגלה ערופה)  is much more painful. The foregoing is the opinion of Maimonides in his Moreh Nevuchim, and I have already mentioned part of it earlier.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words שלח תשלח את האם are a reference to the emanation בינה, the source from which the lower seven emanations derive their spiritual input in every seven year (שמטה) cycle to renew  the face of the earth. The earth is the קן העולם, the nest of the world. It is known as אם העולם, “mother of the nest (world),” like the “mother bird,” seeing it hatches all creatures.
    You will find the following comment in the Sefer Habahir item 104:  Rabbi Rechumai said the reason that the Torah commands שלח תשלח את האם, “be sure to dispatch the mother,” whereas it does not say that one must dispatch the father bird, is to render recognition and give honour to the “mother” of the world seeing that the emanation בינה is perceived as the emanation everyone calls out for as we know from Proverbs 2,3 כי אם לבינה תקרא, “for you call out for insight.” [this may also be an allusion to Proverbs  1,8: ואל תטוש תורת אמך “do not abandon the teachings of your mother.” Ed.]
    The emanation בינה as the emanation immediately “above” the lower seven emanations each of which symbolises one of the seven days of creation, is perceived as the mother, i.e. the one giving birth to these other seven emanations. Ed.
    Concerning the words ואת הבנים תקח לך the same Rabbi Rechumai writes that it refers to the בנים she has raised. This is a reference to the seven days of the week and the seven days of Sukkot. Thus far Sefer Habahir.
    The dispatch of the mother bird legislated here applies only to pure birds, i.e. the ones permitted for consumption by Jews. This is a compliment and a form of religious service for these birds as they are considered above and beyond the domain of the seven days of creation, a domain which has not been completed (limited) by a number being given to it. [The reference appears to be to the emanation בינה, which is “higher” than the seven emanations below it. Ed.] A parallel to this is found in Psalms 147,8 ולתבונתו אין מספרת, “its insight has not been assigned a number such as have the days (which would limit it). Ed.] Not only the emanation בינה but also the tenth emanation מלכות, (from כתר down) is known as אם as we know from the fifth commandment כבד את אביך ואת אמך, a commandment addressed to people in that sphere. [I assume that the word ואת in that commandment provides the linkage between בינה and מלכות. Ed.]
    Our sages in Berachot 35 citing Proverbs 28,24 where Solomon lambasts those who rob father and mother, speak about man robbing G’d (in connection with enjoying food etc., without first reciting a benediction). The reason the simile is extended to both father and mother [who cannot both represent G’d. Ed.] is that “father” refers to Hashem, whereas “mother” refers to כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of the people of Israel.
    The Torah promises long life as the reward for fulfilling both the commandment of honouring father and mother and the commandment of dispatching the mother bird. The only difference in the wording of the reward is that in connection with honouring father and mother the “long life” is promised על האדמה, an expression repeated in connection with having true weights (Deut. 25,15). In connection with our commandment the words על האדמה “on the earth” are missing, suggesting that the Torah speaks of extra terrestrial life in the hereafter, or as the sages put it “in a world which is all long life.” 
    The meaning of the words והארכת ימים is a reference to the תאריך אף מן הימים, “you will also enjoy other days,” i.e. after the world limited to ששת ימים, the six days of creation has come to an end.
    There is also a different approach concerning this commandment, i.e. that the reward promised extends to the entire world seeing that the very chasing away of the mother bird awakens feelings of concern, worry and pity in her seeing she suspects something will happen to her chicks. It is these feelings and the appeal to G’d which they engender that triggers G’d’s largesse for His creatures on earth. Seeing that the mother bird is trying to take her own life due to her anguish, the angel in charge of all the birds is aroused asking G’d’s mercy for her. At that point, Hashem, Who is known as רחמיו על כל מעשיו “extending His mercy to all His works,” (Psalms 145,9) is activated to extend this mercy in increasing amounts to all creatures experiencing anguish. Looked at from this vantage point, you may conclude that the effects of fulfilling this commandment are indeed very far ranging, so much so that it triggers mercy for all the inhabitants of this world. This is the extended meaning of the words למען ייטב לך והארכת ימים, i.e. the dispatch of the mother bird will be good for you in that it results in your life span being extended. An extension of one’s life span is always due to the attribute of Mercy having been invoked.
    I have found the following in Devarim Rabbah 6,3: “the reward for fulfilling the commandment of dispatching the mother bird are children (being granted them).” G’d formulated this reward as follows: ‘if you presently do not have children, I will grant you children.’ How is all this contained in the wording of the text? The Torah writes שלח תשלח את האם ואת הבנים תקח לך, “if you will surely dispatch the mother you will be able to acquire the children for yourself.” This Midrash alludes to the mystical aspect of this commandment I already discussed.
    This also clarifies that the emanation (attribute) בינה is the one responsible for the granting or denying of children. This is the meaning of the peculiar expression ותתפלל על ה' reported in Samuel I 1,10 where Channah is described as praying for children. We would have expected the text to say ותתפלל חנה אל ה', that Channah prayed “to the Lord,” not על ה'. The expression על ה' suggests a domain above that of the seven lower emanations, a domain of a world which is totally good, totally enduring, everlasting. This is implied in the words והתענג על ה', (Psalms 37,4) where the psalmist says: “seek favour of the Lord and He will grant you the desires of your heart.” If one penetrates to that emanation, to that attribute of G’d, one will have one’s wish for children granted.
    Seeing that this is so the legislation before us concludes with the words למען ייטב לך והארכת ימים, “so that it will be good for you and you will enjoy long life.” We have learned in Niddah 70 “what is a person to do in order to be endowed with wisdom?” Let him ask for mercy from the One Who owns wisdom, for it is written וה' יתן חכמה, “the Lord will grant wisdom” (Proverbs 2,6). The Talmud there continues: “what is someone to do who yearns to have children?” “Let him ask for mercy from the One to whom the children belong.” as we know from Psalms 127,3: “sons are the provisions of the Lord, the fruit of the womb, His reward.”
    It is worthwhile to analyse in this saying how the sages arranged the requirements (objects of prayer) in the descending order of the emanations. [wisdom is stored in the higher emanation חכמה, followed by the next lower emanation  בינה, which is the source of children. Ed]
    This commandment belongs to the category we described earlier as מקובלות, [the author had divided the commandments into three groups, מושכלות, מקובלות,חוקים, compare beginning of commentary on Parshat Chukat Ed.] Normally, the sages instituted a benediction to be recited prior to the performance of any of the commandments which the  author described as מקובלות. We do not know of any such benediction before the performance of this commandment. Why is this so? The reason is that it is not one of the commandments man should strive to fulfil, seek out opportunities to observe. If the occasion arises, the commandment needs to be fulfilled. This is why the whole paragraph is introduced with the words כי יקרה, “if it so happens.” Even if the opportunity arises, this commandment applies only if the finder wants to take the eggs or chicks for himself.
    22,8. ועשית מעקה לגגך, “you are to make a railing on the roof of your house.” According to the plain meaning of the text the commandment is an example of how one is to guard against dangers to life and limb posed by one’s property. It is similar to the general statement in Deut. 4,9: “only beware for yourself and greatly beware for your life.” Seeing that such considerations are  a major concern of the Torah, the Torah here legislates the affixing of a railing to the edge of one’s roof so that if someone falls off it the owner cannot be accused of negligence. The sages taught us as a corollary of this commandment that if someone  raises a dog trained to bite in his house, or he puts a shaky ladder inside his house (for climbing the upper floor)  he is liable for harm caused thereby (Ketuvot 41).
    A Midrashic approach based on Shabbat 32, the sequence of the words ועשית מעקה לגגך ....כי יפול הנופל ממו, “you shall erect a railing on your roof....so that if someone falls  from it.” These latter words mean that if someone falls from that roof this has already been foreseen since the days of creation, i.e. he would not fall unless that was his fate. However, you have to do your  duty so that you will not be perceived to be the cause of his fall. What this Midrash is trying to illustrate is that all creatures at the time of their creation which occurred in accordance with their will and their aspirations, were informed by G’d at that time of all that will befall them in the course of their lives. Similarly, He informs them of the number of years they are going to live and what the manner of their death is going to be. They are also informed if they will enjoy an easy livelihood, or if they will have to fight and suffer in order to eke out a living. G’d tells them if they will be dependent on handouts or will be able to make a living by their own skills and labours. This is also what the sages had in mind (Chulin 60) that all creatures were created with a complete itinerary for their lives mapped out. (my translation Ed.) The sages based this on Genesis 2,1 וכל צבאם “complete with all their hosts,” At that time those creatures were all satisfied with what fate was to have in store for them. This is the meaning of: “he had been programmed to fall from this roof ever since the six days of creation.” In spite of 
2eople having been programmed, it is a great sin if by failing to erect a railing someone fell to the ground from that roof and was killed. This is quite independent of that person having been meant to die in such a fashion on such a date. Seeing this is so the legislation makes sense, after all.
    A kabbalistic approach: seeing that in connection with the commandment to dispatch the mother bird the Torah had alluded to the emanation בינה which presided over the other seven emanations as does a mother who has raised seven children, it had now become necessary to mention the emanation חכמה and יראה in connection with this commandment in order to complete the cycle of ten emanations. These latter two emanations are closely linked to the emanation of בינה. The railing on the roof is a symbol of something which embraces all the other things within it. It is a reference therefore to a very lofty source. The roof needs to be enclosed by something of a lofty nature so that all that is within it does not separate and disintegrate into separate parts. This is what is meant when David said (Psalms 111,10) ראשית חכמה יראת ה', that the beginning of all wisdom is fear of the Lord, i.e. the recognition of the highest emanation כתר the אין סוף which surrounds all. This is what is meant when the author of the Yetzirah (1,4) speaks of עשר ולא תשעה, ”Ten, and not Nine.” [I believe the author means that if one forgets for even one moment the existence and function of the tenth and highest emanation, the result will be heresy and the blood guilt resulting from that. Hence the need for the linkage between the emanation בינה which was central to the last-mentioned commandment, and the emanations חכמה  and בינה alluded to in this commandment. Ed.] The words כי יפול  תפול ממנו, are a warning of what would happen to the spiritual niveau of a Jew who fails to keep such considerations uppermost in his mind. It is an indirect reference to Elisha ben Avuyah who became a victim of this failure to heed David’s warning about the primacy of יראת ה'. [I have paraphrased the author in this paragraph. Ed.] (compare Chagigah 14) Even though Elisha ben Avuyah did not literally “fall off a roof,” seeing that he lost his faith in the nether regions, this is all the same thing and the “roof” is merely a convenient symbol for affixing a railing and “keeping it all together.” 
    
    22,9. לא תזרע כרמך כלאים, “Do not sow additional species of seed in the midst of your vineyard.” According to Kidushin 39 culpability for violating this commandment does not start unless one has taken wheat and barley in one’s hand together with kernels of grapes and flung them into the ground. The wording of our verse may be interpreted as follows: the word כרמך refers to the kernels of the grapes; the word כלאים refers to the mixture of wheat and barley. The reason the sages read this into the text is that the Torah wrote לא תזרע כרמך כלאים, instead of writing כרמך לא תזרע כלאים. They took their cue from Leviticus 19,19 where the Torah wrote שדך לא תזרע כלאים, “your field you must not sow with a mixture of different species of seeds.” Had the Torah used a similar way of phrasing our verse, I would have understood that throwing grain seed into an existing vineyard or one which had already been sown with grape-seeds makes the party doing that culpable for violating this prohibition.
    If someone sows the three kinds of seeds we mentioned simultaneously he will be receiving 39 lashes twice, once because he violated the prohibition in Leviticus 19,19, and once for ignoring the prohibition in our verse here. Sowing grain seeds of different kinds in the earth is culpable only if this is done in Eretz Yisrael, whereas the prohibition of mixing grape kernels with other seed is world-wide, at least as a rabbinic decree. This is based on the additional words in our verse פן תקדש, “lest it become forbidden, out of bounds” (like sacred things). Our sages in Kidushin 56 read the words פן תקדש as if the Torah had written פן תוקד אש, “lest it will have to be burned in fire” (seeing its use is totally forbidden). The reason behind the prohibition of mixing these species reflects that what we do on earth has its impact in the celestial regions and will result in changes in those regions also. I have elaborated on this in my commentary on Leviticus 19,19 את חקותי תשמורו, 
    
    22,10. לא תחרוש בשור ובחמור יחדו, “You shall not plough with an ox and a donkey together.” The Torah merely uses the most likely example of pairing animals together which are mismatched, one being much weaker than the other. Any animals of two different species must not be used to jointly pull wagons, etc. (Sifri 231). Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes that the reason for this commandment is G’d’s concern and pity for His creatures, seeing that the physical strength of a donkey cannot be compared to that of an ox. According to his words our verse speaks only about donkeys and oxen not being paired together, not other animals. Ibn Ezra’s view does not coincide with that of our sages in Sifri. The principal reason of this commandment is that pairing different species in such a fashion leads to their mating (compare Maimonides Moreh Nevuchim 3,49), something that is an abomination in the eyes of G’d. It is customary for the farmer to bring his team of animals to a common stable which would facilitate mating and even giving birth to bastard animals (mutations) as a result of such mating. All such activities directly contradict G’d’s revealed plan for His universe when the Torah describes all the species as having been created למיניהם, למינהו, למינה, i.e. strictly in adherence to their genetic properties. Further evidence that this must be the reason which prompted the Torah in formulating this legislation is the fact that it is sandwiched between two commandments concerned with maintaining the purity of species, i.e. men and women remaining distinguishable by their clothing, and the subsequent prohibition of mixing wool and linen. 
    The prohibition dealing with not mixing different species extends to three spheres. 1) the soil, i.e. not  planting species together, or grafting species onto one another; 2) not to try and mate different species of animals together [even if the vast majority could not produce offspring from such mating due to genetic incompatibility. Ed.] 3) mixing flax and wool in clothing. In Leviticus chapter 19 all these three categories appear in a single verse (19) “You shall observe My statutes; you shall not mate your animal to another species; you shall not plant your field with mixed seed; a garment which is a mixture of combined fibers (of wool and linen) shall not come upon you.”
    
    22,11.לא תלבש שעטנז צמר ופשתים יחדו , “do not wear a mixture, i.e. wool and linen together.” The Torah forbids this mixture only when woven together or sewn together. This is the meaning of יחדו. It is perfectly in order, however, to wear a linen shirt underneath a woollen jacket. (Maimonides Hilchot Kilayim 10,11). It is also permitted to sew together the skins of animals producing wool with linen threads, seeing that this does not constitute a garment. We discussed the mystical aspects of this commandment in Leviticus 19,19.
    
    22,12.גדלים תעשה לך , you shall make for yourselves twisted threads;” here the tzitzit are referred to as gedilim. Our sages in Yevamot 4 cite a tradition that the appearance of this commandment in a positive connotation immediately after the prohibition of mixing wool and linen is to teach us that for the purpose of tzitzit this prohibition has been waived. The Talmud concludes that the appearance of certain legislation immediately after another legislation has halachic implications and is a legitimate exegetical tool (דרשינן סמוכים). The reasoning goes as follows: “if the Torah had not wanted to permit a mixture of wool and linen threads as the integral parts of the tzitzit, why would the prohibition of kilayim have to be repeated here? We already discussed the mystical aspect of the commandment of making and wearing tzitzit in Numbers 15,38.
    The expression גדלים chosen by the Torah here to describe these tassels, fringes, is an allusion to Psalms 104,1: ה' אלו-הי גדלת מאד הוד והדר לבשת, “O Lord, my G’d, You are very great; You are clothed in glory and majesty.” When someone wears tziztiyot, i.e. 32 twisted threads, this is an allusion to the 32 paths of wisdom (discussed in the latter part of Numbers 15,38)
   על ארבע כנפות כסותך “on the four corners of your garment.” Seeing that in Numbers 15,38 the Torah wrote vaguely that the tzitziyot should be על כנפי בגדיהם, “on the corners of their garments,” I would have thought that every garment is to have tzitziyot. This is why the Torah had to be more precise here and tell us that the legislation applies only to garments with four corners. Any garment having fewer than 4 corners is not subject to this legislation, whereas any garment having more than four corners requires to be equipped with tzitziyot in order that it may be worn (Maimonides Hilchot Tzitzit 3,3). Our sages in Menachot 46 derive this from the additional words אשר תכסה בה, “which you cover yourself with.” The reason these words are not used to include three-cornered garments which are large enough to cover you is that four is not part of  three, whereas four is part of five. 
    
    22,17. ופרשו השמלה, “and they will spread out the sheet.” According to Rashi the word “sheet” is to be understood allegorically; i.e. the parents bring proof of their daughter’s virginity by all the means at their disposal.
    Nachmanides understands the word שמלה, literally, arguing that if it were not so why would the mother come to court at all, it would be enough for the father to come to court to defend the honour of his daughter. True, the mother is not a litigant in the matter. However, precisely because the word “sheet” is to be understood literally, and women are more experienced in interpreting stains on sheets than are men, her explanations are relevant. We must understand the preceding verse (15) ”the father and mother of the girl take her and display evidence of the virginity of the girl in the presence of the elders of the city, to the gate (court).” At that point the Torah mentioned both the father’s and the mother’s presence at court, whereas in verse 16 only the father speaks to the elders of the city. Subsequent to this, in verse 17 both father and mother are involved i.e. ופרשו in displaying the sheet. The physical evidence is submitted after the father had presented his arguments in the absence of the mother. Thus far Nachmanides.
    Concerning the penalty of 100 silver pieces levied against the husband who slandered the reputation of his bride, Maimonides writes in Moreh Nevuchim 3,49: “seeing that the standard dowry of a virgin is 50 silver pieces (verse 29) and this husband had tried to make her lose her כתובה, her marriage settlement and wanted to divorce her without paying her a penny, the Torah treats him like a thief who has to make restitution of twice the value of the object he has stolen” (Exodus 22,8). Even though, in this case, the husband did not get to carry out his intention, we have a precedent of other witnesses being punished in accordance with the damage they wanted to cause the intended victim in Deut. 19,19 where the Torah discusses עדים זוממים. The corporal  punishment administered to him reflects the fact that he tried to assassinate her character, to demean her; therefore her husband is being demeaned by having this corporal punishment inflicted upon him publicly. Seeing he wanted to betray her, divorce her without compensation, he is not allowed to divorce her ever, the opposite of his intent.
    
    22,15. ולקח אבי הנערה, “the father and the mother of the girl shall take.” if they are alive; if the girl is an orphan, an appointee of the court performs the services of father and mother. (Ibn Ezra).
    
    22,22.ומתו גם שניהם האיש השוכב עם אשה , “they shall both die, the man who sleeps with a woman.” if the woman was a married woman at the time. The word והאשה “and the woman,” which appears superfluous seeing the Torah wrote that “both are to die; is to tell us that the man is considered more guilty than the woman. If she had been considered equally guilty, the Torah should have added the word הנשכבת, “who had been slept with.” This is the opinion of Nachmanides.
    Our sages in Kidushin 10 understand the words ומתו גם שניהם to mean that both man and woman are equally guilty, i.e. both are adults. If the woman was a minor, she is not to be executed. In Erchin 7 these words are interpreted as referring to any fetus inside the woman. If a woman is pregnant and her labour pains have commenced before she has been sentenced, the court waits until after she has given birth before carrying out the sentence. If she had not reached that stage in her pregnancy her status does not result in a delay of her execution. [the reason is that once the baby (fetus) showed signs of wanting to move out of its mother it is considered a separate body.]
    
    22,24. על דבר אשר ענה, “on account of his having violated (raped) the wife of his fellow.” We would have expected the Torah to write: “on account of his having slept with his fellow’s wife.” If he had to use force to make her submit, she is a victim of violence and innocent. How then could the Torah punish her with death by stoning? The reason the Torah describes the man as having violated her, forced her, is that the Torah considers the male as if he had raped her, whereas she is considered as if she had been quite willing to engage in this encounter. Seeing the incident occurred in town where her cries for help would likely have resulted in her being rescued she is guilty of death for failing to cry out. The man, on the other hand, is treated as if he had violated her against her will instead of having merely seduced her first, and we apply the death penalty to him.
    If the Torah mentions “city” and “field” as the locations where these illicit sexual unions take place, this is not to be understood literally, i.e. that only adultery by consent in the city makes the woman guilty of the death penalty, whereas she is free from guilt only if she had been raped in the field. The words “field” and “city” are illustrations of a likely scenario. If a woman was raped in the city she is most certainly not convicted, whereas if she chose to commit adultery in the field she is most certainly a candidate for the death penalty. In the final analysis both parties’ fate depends on the testimony of the witnesses.
    
    22,26. כי כאשר יקום איש על רעהו, “for like a man who rises up against his fellow,” in Sanhedrin 74 our sages explained to us why the Torah describes the situation of the נערה המאורסה, the betrothed girl who became the victim of a rapist in the field, in such a cumbersome fashion, using such a parable comparing the situation to murder. We would have assumed that all the Torah had to say is that she cried out to no avail  According to the Talmud, the Torah wanted to teach us that the two crimes, murder and rape, have features in common which enable us to apply the law applicable in one situation to the other situation in a reciprocal manner, i.e. the language of our sages: הרי זה בא ללמד ונמצא למד. The law of the murderer contains elements which are applicable to the law pertaining to rape, whereas the law of rape contains elements which we can apply to the law about murder.
    Just as one must prefer to suffer death rather than commit the sin of murder based on the dictum of Rava: ‘who said that your blood is redder than that of the person you are asked to kill in order to stay alive,” so if someone threatens you with death unless you rape a woman you must rather suffer death than commit that crime. This law applies even if the woman to be raped is not married.
    Our sages in Sanhedrin 75 tell of an incident when some man  became love-sick over unrequited love. When his family turned to the doctors to ask how he could be cured, the doctor said that until he would have his craving indulged, i.e. sleep with the woman in question, he could not be cured. The Rabbis ruled it would be better that he die than that the woman submit to his sexual advances. In reply to the question whether at least he could have his libido assuaged by seeing the woman in question in the nude, the Rabbis were adamant, refusing that the woman in question expose herself to that man. In answer to the further question whether the woman could talk to that man from behind a fence, the rabbis did not even permit this either. (there is a dispute in the Talmud whether the lady in question was married or not) Nonetheless, the reason given by the scholars who refused the girl in question to even speak to the infatuated man from behind a fence gave as their reason  that it is not permissible to expose the girl’s family to shame on account of someone who cannot control his libido. Even speaking to the individual from behind a fence is considered as equivalent to closeting herself with him.
    Seeing that the Torah adds the comment that there was no one to act as the rapist’s victim’s saviour, it appears that had there been such a person nearby he would have been obligated to save the girl from being raped even if the saviour would have had to kill the rapist to be. The same holds true, of course, in the case of saving a potential murder victim from his assailant by killing him. When one observes a situation which will result in murder unless one stops the murderer by any means available one must use all such means including killing the potential murderer. This is also the reason why when a woman who is in labour and is likely to die unless the baby about to be born is killed, must be saved at the expense of the life of the infant about to be born. The general rule is that it is permissible or obligatory to kill a רודף, someone clearly intending to kill an innocent person. The latter rule obtains only until the baby’s head and the greater part of its body has left the mother’s womb. Once this has happened halachah treats both mother and baby as separate lives and it is forbidden to save one at the expense of the other. We have confirmation of these rulings in Oholot 6,6 where the Mishnah teaches that in order to save the life of a mother in distress due to difficulty in giving birth one may remove organs of the fetus piece by piece from the womb seeing her life takes precedence over that of an unborn child. However, if the greater part of the baby had already emerged, one may not decide which life to save and has to leave this to natural forces.
    The question is asked in the Talmud there: “why can we not save the life of the mother in the aforementioned situation seeing that we have a rule that if a minor is a potential murderer, in the act of perpetrating murder, that he may be stopped at the cost of his life? Why is this infant different from that situation? The answer given is that the infant in the process of being born is not viewed as someone bent on murder as it is his natural function to emerge from the womb for the sake of its own life. He is as if programmed by heaven to be in a life-threatening position vis-a-vis his mother.
    The reason that the Torah in our verse describes the victim of the rape as צעקה, having cried out for help, (when in fact this is merely a presumption) is that she is viewed by the Torah as if she had cried out, i.e. the Torah gives her the benefit of the doubt. (Ibn Ezra) Alternatively, the meaning of the words is ”if she had cried out there would have been no one to help her.” In other words, she is not charged as even if there is evidence that she had not called out this was due to the knowledge that it would have been useless.
    23,1. לא יקח איש את אשת אביו, A man must not marry the wife of his father.” The reference is to a woman whom his father had once raped. This explains why this verse is appended to the subject of rape just discussed.
   ולא יגלה כנף אביו, ”and he shall not uncover the robe of his father.” The reference is to a woman who is slated to become his father’s wife as she was widowed from a brother of his father who had no children.
    
23,2. פצוע דכה, “someone whose testicles have been crushed;” even if only one of his testicles has been crushed. (Yevamot 75). 
   וכרות שפכה, “or whose male organ has been severed.” The reason the Torah employs the word שפכה, “poured out,” is that this organ serves to discharge either urine or semen.
   בקהל ה', “into the congregation of Hashem.” This does not refer to his religion but to the fact that such a person must not consider himself entitled to marry a natural born Jewish woman (Ibn Ezra). The reason is that his physical condition prevents him from fulfilling the primary function of marriage, that of begetting children. In the words of Isaiah 45,18: “G’d did not create earth in order for it to remain void; rather He created it in order to be populated.”  Seeing the type of injuries mentioned here preclude the husband from fulfilling this commandment the marriage would be deemed futile from the start.
    Seeing that the Torah writes that such people must not come בקהל ה', “into the congregation of the Lord,” it would appear that they may marry a woman who does not fulfill that criterion, i.e. a convert or a freed slave (Yevamot 70). Had the Torah wanted to forbid marriage outright for these people whose virility is impaired it would have written: “he must not marry a woman.” Had the Torah used such terminology I would have concluded that any sexual intercourse which is not potentially capable of resulting in the woman becoming pregnant is forbidden. Now that the Torah prohibited only בקהל ה', it is clear that sexual intercourse is permitted even if its purpose is not to perpetuate the species.
    
    23,3. לא יבא ממזר בקהל ה', “A bastard must not enter the congregation of the Lord.” He is not allowed to marry a natural born Jewess but is permitted to marry a convert (Maimonides Hilchot Issurey Biah 15,7) seeing the Torah only forbade entry into קהל ה',  and a congregation of converts is not considered קהל ה'.  A “bastard” is someone born of the type of illegal union which is punishable by the penalty of karet according to Torah law, or people who sired children after having been legally sentenced to death by a Jewish court (the exception is the child born from a union while the mother was menstruous). The term ממזר is a contraction of the words מום זר, “a blemish making him an outsider” (compare Jerusalem Talmud Kidushin 3,12).

    23,5. על דבר אשר לא קדמו אתכם בלחם ובמים, “because of the fact that they did not meet you with bread and water.” It is elementary courtesy to welcome people who are journeying with offers of food and drink. It is irrelevant that the Israelites did not lack any of their basic needs while they were in the desert. After all, the manna descended for them daily, and Miriam’s well travelled with them wherever they moved.
    Nachmanides writes as follows: the Torah made sure that there is a clear separation between these two brothers (Ammon and Moav) on the one side and the Jewish people on the other, seeing these brothers who owed their very existence to the acts of charity and kindness performed for their father and mothers by Avraham, founder of the Jewish people who had battled the mightiest kings of his time merely to get Lot released from captivity (Genesis 19,29). How did they repay that favour? One of them hired the prophet Bileam to curse the Jewish nation and the other failed to offer the basic necessities of life to the people who were their cousins travelling through the desert. Of the two, Ammon had sinned more greatly against the Jewish people seeing that the Moabites as well as the Edomites (who knew that G’d had forbidden the Jewish people to harass them) offered food against payment (Deut 2,29). Ammon did not; this is the meaning of “for they did not meet you with bread and water.” The Torah therefore mentions Ammon first (although historically he was junior to Moav). The Torah also lists Ammon’s sin first and only afterwards reminds us that Moav had hired Bileam to curse us .
    Our sages in Yevamot 76 conclude that this exclusion from becoming members of the Jewish people is applicable only to the males of that nation, i.e. מואבי ולא מואבית. The reason is that it is the custom for men to extend greetings with bread and water, whereas it is the custom of the women to be busy in their homes. 
    This accounts for the fact that Rurth, the Moabite, was allowed to convert. As a rsult, eventually, David was born.
    23,8. לא תתעב אדומי, “Do not abhor the Edomite.” The Torah implies that though we would have reason to abhor this people seeing that they assumed a threatening posture against us (Numbers 20,18) nonetheless we are not to hold this against subsequent generations of Edomites. seeing there is a blood bond between our two nations, both being descendants of our patriarch Yitzchak. Neither must we detest the Egyptians although they drowned our boy babies; the fact remains that at a crucial point in our history Egypt offered a home to our people at a time when Yaakov’s family was in reduced circumstances (compare Rashi). Seeing that each of these nations had been guilty of grievous sins against the Jewish people only the third generation (after the Exodus) of these people are potential candidates for conversion to Judaism. By that time they may have become more refined. We are to detest  Ammon and Moav, by contrast, seeing they seduced the Jewish people into sin, The Torah goes out of its way to prohibit us from seeking the welfare of these nations.
    These verses gave rise to our sage in Sifri 252 to rule that seducing someone into sin is a more grievous sin that killing him seeing that the murderer robs the victim only of life on this terrestrial sphere whereas the seducer robs him of his eternity.
    23,10. ונשמרת מכל דבר רע, ”you shall guard against anything evil.” This is a warning not to insult the sanctity of the Holy Ark, (which while in the Sanctuary was automatically protected against such improper behaviour by the walls of the Sanctuary). When in the camp of the soldiers during war it was not surrounded by walls shielding its sanctity. (Numbers 31,6) 
    According to the plain meaning of the text, the words מכל דבר רע mean: “against anything which the Torah has prohibited.” When the Canaanites went to war all their normal restraints against unbridled behaviour were suspended during the period of the war. They would behave in a totally irresponsible manner, The Jewish people have to be reminded that even in war, their camp is a holy camp as opposed to the Canaanites.
    Our sages in Sifri 254 understand the words מכל דבר רע as directed at sexual licentiousness which is so often the mark of soldiers in war. Another meaning of דבר רע, is “using one’s tongue loosely, irresponsibly, לשון הרע, badmouthing others.” They derive the warning against sexual licentiousness from the words ולא יראה בך ערות דבר, the word דבר being an allusion to that verse 15. The connection with לשון הרע is based on the word רע in our verse. Instead of דבר רע, assume the spelling would have been dibbur ra, “wicked talk.” The reason this verse warns specifically against these two sins is that each one is an extremely serious sin and the Presence of G’d, the Shechinah is apt to withdraw from the camp on its account.
    Our sages in Avodah Zarah 20 also comment that the wording of that line suggests that one should not have sinful (lewd) thoughts by day which would result in one’s having nocturnal emissions of semen during one’s sleep. This is why the next verse discusses such an occurrence and the need to purify oneself as a result.
    Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair (the epitome of piety) derives from the sequence of our verses here that care not to violate a negative commandment will lead to a person becoming eager in striving to fulfill positive commandments. This is turn will lead to one becoming ritually pure of body. The next stage of one’s spiritual ascent will be פרישות, suppression of sinful thoughts. This in turn will lead to a state of purity of spirit followed by the attainment of a level of sanctity. Having attained that level one will graduate to יראת חטא, an abhorrence of sin, which in turn will lead to the virtue of humility. Once a person has acquired this virtue he will progress to the virtue of piety which in turn will enable him to acquire holy spirit. In the foregoing the venerable Rabbi listed ten virtues, five of which involving one’s body, the other five involving one’s spirit, one’s mind. All of them are leading up to the tenth attribute, i.e. holy spirit.
    
    23,14. ויתד תהיה לך על אזנך, “you are to have a shovel in addition to your gear (weapons).” The letter א at the beginning of the word אזנך is an addition, not part of the root. The basic word is זין, weaponry. The shovel is supposed to be an integral part of your equipment in war, no less important than your weapons. This commandment reflects he spiritually high level of a Jewish camp. It reflects the awareness by the Jewish soldiers that the Shechinah is in their midst. At the same time, the need for the shovel indicates that the Torah speaks of a period when the people had already become guilty of sins seeing that during the years when they did not sin there was no need for a shovel as the manna was completely absorbed by their bodies so that there was no excrement which had to be covered up. Not only that, but it also absorbed the taste of other foods. After the Israelites had begun to sin, they did need shovels to clean up after themselves. I have already discussed this matter in Numbers 11,5.
    Our sages in Yuma 75 explain that when the Israelites defecated they did not do so sideways or forwards but behind themselves so as not to expose their excrement to the clouds of glory which accompanied the Israelites on both their flanks and in front of them.
    
    23,16. לא תסגיר עבד אל אדוניו, “Do not extradite a slave to his master.” The master the Torah speaks about here is a Gentile. The slave has fled from outside the boundaries of the land of Israel and sought refuge in the land of Israel. It is forbidden to hand over such a slave to anywhere outside of Eretz Yisrael out of love and fondness for the land of Israel. The court, or other authorities, force the owner to write a document releasing the slave in question and to free him to an Israelite. The former slave will sign a document in return obligating himself to compensate his former master accordingly (compare Gittin 45).
    
    23,18. לא תהיה קדש, “there must not be a harlot amongst the daughters of Israel.” This is the prohibition for women not to be sleeping around, and the second half of the verse applies equally to men and is an instruction to the court not to allow men or women to offer their sexual services on the streets. 
    
    23,20. לא תשיך לאחיך, “Do not pay interest to your brother.” This is a warning (prohibition) for the borrower not to pay interest for a loan received from a Jew. The corresponding prohibition for the lender not to charge interest on loans to Jews is found In Leviticus 25,37: “do not give him your money against interest.” The reason that interest is called נשך by the Torah is the verse in Kohelet 10,11 אם ישוך הנחש, “if the snake bites;” that it is something which “bites” the borrower. It is as poisonous as a snake bite, i.e. נחש. Just as the poison of the snake enters the victim and afflicts his various organs so agent chosen as  punishment for this sin will attack the property of the lender as tit-for tat.
   נשך כל דבר, “interest of any kind.” Even words could be understood as interest payments or charges. This is how the Talmud in Baba Metzia 75 describes it: “how do we know that if someone has extended a loan to his fellow, and the borrower had not been in the habit of greeting the lender when he saw him on the street, that it is forbidden for him to make a point of being the first one to extend a greeting to the lender? it says ‘interest of any kind.’” Even using words to ingratiate oneself with the lender is forbidden. It is an overriding rule concerning anything of direct or indirect benefit to the lender that it is forbidden for the borrower to do now that he is a debtor.
    
    23,21. לנכרי תשיך, “to the Gentile you may (or must) charge interest.” The prohibition of charging a Jewish borrower interest is at the same time a positive commandment to charge a Gentile interest on loans extended to him. Maimonides, in Hilchot malveh veloveh 5,1 rules that our verse is definitely a positive commandment, not merely permission to accept interest from a Gentile borrower. Others, such as Ibn Ezra, interpret our verse as merely granting permission to charge interest to Gentile borrowers. This statement is supposed to be similar to that of ששת ימים תעבוד, “during six days you are to work” (Exodus 20,9) which is a permission. The Torah permitted loans to Gentiles, and it permitted charging interest on those loans.
    When the Talmud in Makkot 24 states that the words בספו לא נתן לנשך, “he has never lent money at interest” (Psalms 15,5) includes that the person referred to has not charged interest to a Gentile, this is not to be understood as a prohibition but is a voluntary restriction imposed upon himself by the lender. A person practicing such virtues will attain the spiritual level described as desirable in that psalm.
    A statement by our sages in Baba Metzia 71 that it is forbidden to lend to a Gentile against excessive interest except if the lender was a Torah scholar, has to be understood against the following background. [the whole passage is strange, compare Rashi and Tossaphot. It is assumed that the Gentile had called the Jew “wicked,” had insulted him. Ed.] Ordinary Jews may not charge an amount of interest which would reduce the income (net) of such a Gentile by more than a third. The restriction is designed to ensure that Jewish lenders do not learn bad habits from the Gentiles. Torah scholars are not presumed to copy such bad habits. When the Sifri writes that the words לנכרי תשיך are a positive commandment, the meaning is not that the Torah imposes an obligation on an Israelite to grant loans to, and to charge interest to Gentiles, but it addresses itself (obliquely) to the Israelite charging interest on a loan to a fellow Jew as also being guilty of violating a positive commandment, (not merely a negative commandment). The verse contrasts conduct vis-a-vis a Gentile with that towards an Israelite. The words “to a Gentile you must charge interest,” are a restatement of the prohibition not to do so to a fellow Israelite. It is something called לאו הבא מכלל עשה, “a negative commandment implied in a positive commandment.”
    In a similar fashion we find that Sifri Re-ay 103 understands the commandment  “these you may eat” dealing with permissible fish  (Deut. 14,9) as meaning that all the fish not enumerated in that verse as possessing certain identifying marks such as fins and scales are forbidden for Jews to eat. The line: “these you may eat,” certainly does not mean: “these you must eat.” The Torah simply says that if we eat fish which do not have fins and scales we have  violated a positive commandment called “these you may eat.” At the same time one has violated the negative commandment “these you must not eat,” which is appended to “all those which do not have, etc.” The same holds true for the commandment dealing with interest in our Parshah. Our sages interpret the words ולאחיך לו תשיך, “and to your brother you must not charge interest,“ as referring to people acting like your brother, i.e. including recent converts, people who have now become like your brother seeing they are bound by the same rules of conduct as your brothers. At the same time this phraseology excludes the descendants of Esau as, though they are biologically related, they do not adopt the rules of conduct of your brethren. Hence one may or must charge interest on loans made to Edomites. Although in Numbers 20,14 Moses had described the Jewish people as “your brothers,” when speaking to the Edomites, the legal status of these people changed after they demonstrated that they did not consider themselves as “brothers.” It became perfectly permissible to charge interest on loans to Edomites. There is a statement by the prophet Ovadiah 11 ”on that day when you stood aloof, when aliens carried off his goods, when foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were as one of them.” This underscores the point we just made. 
    The whole reason for the prohibition of charging interest is based on our obligation to keep fellow Jews alive, to relate to them with deeds of loving kindness seeing the Torah wrote וחי אחיך עמך, “ensure that your brother will be able to live alongside you” (Leviticus 25,36). No such directive exists concerning Gentiles. A Jew who has decided to practice idolatry is also not subject to the law not to charge interest on loans to him. Seeing that the Torah made it clear that such a person’s very body is unprotected by Biblical injunctions, his property is most certainly not protected by Torah law! We find confirmation of this in Avodah Zarah 26: “one may push drowning idolaters (Jews) down into the pit and one is not allowed to pull them up (in order to save their lives).” On the other hand, accepting loans from such people and paying interest on such loans is probably forbidden as opposed to natural born pagans. The reason is that the Jewish heretic was born with the obligation to conduct himself as Jew, whereas the same cannot be said of the natural born pagan. Our sages in Sifri Ha-azinu 308 interpret the word (Deut. 32,5) בניו מומם as meaning: “although they are blemished they are still His children;” in other words, loans accepted from such people are considered as loans extended by Jews. At the very least, if one accepts a loan from such a Jewish idolater one violates the negative commandment ולפני עור לא תתן מכשול, “do not place obstacles in the way of a blind person. “
    
    23,23. וכי תחדל לנדור, “if you refrain from making vows, etc.” There was no need to tell us that if one does not make vows that one will not become guilty of violating same, i.e. sinning; the words לא יהיה בך חטא, “you will not be guilty of a sin,” refer to what was written in verse 22, i.e. “if you make a vow, etc.”  The Torah warns that the very fact that you do make vows is what may lead to your ultimately becoming guilty of the sin of not honouring your vow or being late in honouring it. Unfulfilled vows are apt to cause numerous sins, especially if the vow was not unreservedly for the sake of heaven. Our sages at the beginning of the first chapter of Chulin (folio 2) interpret the verse in Kohelet 5,4 to mean that better than even keeping to the terms of the vow is not to make a vow in the first place. If one wants to bring an offering to G’d, one should do so at the time when one decides on it without first making a vow about it. (Nedarim 9). They also say in Nedarim 22 that even people who make vows and kept them on time are called “sinner.” They base themselves on this verse, i.e. that the only way to avoid being called “sinner” in relation to the subject of vows is by not making any vows.
    
    23,24. מוצא שפתיך תשמור ועשית,  “you must fulfill what has crossed your lips and perform it.” According to the plain meaning of the text, these words refer once more to the vows discussed previously. Up until now the Torah had only forbidden being late in honouring one’s vows but had not said anything about the vow having to be carried out. Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write something like: “when you make a vow, carry it out and do not be late in paying it.” The meaning of the words מוצא שפתיך, is the actual vow. The words תשמור ועשית, refer to carrying out all the conditions of the vow, i.e. כאשר נדרת לה' אלו-היך,  “as you vowed to the Lord your G’d in the free-willed gift of your heart.” The additional words אשר דברת בפיך “as you said with your mouth,” mean that you will not omit any detail of what you promised to do. 
    The Torah says all this to demonstrate how seriously it takes a vow. This is why the penalty for failing to keep such a commitment is so extreme, i.e. it is considered a sin against one’s soul. Compare Numbers 15,31 הנפש ההיא עונה בה, “that soul, his sin is upon him.” There are a few other instances where the Torah describes the ongoing sin in such terms such as when a poor person whom we have abused cries out to G’d in anguish about the treatment he has received from us when we held back his wages (Deut. 24,15). There are a few more such examples. The penalty may be that known as נפש תחת נפש, “a life for a life,” an example of the punishment matching the crime. When the Torah describes a sin in terms of involving נפש, you have to be on guard. Whenever the Torah uses the term נפש in such situations it is a reference to the life of the body of the sinner. Delaying payment of a vow is considered as a trespass against the essence of G’d [compare what author wrote in connection with Numbers 30,3 near the end of the kabbalistic approach where the author explained why a vow is something more serious than forbidding oneself something on oath, page 2300 our translation Ed.] This is why the Torah writes the unusual “for the Lord your G’d will demand it of you.” This is the essence of the “King” Who supervises all the details of what goes on. He demands accounting for blood spilled  (Psalms 9,13) both in this world and in the world to come. This is why the words דרוש ידרשנו  ה' אלו-היך מעמך have been repeated. 
    A Midrashic approach: on the line מוצא שפתיך תשמור ועשית, the first two words refer to the positive commandment, whereas the word תשמור refers to the negative commandment not to violate the terms of the vow. The word ועשית is an admonition to the court to ensure that you keep your vows. If for instance, you vowed to offer certain sacrifices, the court may force you to honour your vow by beating you until you respond by saying that you are willing to keep your vow. This is based on Leviticus 1,3 יקריב אותו לרצונו, “he will offer it (willingly),” as interpreted by Rosh Hashanah 6. If the subject of the vow were charitable donations the donor is most certainly forced to fork over what he had promised even if the court has to put up some of his property for sale to satisfy his vow (Rosh Hashanah 6). The delay permitted then is even shorter as the poor people for whom the donations were intended cannot afford to wait. The Talmud in Baba Batra 8 says that such taking of pledges from the donor to make good on his vows may even be performed on the Sabbath eve. The words כאשר נדרת refer to regular vows, whereas the subsequent words לה' אלו-היך refer to sin-offerings, guilt-offerings, burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings. The words ה' אלו-היך occur in connection with each one of those offerings. The word נדבה refers to a free-willed gift, as implied by the word. The words אשר דברת, refer to donations made to the Temple treasury, items not suitable for the altar. The word בפיך is a reference to charitable donations. The sages derive this meaning from Isaiah 45,23 יצא מפי צדקה דבר ולא ישוב, “from my mouth has issued forth righteousness, a word that shall not turn back.”y
    A kabbalistic approach: the words מוצא שפתיך correspond to פי ה'; just as man expects G’d to make good on what He promises, so G’d expects man to make good on his promises, even if these promises were not reinforced by an oath or something similar. The sages, in Shevuot 36 have said that when the word “no” appears twice this is equivalent to an oath. They illustrate this with Isaiah 54,9 אשר נשבעתי מעבור מי נח עוד על הארץ “as I swore that the waters of Noach nevermore would flood the earth, so I swear that I will not be angry, etc.” Also, when Noach had offered the sacrifice thanking G’d for his being saved from the deluge, the Torah speaks of G’d “smelling” the fragrance of the offering (Genesis 9,21) “I will not again curse the earth on account of man, and in the same verse, I will not again smite all living creatures as I have done.” This formulation is absolute and irrevocable. If the statement appears only once, though it is not an oath, it is nevertheless something that is binding on the person who has made it. This is why the sages in Baba Metzia 44 have stated that anyone who reneges on his promises invites the penalty of מי שפרע i.e. the same G’d who brought retribution on the generation of the deluge.
    They also said that we are all children of the Lord and have been sanctified by an oral covenant directed at the space between our ten fingers as well as the ten toes of the feet and the male organ. The mouth is the seventh orifice (from the head down) after the two eyes, the two ears and the two nostrils. We know that the number seven represents sanctity, both in terms of the Sabbath, the seventh heaven as ערבות, His abode, etc., etc. He has chosen the seventh day of the week as His holy day. He has chosen man’s mouth to be the instrument to sing the praises of His Holy Name. This is the reason for לא תחללו את שם קדשי, “do not desecrate My Holy Name,” (Leviticus 22,32). The mouth was given to us to pronounce the praises of the Lord, not to be used profanely. It is most inappropriate to abuse our lips to tell lies and thereby to deny one of the covenants G’d has made with us. The psalmist prides himself (Psalms 44,18) for not having been false to G’d’s covenant.
    When the Israelites transgressed commitments taken upon themselves with their mouths, Moses upraided them by saying: “why are you violating the covenant you have made with the Lord?” (Numbers 14,41) For all these reasons Moses says in our Parshah: “be sure to observe and carry out what emerges from your lips.” There is no need for us to be told here that we have to keep the negative and positive commandments which were commanded to us by G’d. Self-imposed vows rate higher than the commandments which we are obliged to keep without having volunteered to do so. The vows are holier than the ordinary commandments, this is why the Torah has to warn especially against not honouring them. This is what is meant by the words כאשר נדרת לה' אלו-היך נדבה, the inspiration to make these voluntary vows originates in the highest celestial regions and is known as the סוף הבנין, “the ultimate stage of the structure,” or the level of the emanation תפארת, the highest associated with anything even remotely physical. This is what is described as תרומה in Exodus 35,5 of which the Torah writes כל נדיב לבו יביאה את תרומת ה', “everyone whose heart prompts him will bring the offering of Hashem.” This generosity is part of what the people who heard the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai were imbued with as a result of that experience. This is meant by אשר דברת בפיך, i.e. “which you uttered with your mouth.” This is a reference to the קול, רוח, ודבור perceived by the people at Mount Sinai. This is what prompted the sages to interpret the words אשר דברת as being a reference to קדשי בדק הבית, items donated for the use of the Temple treasury. (compare Sifri)
    
    23.25. כי תבא בכרם רעך, “when you enter the vineyard of your fellow,” The Torah speaks of a worker hired to help with the harvesting of the grapes. (Baba Metzia 87) Our sages there continue to understand the wordכי תבא עליו השמש  (24,15) which clearly speaks of a worker, as proof that here too (only) a worker is meant. Otherwise, everyone could help himself to the grapes in any vineyard any time. This is also the way Onkelos translates our verse, i.e. ארי תתגר, “when a trader,” i.e. someone who has legitimate business in that vineyard.
   ואל כליך  לא תתן, “but you must not put any of it into your vessel.” This would be considered robbery. The Torah made a concession only concerning the desire of a person to eat on the job when he is tempted greatly to immediately gratify his appetite. Had the Torah not given its blessing to the labourer to eat ad hoc, he would have done so as a thief, something far worse. This is why the Torah adds the significant restriction כנפשך שבעך, “until you have satisfied your immediate craving.” The expression שבעך is reminiscent of Proverbs 13,25: “the righteous eats to his heart’s content;” Solomon means that he does not eat as a glutton, only to still his hunger. The same considerations apply to the labourer working in a grain field as outlined in verse 26. He must not use a tool (sickle) in order to cut down grain for personal consumption.
    
    24,1. כי יקח איש אשה ובעלה, When a man takes (marries) a woman and lives with her;”  the Torah speaks of two stages of acquiring the woman; 1) money or equivalent. 2) marital intercourse. Whenever the Torah speaks of כי יקח, the meaning is not that someone simply “takes,” but that he acquires something with money (or equivalent). Examples of the relationship between קיחה and money are already found when Avraham wanted to purchase the cave of Machpelah (Genesis 23,13) נתתי כסף השדה קח ממני, “I have deposited the money for the field, take it from me.” There is yet a third way in which one can acquire a woman, i.e. by means of a document. The Torah alludes to this in the very next verse when a divorce is discussed. Just as a document is required to dissolve the husband-wife relationship, otherwise the woman cannot be remarried, so a marriage may be concluded by means of such a document. The words ויצאה והיתה, “she leaves and she remarries” next to one another are understood as comparing the process of leaving a marriage to that of entering a marriage. (compare Kidushin 5) We therefore have three ways in which a woman can be acquired as pointed out at the beginning of tractate Kidushin.
    The exegetical tool known as גזרה שוה, “identical expressions comparing different subject matter” is so strong that it enables the sages to treat as a capital crime violation of a law derived at only by a comparison of such wording. If a girl who has not been betrothed engages in sexual relations she is not sentenced to death by the court. If she had been betrothed only by receiving the equivalent of some money, she is considered as legally married for the purpose of being sentenced to death by stoning for adultery, even though she never lived with her betrothed. This shows that the גזרה שוה is an extremely powerful exegetical tool. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Ishut 1,2 and the Talmud Kritut 5,1.) [In the Talmud there it is pointed out that although the subject of פגול, faulty intentions concerning the consumption of sacrifices, is a major part of the Torah, the penalty is arrived at only by means of a גזרה שוה. Ed.] All these ways of acquiring a woman have to be witnessed by two valid witnesses in order to be legal, although if the woman wants out of the marriage she may require a bill of divorce because her status had been in doubt. (Maimonides Hilchot Ishut 4,6) [witnesses to consummation of a marriage mean witnesses who testify that both parties had secreted themselves long enough for such consummation to be capable of having taken place. Ed.]
   ספר כריתות, “a book of dissolution.” According to the plain meaning of the text this “book” separates, divides, between the two parties that they will not have anything more in common with each other for all future time. A  divorce cannot be limited to a certain time frame, must be absolute, not conditional. If the husband were to say to his wife: “this document of divorce is valid on condition that you will never drink any wine,” this is not a bill of divorce. Even if he said: “on condition that you will not drink wine for the rest of your life,“ this also is not a valid divorce. If her husband said that the bill of divorce would be valid if she would not drink wine during the remainder of his life, the divorce is valid, seeing it is entirely possible that he would die before her, so that the condition is capable of being fulfilled and she would then cease to be obligated by it. (Maimonides Hilchot Gerushin 8,10). Similar rules apply to all the conditions attached to a bill of divorce as long as the condition is not part of the written bill of divorce but is oral or spelled out in a separate document. (Hilchot Gerushin 8,3)
    A Midrashic approach based on Tossaphot Gittin 2, divrey hamatchil  “המביא”). The word ספר כריתות includes that there must be (at least) twelve lines; just as in the Torah scroll (known as the Book of the Torah) one needs to leave 4 lines empty at the end of the Book of Genesis before commencing to write the Book of Exodus, and the same at the end of the “book” of Exodus, and again at the end of the “book” of Leviticus,” (making a total of twelve lines), so the Get, i.e. bill of divorce, has to correspond in appearance to such a “book” of the Torah. [at the end of the Book of Numbers there are no mandatory empty four lines as this “book” is considered the last “book” of the Torah, Deuteronomy being known as Mishneh Torah, a review of the Torah].
    Onkelos translates the words ספר כריתות as גט פטורין, “a document of release.”  Seeing that this document is called ספר by the Torah, it requires that it be written in a similar manner to the Torah. The word גט has a numerical value of 12, i.e. alludes to the requirement to have 12 lines.
    If you will analyse the divorce bill called ספר, you will understand the logic of why the dissolution of a marriage has to involve the writing of a “book.” When the Lord created His universe He employed 22 letters (the aleph bet), refining each letter both in the heavens and on earth, matching them to each other, weighing each, etc., etc. He  gave them the kind of shapes which contained elements of all that exists in the universe. It is impossible to weigh something except by “matching” it to something else, i.e. comparing it to something else. G’d did not only “weigh”, i.e. “match” the letters but each creature in order to determine who would be a suitable partner for whom. This is what the sages in Sotah 2 had in mind when they said that 40 days prior to the formation of the fetus as a viable embryo a heavenly voice announces who the suitable marriage partner will be for that creature to be. Even if the two human beings live across the ocean from each other G’d will arrange for them to meet and marry. Seeing that the letters of the aleph bet had been instrumental in making the match in the first place, letters of the aleph bet, i.e. a “book” has to be the instrument to dissolve that union. (compare Commentary of Raavad on Sefer Yetzirah 2,2) This is a reminder that pairing off potential marriage partners has its origin in prehistoric times, antedating the universe.
    
    24,4. אחרי אשר הוטמאה, “after she has been defiled.” by her second husband. The Torah describes this woman as “defiled” to her former husband seeing she has in the meantime had carnal relations with her second husband. 
    According to the opinion of our sages in Yevamot 11 the meaning of the words אשר הוטמאה is ולא אשר הוטמאה, “and he cannot, seeing she has become defiled;” there are two separate halachot here. 1) A divorcee who has remarried cannot marry her former husband again even if she did nothing of an adulterous nature in the interval. 2) If a woman while married to her husband committed adultery, her husband cannot keep her as a wife even if he wants to, seeing she has ben defiled while she was his wife. From the moment her husband suspects her to the point that he initiates the proceedings against her known as Sotah, he must not sleep with her anymore seeing he considers her as an adulteress. This is the meaning of: “her first husband who dismissed her cannot take her back in marriage.” As soon as the husband had reason to believe she had become defiled while married to him, that marriage is at an end. The fact that she secreted herself with another male after having been warned not to, makes such conduct a prima facie case of adultery, even if she did not drink the waters, etc. 
    
    24,5. נקי יהיה לביתו, “he shall remain free for his home;” the final letters in the words נקי יהיה לביתו שנה, are an allusion to the Holy Name of the Lord, to the tetragram. I already commented on this in Parshat Shoftim (20,9) concerning men who have either become betrothed, planted a vineyard, or built a house without consecrating it. We found that the relationship between G’d and the Jewish people after their “marriage” at Mount Sinai was also earmarked by a similar period of one year during which the Shechinah remained “at home” i.e. stationary at Mount Sina,i seeing the people did not commence journeying until the 22nd of Iyar, i.e. of the second year. 
    
    24,6. לא יחבול רחים ורכב, “he must not take as a pledge an upper or lower millstone.” The reason is that these are the very tools with which the debtor earns his livelihood. The Torah mentions these two items merely as examples of other tools which the debtor cannot do without. The precise meaning of the word לא יחבול is that the lender must not bring these tools into his own house as collateral as he is not allowed to do this even with utensils which are not essential to the borrower. The Torah has written specifically in verse 10: “you must not enter his house to take a pledge;” even the messenger of the court must not enter the house of the borrower, but the borrower (debtor) has to bring the pledge outside. (verse 11) Seeing that this is so, why did the Torah have to write our verse at all? Answer: so that he who violates the directions of the Torah in this respect will be guilty of violating two commandments simultaneously. (Baba Metzia113)
    
    24,8. השמר בנגע הצרעת, “Beware of the affliction of tzoraat.” A person afflicted must be careful not to cut off the signs of his affliction from his skin. However, if the signs of the affliction were visible only on the foreskin, the area to be removed during circumcision, this is no reason to delay the circumcision and it may be removed as part of that procedure (Shabbat 132).
    
    24,9. זכור את אשר עשה ה' אלו-היך למרים, “keep remembering what the Lord your G’d did to Miriam.” This is a positive commandment related to the negative commandment not to speak evil about people (לשון הרע). We are not only to remember that Miriam badmouthed her brother Moses but the punishment that she endured on account of that. It is mentioned here as her punishment was to become afflicted with the skin disease tzoraat. Seeing that the previous verse had commenced with the word השמר, something which always introduces a negative command-ment, I might have thought that this too is a negative commandment. The Torah teaches that although this was a negative commandment which was a direct derivative of a positive commandment and is usually not viewed with the severity of an ordinary negative commandment, the reason that Miriam’s punishment is recalled here is to remind us how serious the sin of לשון הרע is considered in the eyes of the Torah.
    Consider that if righteous Miriam, the prophetess, who only spoke against her brother, who was older than he, and for whom she had put her life at risk and had said what she said without his ever hearing it was punished with the dread disease tzoraat, and all her accumulated merits did not protect her against this punishment, how much more reason do we normal mortals have to be circumspect and not become guilty of this sin. Consider further that Miriam had not really said something negative about Moses except that she had compared her and Aaron’s prophetic stature to that of her brother Moses.
    In view of all these considerations it is easy to understand why the Torah looks askance at any assembly of fools, loiterers, people engaged in pointless and unproductive conversation. Solomon makes this plain in Kohelet 8,2 when he said that foolishness is the result of too much talk. Such talk will easily degenerate into sinful talk, character-assassination of one’s peers and the like. Once one has begun to speak disparagingly about one’s peers it is only a short step away from criticising Torah scholars as we know from Psalms 31,19: “let lying lips be stilled that speak haughtily against the righteous with arrogance and contempt.” Once one is not afraid to speak about the righteous, one will start putting down G’d’s prophets, and in the end one will speak out against G’d Himself. We have examples of all this in Chronicles II 36,15: “but they mocked the messengers of G’d and disdained His words and taunted His prophets until the wrath of G’d against His people grew beyond remedy.” Compare also Psalms 73,9: “they set their mouths against heaven, and their tongues range over the earth.” Who was the cause that they set their mouths against heaven? Their tongues which had begun by speaking about earthly matters.
    
    24,10. לא תבא אל ביתו לעבוט עבוטו, “do not enter his house to take his security for it.” It is forbidden to take the collateral (it must be offered). Neither the lender nor the court’s clerk is entitled to enter the debtor’s home for this purpose. This is an illustration of the Torah’s concern for the dignity of the borrower, and the efforts it makes not to embarrass him through allowing people to search his home for utensils to take as pledges. Another reason for this prohibition is to forestall heated arguments which might lead to murder. The lender is permitted, however, to enter the house of the guarantor of the loan, seeing he has nothing to be embarrassed about. Whereas the borrower is embarrassed about his poverty, the guarantor obviously has means, otherwise he would not have volunteered to guarantee the loan (Baba Metzia 115). This is what Solomon said in Proverbs 27,13: “seize his garment, (the guarantor’s) for he stood surety for another. Take it as a pledge for he stood surety for an unfamiliar woman.” (Maimonides Hilchot Malveh veloveh 3,7) The reason is simple. Although logic might have dictated that the pledge be taken from the borrower who otherwise may be tempted to live it up instead of trying to save and repay his loan seeing the lender will claim payment from the guarantor, the fact is that the guarantor has nothing to be embarrassed about whereas the borrower does. This is why the Torah does permit the lender to enter the house of the guarantor and take a pledge.
    
    24,11. יוציא אליך את העבוט החוצה, “he shall bring the pledge to you outside.” Our sages in Gittin 3 say that the borrower is likely to volunteer only the least valuable of his possessions as a pledge. Seeing this is so, the sages basically ruled that when repayment of debts has to be made, the debtor may satisfy the claim of the lender with זיבורית, the relatively least valuable part of his soil. They amended this rule to insist that the debtor use at least his average quality soil for making repayment as otherwise sources of loans would dry up, the lenders not wanting to have to take inferior land in payment of their loans. If the borrower refuses to bring the pledge outside, the court can compel him to perform this positive commandment listed here just as the court has the right to compel people to perform other positive commandments. [I have not found this listed as a positive commandment in the accepted list of such commandments. Ed.] The court may seize lands belonging to the borrower and put them up for sale to ensure the lender gets paid out of the proceeds.
    
    24,13.השב תשיב לו את העבוט , “be sure to return the pledge to him.” Even if the lender already kept the pledge in his possession for many years (seeing he had not been repaid) if and when the borrower does repay the loan he must return the pledge to him (and not deduct it from the repayment). The procedure of returning the pledge in the evening and exchanging it in the morning, etc., also does not have a time limit and may have to be repeated hundreds of times. (compare Temurah 6) The pledges meant here are garments worn either by day or by night which the borrower cannot afford to be without at the respective time of day, and which therefore are constantly being exchanged. This is why the Talmud says in Baba Metzia 114 concerning our verse 12 that the lender must not keep the pledge overnight. The same applies to kitchen utensils which must be put at the borrower’s disposal at the time when he prepares his meals. Other, less essential utensils, do not have to be returned and exchanged on a daily basis.
    You must understand the mystical dimension of the words כבא השמש, “at sunset.” This is an implied warning that if you, the lender, fail to return the pledge by the time the sun sets, (simile for the attribute of Mercy) you will expose yourself to night (domain of the attribute of Justice) and will be struck by it.
   ושכב בשלמתו וברכך, “he will sleep in his own garment and will bless you.” He will commend you to the attribute of Mercy. ולך תהיה צדקה, “and it will be accounted for you as an act of righteousness.” You will thereby add to your merits in the eyes of the Lord your G’d.
    
    24,15. ביומו תתן שכרו, “you are to pay him his wages on the day he performed the work.” In order that he can use the money forthwith. ולא תבא עליו השמש, “and the sun must not set on it;” i.e. for your benefit. 
    The words: “on its day you shall pay his wages,” are part and parcel of the line “so that he will not call out against you to the Lord.” The whole verse must be understood thus: “you must pay him his wages on the same day for he is a poor man, his life depends on his getting his wages immediately; do not allow the sun to set before you pay him so that he will not appeal against you to G’d. If that were to happen you will be at risk by nightfall as at that time the attribute of Justice commences its reign and it will be poised against you.”
    
    24,16. לא יומתו אבות על בנים, “fathers must not be executed on account of the children.” The Torah refers to testimony given by the children. The same applies to fathers testifying against their children (Sifri). The same is true of testimony of any blood relation being insufficient to base a death sentence on. It is a decree by the Torah that such testimony is inadmissible not only on behalf of relatives but also against them (Sanhedrin 27).
    
    24,17. ולא תחבול בגד אלמנה, “and you must not take the garment of a widow as a pledge.” The Torah had already warned the lender not to enter the house of a borrower in order to take a pledge; the same certainly applies if the borrower in question is a widow. The reason this is repeated is to tell us that if one does take such a pledge from a widow one has transgressed two negative commandments (Tossaphot Baba Metzia 115). A widow is more apt to break out in tears, and the Torah has legislated that she is to be treated with special sensitivity on numerous occasions. Our sages in the Sifri add that the reason this is repeated is to tell us that even the widow of a king (a wealthy widow) is included in this prohibition.
    
    24,19. לא תשוב לקחתו...למען יברכך ה' אלו-היך, “you must not turn back in order to take it;.....in order that the Lord your G’d will bless you.” G’d assigned a blessing for people who have the right thoughts. Sifri 283 adds that even if the handout, i.e. forgotten sheaf, became the property of the poor without deliberate intent by the farmer who had forgotten it, he will be blessed. How much more will he be blessed when he had arranged for the poor to become the recipient of this sheaf (or coin, etc.)?
    
    24,20. לא תפאר אחריך, “do not go over them again;” according to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is: “do not search the branches.” The word occurs in this context in Ezekiel 17,6: “it produced branches.”
    A Midrashic approach: do not consider yourself a “beautiful” person because  you have given them or deliberately left for them olives under your olive trees. The moral lesson is that one must not publicise kind acts one performs. We have a more specific verse concerning this in Proverbs 20,6: רב אדם יקרא איש חסדו ואיש אמונים מי ימצא, “most people proclaim their good deeds; who can find a truly discreet person?” The reason that Solomon refers to the latter category of person as איש אמונים is Proverbs 11,13: ונאמן רוח מכסה דבר, “and the truly sincere spirit keeps a confidence.”
    The sages also explained in Chulin 131 that the meaning of the words לא תפאר אחריך is: “do not take its beauty away from it.” Our sages derive from this verse that the regulation of leaving a “corner” of one’s field for the poor also applies to the orchards, i.e. the trees in it. The fruit is considered the beauty of the tree. The expression “beauty” has been applied only to the olive tree, just as the expression הוד, “splendour, majesty” is not applied to any other tree except the olive tree. Compare Hoseah 14,8: “its majesty was like that of the olive tree.” The reason for this is the light derived from the oil of the olive, an oil known as יצהר, a word related to אור, תפארת, הוד, all names used to describe light in the celestial regions.
    
    25,2. כדי רשעתו במספר, “according to his wickedness, by a count.” Seeing that the vowel under the letter ב in the word במספר is a semi-vowel sheva, it is clear that that word belongs to the word ארבעים in the verse which follows. In other words: “the number is close to 40, but not precisely 40.” This is where our sages got the number 39 for the number of strokes to be administered. The deeper significance of this number 39 is that a dead person needs to be resurrected; a person who committed a sin and transgressed against the laws of his master is guilty of death. His soul is subject to the karet penalty. The penalty of 39 lashes substitutes for the death penalty and is equivalent to the dew (טל=39) which G’d is reputed to employ to bring the dead back to life (compare Chagigah 12). The Talmud Megillah 7 states that people who qualified for the karet penalty but have endured the penalty of מלקות instead are thereby saved from having to endure the karet penalty after their death. In other words, this corporal punishment is a form of atonement for a greater penalty. It is as if the guilty party had already received the טל של תחייה, the life-restoring dew in advance.
    There is another reason for this number. The culpability for sins through trial on earth commences with age 13. The number of strokes administered is 39, i.e. three times the number 13. This equals the numerical value of the word טל. Culpability by the heavenly tribunal only commences with age 20. Three times 20 is 60. This is what Baba Metzia 85 refers to when it describes that Elijah (the apparition of Elijah traversing the earth) was struck with 60 brands of fire for having divulged celestial secrets to mortal man]. 
    If the sages are in the habit of always referring to 40 lashes instead of to 39 lashes, or “40 minus one lashes,“ such as when they describe the various kinds of forbidden categories of work on the Sabbath as “40 minus one” (Shabbat 73), the reason is that they wanted to model their speech as closely as possible on the language of the Torah itself, seeing the Torah wrote ארבעים יכנו,  “he shall strike him with 40 (lashes).” The reason the Torah adds the words כדי רשעתו, “in accordance with his wickedness,” is that the ferocity with which these lashes are administered depends on the severity of the sin for which it is administered. (compare Ibn Ezra).
    
    25,3. ארבעים יכנו ולא יוסיף, “he shall strike him forty and he shall not add.” This amount of lashes is a judgment by itself, a heavenly decree [not the result of an assessment by the judges of the severity of the sin. Ed.] The judge is bound to sentence the guilty party to this sentence only, and the convicted party must endure it. One must not increase the number of lashes so as not to humiliate the convicted party.
    Our sages in Makkot 22 elaborate on the precise manner in which this beating is administered. The two hands of the victim are bound in two opposing directions to a kind of wooden board. The person administering the lashes takes hold of the guilty party’s clothing, exposing his chest. A stone is placed underneath him from behind. The person deputised to perform the beating (known as חזן הכנסת) stands over the prisoner with the belt made of calf-leather in his hand (and proceeds). This belt is folded over and folded over again so that it is actually four strips of belt. In addition there are belts of donkey hide interspersed to connect the other four strips with the ones made of calf-hide. The handle of the belt is one handbreadth wide and one handbreadth long. The beatings are administered one third to his chest and the other two thirds to his back. The reason the portion of not muzzling an ox while it is in the act of threshing is written immediately after this verse is to teach that the belt should be made of calf-hide.
    The reason why the measurements of one handbreadth width and length respectively, and the total number of leather strips in that belt (whip) are important, is connected to the fact that a handbreadth is four fingers wide. When we fold this over we get eight finger widths and when we do this a third time we have 16 fingerbreadths. There is not a single commandment in the Torah the violation of which does not involve a minimum of violating 16 covenants. Hence the number 16 has a deep symbolic signi-ficance in the administering of the penalty for violating a negative commandment. (compare Sotah 37) The reason that two (kinds of) belts which interconnect upwards and downwards between the calf hide belts are used is to allude to the violation by the sinner of both his undertaking implied in the word נעשה and the word נשמע “we will do and we will hear (learn),” which was the formula by which the people of Israel had accepted the Torah. The reason both calf-hide and donkey-hide is used is to combine “ox and donkey.” This is an allusion to the lament of the prophet Isaiah that whereas both an ox and a donkey are smart enough to know and respect their owners, only the sinful Jewish people appear not to possess such minimal intelligence. (Isaiah 1,3) Anyone who transgresses the commandments of His Maker deserves to be disciplined by lashes from a belt consisting of both calf-hide and donkey-hide.
    In the Jerusalem Talmud Makkot there is a comment that the fact that the belt was folded is derived from the words והפילו השופט, “the judge shall cast him down” (verse 2), suggesting that the word והפילו may be read instead as והכפילו, “he shall double him over.” As to the reason why one third of the lashes are administered to the chest and the remainder to the back, this  is based on the verse והכהו לפניו כדי רשעתו, which is understood in Makkot 23 as “corresponding to one wickedness in front and the other two thirds on his back.” The word יכנו, להכותו are understood as referring to two beatings. Had the Torah wanted all the strokes to be administered to one part of the body only it should merely have written the word והכהו לפניו, “he will beat him on his front (chest).” As it is, the word for striking is used three times instead of merely once, i.e. והכהו, יכנו, להכותו. This teaches that one third of the strokes are to be administered to the chest and the other two thirds to the back.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Bamidbar 23: ”why did the Torah pick the number 40 for the strokes to be administered? A human fetus is formed during a period of 40 days. The Torah also was only given to Israel after Moses had been taught it for 40 days. He who violates the Torah which took 40 days to reveal deserves 40 strokes for violating the Torah. You will find that when sin came into the world the punishment involving the universe comprised 40 elements, 10 endured by Adam, 10 by Chavah, 10 by the serpent and 10 by the earth. Therefore, when man violates a negative commandment his punishment comprises 40 elements. (compare Tanchuma Bamidbar 23) [The Midrash does not elaborate. Ed.] The figure 40 again surfaces in connection with the punishment of the Jewish people for accepting the majority report of the spies. Israel was punished by having to remain in the desert for 40 years.
   פן יוסיף, “lest he  add (strokes).” Seeing the Torah repeats this expression for the second time, Rabbi Yonah the holy one, deduces that if one strikes a fellow or one’s wife one violates two negative commandments. (compare Shaarey Teshuvah by Rabbeinu Yonah section 3, item 77). The first negative command-ment is the one introduced here as לא יוסיף, whereas the second one is introduced by the words פן יוסיף. We know that this latter formula is a negative commandment as we have a rule that the word פן or השמר or אל always introduces a negative commandment (Makkot13).
   מכה רבה, ”a great blow;” even adding one single stroke of the belt is called “a great blow.” There is an allusion in the word to the 365 negative commandments. In the event of violation there are many of  these commandments which do not carry the penalty of corporal punishment for a variety of reasons. The number of negative commandments the violation of which results in 39 lashes being administered is 207, corresponding to the numerical value of the word רבה. This is why the Torah here chose the expression מכה רבה.
    If you will analyse the mystical dimension of the subject you will discover another allusion in the expression מכה רבה. It is the allusion to the “great corporal punishment,” i.e. the fire in Gehinom, purgatory. This fire derives its power from the attribute of Justice in its most ferocious form. This attribute is known as כה, and this is why the plagues with which Pharaoh and the Egyptians were smitten were introduced with the word כה (Exodus 4,22; 7,17 et al.)
    The milder form of retribution orchestrated by the court for violation of the aforementioned 207 negative commandments is a form of atonement, saving the sinner from becoming exposed to the ferocious element of the celestial attribute of Justice. It is one of the manifestations of G’d’s loving concern for us that He arranged for such a punishment to take the place of something far harsher. The reason that even a single extra stroke would be considered as מכה רבה, is that the number 40 atones for what would have become exposure to the fires of purgatory. If an additional blow [additional to 39. Ed.] is administered the victim already began to taste some of that מכה רבה unique to purgatory. The party administering same would be guilty in the extreme.
   ונקלה אחיך בעיניך, “and your brother would be degraded in your eyes.” Until the moment when he received the additional blow, the Torah referred to him simply as רשע, wicked, i.e. והרשיעו את הרשע, (verse 1), or והיה אם בן הכות הרשע  or כדי רשעתו (verse 2). As soon as the guilty party has submitted and received his punishment the Torah once more refers to him as אחיך, “your brother.” Our sages use this verse to prove that all the people whose transgression would have made them guilty of the karet penalty will be exonerated if instead they subjected themselves to the penalty of 39 lashes (Megillah 7, our author repeats this). They understand the words ונקלה אחיך in the sense of “after degrading oneself one is once more entitled to be regarded as ‘your brother.’”
    This exoneration which the sages in Megillah speak of does not apply to the corporal punishment administered by the court nowadays, known as מכת מרדות, striking the rebellious for violating rabbinic commandments. Its purpose is only to shame the party into not violating the statutes of the rabbis which were introduced in their capacity as authorised agents of the Torah again. Ezekiel 16,63 makes it plain that feeling ashamed of one’s sins is a precondition of exoneration, i.e. “that you may remember and feel shame and have no more excuse because of your humiliation when I have forgiven you all that you have done.” What we described applies to the administering of the thirty nine lashes with the guilty person having his hands tied, etc., etc., as we described the procedure during the period of the Talmud. You will note that the numerical value of the letters in the word אחיך is 39, just as the numerical value of the letters in the word אלה, in verse 3 is 39 if you count the letters each as 1 plus their numerical values.
    
    25,4. לא תחסם שור בדישו, “Do not muzzle an ox while he is threshing.” The prefix ב in the word בדישו is similar to the prefix ב in the word בבאכם אל אהל מועד in Leviticus 10,9 where it means “when.” Just as in that verse the Torah does not mean literally “when you enter,” but refers to the priest having drunk wine prior to his entering the Sanctuary (and thereby being intoxicated), so here too the word בדישו means: “in anticipation of its starting to thresh.” Even if the owner muzzled the ox before it entered the threshing ground he is guilty of violating this commandment. (compare Baba Metzia 90)
    
    25,6. והיה הבכור אשר תלד יקום על שם אביו, “it shall be that the firstborn which she shall bear shall succeed to the name of his dead brother.” The plain meaning of this verse is the kabbalistic approach. The word שם in this verse does not literally mean “name,” i.e. that the child will bear the name of the deceased brother; rather the Torah speaks of the soul of the new infant which will replace that of the departed brother. This is the meaning of the words ולא ימחה שמו מישראל, “so that his name will not be blotted out from the Jewish people.” If the deceased would not have a replacement on earth his name would be blotted out from Israel. When the Talmud in Yevamot 24 understands the words והיה הבכור אשר תלד to mean that the reference is to the firstborn son of the mother of these brothers, this is not the plain meaning of the verse. The sages only use this sequence as implying that the oldest surviving brother is first in line to “marry” (levirate marriage) the widow of the deceased brother. This is the reason the word בכור appears in our verse.
    
    25,9. וחלצה נעלו מעל רגלו וירקה בפניו, “she will remove the shoe from his foot and spit out before him;” The Torah requires the sister-in-law (who has been rejected) to both remove the shoe of her brother-in-law and to spit on the ground in front of him (Yevamot 104). The Talmud adds that her spittle must be visible to the attending judges.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the reason underlying these whole procedures is the concern with the property of the deceased, preventing both it and his widow from passing to some other hands outside the family seeing the deceased left no heirs. This is why the Torah added: “so that she shall not become the wife of someone from the outside, a strange man.” (verse 5) The Torah presumes to know the mind of the deceased who would have wanted one of his brothers to take control of his estate and his widow rather than that they pass into the hands of strangers.
    The reason for the procedure called חליצה, a device enabling the widow to remarry if none of her brothers-in-law is prepared to preserve the soul of their departed brother by marrying her, is that as long as one of the surviving brothers is willing to enter into the yibum relationship with her, the deceased brother is not truly considered as having died, seeing there is someone willing to perpetuate the seed of the deceased. The moment that there is no surviving brother willing to do this, the deceased is truly considered as dead and one has to mourn him. This is why the widow removes the shoe from her brother-in-law, a traditional sign of mourning.
    A Midrashic approach: the legislation of the levirate marriage is a part of the Torah known as חקים, i.e. defying our understanding by means of our intellect. Our sages stated specifically that the spittle required by the widow is one of the inscrutable laws of the Torah known as “statutes” (Tanchuma Mishpatim 7), seeing that the Torah wrote (Leviticus 19,19) “you shall observe My statutes.” Every one of these “statutes” is a law which serves Satan, i.e. the evil urge and the Gentile nations use it as an excuse to challenge our faith in G’d and our obedience to His commandments. The following is a list of such חקים which have defied our efforts to find a rationale. שעטנז, בשר חזיר, רוק היבמה, הרבעת כלאים, שור הנסקל, עגלה ערופה, צפרי מצורע,  פטר חמור, בשר וחלב, שעיר המשתלח, פרה אדומה. (the prohibition to weave wool and linen and wear the result; eating pig’s meat; the spitting out by the widow of a childless brother if rejected as partner in a levirate marriage; mixing different species of plant seeds or mating different species of animals together; the redemption of a firstborn male donkey; the ox which has gored and has to be stoned to death. The calf killed in expiation of murder committed by persons unknown. The birds offered (one) as a sacrifice and one allowed to escape after the termination of the affliction called tzoraat; mixing milk and meat in any form; the scape-goat legislation of the day of Atonement, the red heifer as an instrument of purification but defiling its handlers. All of these examples are enumerated by Tanchuma in Mishpatim. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the institution of the levirate marriage  is of great value to the soul of the departed. It is a known fact that a soul derives added enjoyment when it is allowed to resurface (be re-incarnated) as a member of the family it had once belonged to seeing it already feels that it belongs. This is why the Torah writes in its introduction of this subject: “when brothers dwell together” (verse 4). Our sages (Yevamot 17) interpret these words as meaning that the rule of the levirate marriage applies only if both brothers lived on earth at one and the same time, however, briefly. If the youngest brother had been born after the oldest had died (or any other brother had died) then this mystical link does not exist between these brothers and the legislation does not apply to them.
    The underlying reason for חליצה, i.e. the removal of the shoe of the surviving brother who refuses to perform the levirate marriage with his sister-in-law, the widow of his brother, is that his refusal is considered an act of cruelty towards the soul of his deceased brother. The removal of his shoe is a symbolic act signifying severance of reciprocal feelings of brotherliness. The very expression וחלצה, is similar to Hoseah 5,6: “the Lord withdrew from them,” (the Israelites who vainly tried to mollify Him with their sacrifices) seeing they had betrayed the Lord. Also the expression נעלו normally translated as “his shoe,” has a dual meaning, is the same as the word נעל, “locked out,” as in “locked the door.” The surviving brother had “locked out” the soul of his deceased brother.
    The reason the Torah writes (the apparently superfluous words) מעל רגלו “from his foot,” is an allusion to the fact that the foot, leg, is the reason for someone moving somewhere, going away. In this instance, that foot had become the cause for the soul of the deceased brother having to move to another family in preparation of his soul’s transmigration.
    The subject of the רקיקה “spitting out,” is a symbol for something despicable similar to spitting out. It is something revolting for the despicable spittle to have to travel the length of the spine, the symbol of the body which serves as the clothing of the soul. This is why our sages decreed that the spittle of the widow referred to has to be what is known as רוק תפל, “tasteless spittle,” i.e. totally colourless liquid. In order that this be the case, the widow in question was prevented from eating for a period of time before she performed the act of חליצה and spitting out before her brother-in-law. It was important that no one think that she spat out because she had eaten something that had disagreed with her. By spitting out רוק תפל, this colourless tasteless spittle, she symbolised that the moisture of the body [which alone makes the body viable, alive, Ed.] had departed from the deceased due to the cruel conduct of his brother. The people of the town would henceforth perceive this “brother” as a cruel individual and the name בית חלוץ הנעל, “the house of the one whose shoe was removed,”  which the Torah applies to that person remained as an ongoing indictment of his behaviour. 
    You should know that the whole subject of the levirate marriage is a manifestation of G’d’s loving kindness towards His people. It is designed to ensure that as many of them as possible will enjoy the hereafter and the supernatural light available in those regions. Our sages in Sanhedrin 90 have already stated that “all Jews have a share in the world to come.” [this means that all Jews have been born with that potential; it may be forfeited due to their conduct on earth.] The subject is discussed in greater detail by Elihu in Job 33,, 29-30: “truly G’d does all these things to a man two or three times; to bring him back from the Pit, that he may bask in the light of life.” In other words, a soul may experience seeing the light of the (terrestrial) world two or three times in order to save him from ultimate and absolute darkness. (oblivion) In fact, even G’d Himself is on record as responding to Job telling him to heed the word of Elihu. Compare Job 38, 13-14: “so that it seizes the corners of the earth and shakes the wicked  out of it? It changes like clay under the seal till its hues are fixed like those of a garment.” In verse 12 of that same chapter G’d had challenged Job: “did you ever command day to break, assigned dawn to its place?” G’d meant if Job had ever been able like He was able to shake out the wicked from the earth and to replace them with other human beings in their place. These similes are all a reference to the re-appearance of souls which had not merited life in the hereafter after their first round on earth, by enabling them to improve their ways when given new “garments” i.e. new bodies on a second trip on earth.
    Having understood all this it is not difficult to comprehend the institution of yibum as an opportunity for the soul of the departed to be given another lease on life on terrestrial earth to make up for the errors that soul had committed while clothed in a different body in a previous incarnation. It is hardly possible for anyone to quarrel on the basis of logic with understanding the concept of yibum in this fashion. 
    The concept of transmigration of souls is an ancient tradition having its root already at the time of Moses. In the Sefer Habahir item 195 you find this spelled out when the author writes: “why do we encounter the apparent paradox of the righteous experiencing a life of difficulties whereas the wicked appear to enjoy a life of ease? The reason is that the person whom we respect as a righteous individual was a wicked individual in his youth, and is only now being punished for this.”
    This raises the question of whether we punish a person for what he did in a period of his life when he was still immature. Did not Rabbi Seymon say that the heavenly tribunal does not punish anyone under the age of 20? To this Rabbi (Nechuniah?) replied that he had not meant immaturity in his present life on earth, but sins committed when the soul of this individual now leading a blameless life had been in another body on a previous occasion. Upon hearing this his colleagues wanted to know: ”how long will you speak in riddles?” He replied: imagine for yourselves a person who had planted a vineyard in his backyard hoping that it would produce only grapes. When he found out that some of the vines produced some evil smelling berries instead of the hoped for grapes, what did he do? he carefully cleaned out the offending vines and planted the vines a second time. When he found that he had not been radical enough in his treatment of the vines, he proceeded to repeat the procedure a third time. When he failed again he did not give up but continued to treat every infected vine. When the students asked the Rabbi how many times G’d would repeat this procedure, he told them that G’d would repeat His attempts even 1000 times if necessary. He based himself on Psalms 105, 8: דבר צוה לאלף דור, “G’d commanded a matter even if would take 1000 generations” (to be carried out). This is the true meaning of the statement by our sages that G’d did not give the Torah until after 974 generations (Chagigah 13) i.e. that during each of those generations [of former worlds which G’d destroyed after they did not live up to His expectations Ed.] G’d planted the “vineyard” but it did not take.
   אשר לא יבנה, “who refuses to rebuild, etc.” This verse proves that the procedure of the levirate marriage is an act of kindness by the Lord towards the deceased. We know that the universe is built on the premise of loving kindness, i.e. Psalms 89,3: עולם חסד יבנה. This is why the procedure of yibum is described here in terms of יבנה, “building.” Kohelet 8,10 also refers to this phenomenon when he writes: “and when I saw the wicked buried and newly come, etc.” Solomon referred to the transmigration of the souls of those whose bodies had already been buried. The word בכן in the verse from Kohelet we just quoted has the same numerical value as the word חסד (64) lending further support to our interpretation of what Solomon referred to in that verse. [the letter ו at the beginning is only a preposition. Ed.]
    
    25,11. והחזיקה במבושיו, “and she takes hold of his private parts;” a reference to parts of the male reproductive organ, the testicles, something causing the owner embarrassment on occasion. Onkelos translates the expression as בבית בהתתה, “the housing of his shame,” similar to Genesis 49,8 where Yaakov commends Yehudah for not being ashamed to admit he had been wrong. The Torah punishes the woman in question by writing: “you shall cut off her (offending) hand.” Clearly, the text is not to be understood literally, but it means that financial compensation be paid to the victim for the embarrassment he sustained. In all matters like this the Torah never decrees that the offending party be deprived of limbs or organs but that the value of the offending organ (or the organ lost by the injured party) be paid as compensation (Sifri 293). We have other similar examples of such legislation such as “an eye for an eye,” “a tooth for a tooth,” etc., where the sages always understood the wording to refer to compensation in financial terms (Baba Kama 83). The woman in question is certainly not guilty of having her hand cut off (even symbolically), seeing that what she did was only in order to save her husband. Nonetheless, the Torah does impose a financial penalty for her indiscreet behaviour.
    
    25,13. גדולה וקטנה, “a large one and a small one.” The large stone (weight) is not to be used to deceive by it being used when you take merchandise, and the smaller stone when you give back merchandise. According to Sifri 162 you may read the words together with the beginning of the next verse, i.e. “if you use different weights on different occasions hoping to thereby enrich yourself at the expense of your customer you will wind up having nothing, “i.e. לא יהיה לך (כלום). (compare Rashi)
    25,15. אבן שלמה וצדק יהיה לך, “a perfect and honest weight you shall have.” If you make sure to have honest weights, and your business will be based on fairness you will have a lot, i.e. יהיה לך [as opposed to the previous לא יהיה לך, Ed.]
    
    25,16. כל עושה אלה, “are all who do this.” This refers to what the Torah described earlier, i.e. uneven weights and measures, etc.כל עושה עול , “anyone doing something corrupt.” This refers to other ways of cheating.
    
    25,17. זכור את אשר עשה לך עמלק, “Remember (constantly) what Amalek has done to you.” The reason the paragraph dealing with Amalek was written at this point is to teach that if your business practices are corrupt you will have reason to worry about provocation by enemies. Our sages base this on the sequence of Proverbs 11,1: “dishonest scales are an abomination to the Lord,” followed in verse 2 of the same chapter by: “evil is followed by disgrace in its wake.” It seems to me that this is also the reason why  the phrase: “for it is an abomination to the Lord,” did not follow the words: “you shall not have in your house different measures,” but was only written later. Had the Torah written these words immediately, the paragraph would have concluded with the promise of long life (verse 15). The Torah preferred to conclude this paragraph with the words: “anyone acting in a corrupt fashion,” so that the reminder of the attack by Amalek could follow it immediately. This would serve as a reminder that when we are attacked by enemies the chances are that we have ourselves to blame for not living up to the ethical standards of the Torah. It also teaches that Amalek did something evil to us, seeing the Jewish people had done nothing to provoke such an attack. Amalek traveled a long way from its home in order to attack the Jewish people and it did not respect the covenant with G’d. The expression אשר קרך is related to the word מקרה, “something unrelated to known causes (coincidence).” The Midrashic interpretation derives the word from קר, cold; the meaning is that Amalek chilled the hot dish in the pot, i.e. the whole world was under the impression of the invincibility of G’d and His people, an impression which Amalek sought to undermine, to prove as wrong.
    
    25,18. ויזנב בך, “he attacked those at your tail end.” It is as if it had cut off your tail. The ones described as “your tail” are the weaker members of the people who trailed the main body. (Ibn Ezra) It is a well known tactic of armies who are not strong enough to engage the main body of their opponents in battle, to whittle away at the ones at the tail end of the column, the weak ones, the tired ones. This is the plain meaning of these words.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Ki Teytze 9 is that the words ויזנב בך represent an attack on the זנב, i.e. he cut off the foreskins of these people and threw them heavenwards saying: “take what you have chosen.” The Amalekites did this to the individuals who, because of individual sins committed, had been excluded from the protective cover of the ענני הכבוד, the clouds of glory enveloping the main body of the Jewish people. Another Midrash in Tanchuma Ki Teytze 5 describes the meaning of the words: “remember what Amalek did to you” in the following terms: There are (here) two mentions of the word זכר “remember” in connection with Amalek. You are to remember what Amalek did to you, and to blot out the memory of Amalek. You are also to remember My promise to blot out Amalek (Exodus 17,14). The word: “the memory of you,” is comparable to the memory of ash זכרוניכם משלי אפר לגבי חמר גבכם, [i.e. it is completely forgotten, if used in the negative sense; if you try and emulate Avraham this “memory” will be accounted something positive, meritorious for you. Ed.] G’d said to Israel: ”be very careful with the two commandments involving ‘remembrance’ which I wrote here.” The one remembrance is written here and the other in Exodus 17,14 where G’d Himself promises to blot out the memory of Amalek. If you do what I tell you to do here you will be true descendants of ‎Avraham your forefather who described himself as dust and ashes in Genesis 18,27. If not, prepare yourselves to be like the people of total insignificance described in the verse in Job and you will be enslaved as labourers in Egypt] burdened with חומר ולבנים, “clay and bricks.” In Psalms 129,3  the slavery in Egypt is also paraphrased as על גבי חרשו חורשים, “ploughmen ploughed across my back.” [The word גבי as well as the word חומר provides the link to the verse in Job 13,12 quoted. Ed. I find the message of the Midrash confusing as it appears to warn of matters which are already past history. The people addressed here are after the redemption from Egyptian bondage, Ed.]
    The Midrash goes on  in several paragraphs to describe that what happened to Amalek and especially to Agog their king as retribution for when Amalek had attacked the Jewish people in the desert. [The reader is referred to Tanchuma Ki Teytze sections 7-9. Ed.]
   ולא ירא אלו-הים, “and he had no respect for G’d.” These words refer to Amalek again. During the time that the Israelites were at Refidim, tired and thirsting for water, Amalek came to attack them.
    According to Midrash Tanchuma Ki Teytze 10 the words: “and he did not fear G’d,” mean that the people of Amalek (descendants of Esau) had a tradition that they could be defeated only by descendants of Rachel seeing that we have a verse in Jeremiah 49,20 אם לא יסחבום צעירי הצאן, “(hear then the plan G’d has devised against Edom) surely the shepherd boys shall drag them away.” These latter words are understood to refer to the youngest of the tribes of Israel, the ones which have been described as נער, (compare Genesis 37,2 where Joseph is described in these terms). We find that also Edom is described as junior in  Ovadiah 2, קטן, “junior,” and it is appropriate that a junior such as Edom be defeated by another junior. The reason is that Joseph who attained prominence and remained loyal to G’d although in the environment of two sinners (Pharaoh and Potiphar) without learning from their deeds, is so superior to Esau who grew up between two righteous people (Yitzchak and Avraham) and still did not learn from the good deeds of those righteous people. The Torah testifies that Joseph said: “I fear the Lord,” (Genesis 44,18) as opposed to Amalek. No wonder that the one was doomed to fall by the hand of the other. [If Moses chose the נער Joshua to battle Amalek this was because he was a descendant of Ephrayim, a son of Joseph. Ed.]
    
    25,19. והיה בהניח ה' אלו-היך לך, “it will be when the Lord your G’d grants you rest, etc.” The Torah speaks about a period after the land of Canaan has been conquered, תמחה את זכר עמלק, “you are to blot out the memory of Amalek.” We have to understand this in the terms in which the prophet Samuel issued the directive to King Shaul to make war against Amalek in Samuel I 15,3. We read there: “kill all that belongs to him; spare no one, but kill alike men and women, infant and suckling, oxen and sheep, camels and asses.” The reason the prophet specified all this was so that no one would ever be able to point to an animal and say: “this is one of the surviving animals of Amalek.” [If he were to utter  the name of Amalek as something still extant this would mean  that the commandment to blot out his memory would not have been fulfilled. [compare Mechilta end of Beshalach. Ed.] The Midrash also claims that the Amalekites made for themselves animals by means of sorcery, changing their genes to different species. This is why Samuel did not content himself with a general description fitting all animals. He used divinely inspired wisdom in order to outsmart them.
   מתחת השמים, “from beneath the heaven.” Moses meant that G’d will blot out their power from beneath the heaven. This is also in consonance with the prophecy of Bileam (Numbers 24,20) “its  end will be utter destruction.” The word אובד in that verse is a noun, i.e. someone who is capable of destroying, “the Lord.” The Torah had already stated in Exodus 17,14 that G’d said that He personally would blot out the memory of Amalek from beneath the heaven. The reason why the Torah uses two words there, i.e. מחה אמחה, is that first G’d will blot out Amalek under the heaven, i.e. אמחה, whereas afterwards it is the turn of the Jewish people to blot out Amalek’s memory on earth, i.e. תמחה, “you will blot out.”
    The words לא תשכח, “do not forget,” mean: “do not forget to blot out his memory.” This paragraph commenced with the commandment to remember something and concludes with the commandment not to forget something. It is a promise that a time will come when the existence of Amalek will be totally forgotten, i.e. during the messianic era.
    Even though the plain meaning of the text appears to suggest that we should not forget Amalek, i.e. what this people did to us, the mystical dimension, the רמז, corresponds more to the cantillation our sages provided for the words. This is why you find the tone sign tipcha under the word לא where you would have expected the tone sign mercha if the Torah had intended the two words לא תשכח to be read together. In other words, the word תשכח stands all by itself and is not connected to what came before. The fact that the letter ת in that word has a dagesh indicates that a time will come when the memory of Amalek will disappear from our minds. This is also what David had in mind when he wrote (Psalms 9,7) “the enemy is no more; ruins everlasting; You have torn down their cities, their very names are lost.” This is the time when G’d’s Holy Name and His throne will be  complete, i.e. the following verse: “וה' לעולם ישב כונן למשפט כסאו, “But the Lord abides forever, He has set up His throne for judgment.”
   כי תבא
    
    
   כבד את ה' מהונך ומראשית כל תבואתך, וימלאו אסמיך שבע ותירוש יקביך יפרוצו, “Honour the Lord with your wealth, with the first fruits of all your harvests; so that your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats will overflow with new wine.” (Proverbs 3, 9-10).
    With these words Solomon warned us to display faith in the Lord and in His ability and willingness to provide our needs for us. The practical way of demonstrating this faith is the setting aside of a portion of our harvests for the Lord or those whom he has appointed to be the recipient of these “gifts.” One should not begrudge the money or food given to the poor and destitute seeing in them something that impoverishes the giver. On the contrary, one should view such gifts as insuring that one will continue to be the beneficiary of G’d’s bounty. Solomon spells this out even more clearly in Proverbs 28,27 where we read: ”He who gives to the poor will not be in need.” We must truly believe that G’d will add to our resources as a result of our demonstrating this faith by sharing what we have with others. This is the meaning of Proverbs 11,24: יש מפזר ונוסף עוד, “one man gives generously (appears to waste) and winds up with more.” Solomon also said (Proverbs 10,2) ”the treasures of wickedness are useless; whereas charity saves from death.” The author of Proverbs means that the excess accumulated by means of robbery and extortion will prove ineffectual, whereas the very giving up of part of one’s fortune to assist the poor and needy is what will prove effective in determining the individual’s fate, so much so that it may save the donor from what otherwise would have been certain death.
    Our sages in Ketuvot 66 phrase it thus: מלח ממון חסר, “if someone wants to treat money as if it were salt, i.e. enduring forever, he will find that it decreases.” Others quote the proverb as ממון מלח חסד, “if someone wants his money to endure as does salt, he should use it to perform acts of loving kindness(with it).” Seeing that this is so it behooves a person to spend his money (part of it) on the performance of commandments which involve expense, especially the commandment to give charity. He who gives to the poor in fact gives to the Almighty [I suppose the meaning is that thereby G’d will not have to trouble Himself to sustain that poor person. Ed]. Similarly, he who donates money for sacred purposes such as the Temple, etc., is only giving to G’d what belongs to G’d in the first place. David spelled this out in Chronicles I 29,14 when he said: “for everything emanated from You and that which comes from Your hand we have given to You.” All of these considerations prompted Solomon to say in the verse quoted above: “honour the Lord with your wealth.”
    The expression הון used by Solomon includes all kinds of things which a person accumulates in order to keep and preserve them. The word is derived from Psalms 119,14: כעל כל הון, “as over all riches.” Other examples of the word in the Bible occur in Proverbs 30,16 ואש לא אמרה הון, “and the fire never says ‘enough’”. Fire’s appetite to devour things is never satisfied. As long as an object subject to burning is available fire is anxious to devour it.
    According to a Midrashic explanation found in the Midrash Mishley on our verse, the word “fire” here refers to the fires of hell and Solomon means that there is no end to the sufferings which people who are in Gehinom have to endure. It would seem that the two verses quoted at the introduction to our Parshah both describe the need to be generous with one’s wealth in order to avoid paying for one’s miserliness by undergoing the afflictions of Gehinom. It is in order to “put G’d to the test” by fulfilling the obligation to be charitable, to give away some of one’s accumulated wealth in order to see whether indeed G’d will compensate one for doing so. This is why Solomon added at the outset: “so that the Lord will fill your barns with plenty.” The word וימלאו, “and they will be filled,” is to be understood as the result of one’s fulfilling the first half of verse 9, i.e. to honour the Lord from one’s wealth. The words: “and your vats will overflow with new wine,” are in response to the words: “from the first fruits of all your harvests” in verse 9 of that chapter. This is also why the Torah refers to “the harvest of the vineyard” in Deuteronomy 22,9.
    Concerning the giving of tithes, the prophet Maleachi 3,10 has stated that if someone were to test the Lord (His promises and if they come true), the only way he is allowed to do this is by means of performing the commandment of giving charity and observing if G’d indeed will enrich him thereby rather than make him poorer. The prophet describes this as an exception to the general rule not to put G’d to the test  by saying: “I will perform a certain commandment in order to be enriched materially by the reward.” Compare Deut. 6.16: “you must not put the Lord to the test.” Our sages in Taanit 9,1 have stated that the verse quoted from Maleachi  represents the single and solitary exception to the prohibition spelled out in Deut. 6,16. They understand the prophet’s words: “bring your tithes, etc.,” as almost an invitation to prove that G’d does reward those who diminish their wealth by sharing the harvest with the poor, as resulting in an addition to those people’s material possessions forthwith. When Solomon spoke about the positive results accruing to the individual who honours the Lord from his wealth, he too meant this not as something given on condition that G’d would reward the individual forthwith but as a statement of fact, of what would ensue as a result of such conduct by those individuals. This is why he did not preface his comments with the words: “if you do such and such.” Basically, the lesson is that although putting the Lord to the test is forbidden, the subject of tithing is an exception to this rule.
    A Midrashic approach, based on Tanchuma Re-ey 12: the words: “honour the Lord from your wealth (הונך),” are interpreted as related to הנאה, something from which one derives satisfaction or profit. Solomon urges people who have received anything enjoyable from G’d over and above what the average person enjoys (not only their harvest) as obligated to “kick back” something to G’d and to thereby honour His name. As an example of the point just made, consider a person who has been endowed by G’d with an especially beautiful voice, a singer. It behooves such a person to place this gift in the service of the Lord by acting as Cantor in the Synagogue services during communal prayer, provided he does so in order to honour the Lord and not in order to receive personal applause by the congregants in his own honour. If such a person truly intends his vocal contribution to the Synagogue services to be in G’d’s honour, the words of Solomon in Song of Songs 2,15: “Let  Me hear your voice for your voice is sweet,” may be applied to him. On the other hand, if such a well endowed person uses his gift to reap personal honour, Scripture applies to him the verse in Jeremiah 12,8: “She raised her voice against Me, therefore I have hated her.” A similar example would be someone endowed with the ability to be a calligrapher of especial talent. He should  acknowledge having been granted this talent, by using it in the preparation of sacred texts, to write Torah scrolls, phylacteries, etc. If he does indeed write a Torah scroll from pure motives (not because he wants to sell it at a profit), he has acquired an outstanding merit. Our sages (Menachot 30) went as far as describing a person who wrote a Torah scroll from such motives as comparing him to someone who had literally received the Torah from heaven (at Mount Sinai). The same applies to people who possess exceptional skill in performing the art of circumcision. Such people should strive to use their skill regularly, seeing that the performance of that commandment is linked to 13 covenants between G’d and His people. All people endowed with exceptional skills or talents are duty bound to place it in the service of the Lord as a form of acknowledging that their talent is G’d-given.
    The words ומראשית כל תבואתך quoted in Proverbs 3,9 are reminiscent of the fact that the Jewish people are described by G’d as “His first harvest (ראשית),” such as in Jeremiah 2,2. It behooves them therefore more than any other nation to know and acknowledge the Lord Who is the First of all Firsts. They must therefore honour the Lord by offering Him the very first of their respective harvests. This is what the Torah had in mind with the commandment governing the bringing of Bikkurim to the Temple as spelled out already in Exodus 23,1. The Torah commanded the Jewish people who have been called ראשית to go to Jerusalem, a place which is known as the first in the universe, i.e. ranking first in beauty, as described in Psalms 50,2 and to offer these firstlings of their harvest to the First, i.e. to the Lord of the universe. They deliver these gifts to the priest who represents the “first” of the nation performing service to the Lord in that capacity, etc. This is the meaning of the opening verse of our Parshah,
    
    26,1-2 והיה כי תבוא אל הארץ אשר ה' אלוקיך נותן לך נחלה וירשתה וישבת בה, ולקחת מראשית כל פרי האדמה, “it will come to pass when you arrive in the land which the Lord your G’d is about to give to you as an inheritance and you will inherit it and be settled in it, then you will bring of the first fruit of all the soil,  etc.” The commandment to offer the bikkurim does not apply to all categories of harvest produced in the land of Israel. It is applicable only to the seven species for which the land of Israel is famous, This is the understanding of the sages in Sifri Ki Tavo item 297. This is arrived at by the fact that in our verse the Torah writes: “which you will bring from your land,” whereas in Deut. 8,8 the Torah wrote: “a land of wheat, barley, grape, fig and pomegranate; a land of oil-olives, and date-honey.” The seven species mentioned in that verse determine what is meant in our verse here. The seven species mentioned in Parshat Eykev represent the species of farm-products which serve as the staple foods of the Jewish people. The commandment is applicable only at times when the Temple is standing (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 2,1). The reason that the Torah writes the words: “when you inherit it and dwell in it,” is to inform us that the commandment becomes effective only at that time, i.e. 14 years after the Israelites entered the Holy Land.
   ולקחת מראשית כל פרי האדמה, “You shall take from all the first fruit of the soil, etc.” our sages (Bikkurim 3,1) in describing the exact procedures to be followed when performing this commandment, wrote as follows: “a farmer goes into his field or orchard to check on the progress of the fruit or grain and when he observes a fig or cluster of grapes which has (almost) ripened, he attaches a string to it (to mark it) and declares that particular fruit as bikkurim.” Once he has made such a declaration the fruit becomes sanctified even while still on the tree although it has not yet completed its growth process completely. When the fruit is fully developed and cut from the tree it does not need to be sanctified again. Bikkurim are brought only from the choicest of one’s fruit. This is the meaning of the term מראשית, i.e. “from the best “(not necessarily from the first). The term ראשית also appears in that sense in Amos 6,6, where it means: “they anoint themselves with the choicest oils.” This is a principle that applies to the performance of all the commandments, i.e. one uses the choicest materials available when performing the commandment, not something of average or inferior quality. This was the difference between the offering of Hevel and that of Kayin, his older brother. The Torah reports of Hevel that he used the choicest of his animals as a sacrifice; hence G’d turned with goodwill to his offering while rejecting that of Kayin who had used inferior material. (Genesis 4,4)
   אשר תביא, “which you are to bring;” if someone has set aside his bikkurim in order to bring them to the Temple and they have been lost or stolen he is liable for replacing them; We derive this from the text here where the word תביא implies a personal obligation for the owner to present this fruit to the priest in the Temple. It is one of the few commandments which cannot be performed by means of a “messenger, שליח, the task cannot be delegated. If at the time of taking the fruit from the tree the farmer had made a condition saying that he would delegate the task of transporting this fruit to the Temple such a condition is acceptable (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 2,21).
    Farmers living in the proximity of Jerusalem, must bring fresh grapes or figs as their bikkurim, whereas those living far away may bring dried grapes or dried figs instead. Bikkurim are not to be presented in the Temple before the festival of Shavuot, seeing the Torah wrote (Exodus 23,16) “the festival of cutting (grain harvest) the time of the bikkurim of your labour.” If a farmer did bring his bikkurim before that date the priest does not accept them but they have to remain in escrow until that festival and only at that time can they be designated as bikkurim (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 25-6). Concerning such situations the Torah writes in verse 11 of our chapter: “you shall rejoice with all the goodness, etc.,” etc., i.e. that the time of year when bikkurim are acceptable is the season when people are happy seeing that they started bringing in the year’s harvest. Traditionally, this period extends from the festival of Shavuot through the end of the harvest season. If the bringing of the bikkurim occurs later than the festival of Sukkot, the offering is accepted but the accompanying scriptural verses may not be recited (Sifri Ki Tavo item 297).
   מארצך, “from your land.” The sages in Sifri Ki Tavo 297 write that that as long as the particular species which qualifies as bikkurim is still in evidence on the land (unharvested) and the beasts of the field have not yet consumed any leftovers of such species, bikkurim are still acceptable. This prompted our sages to rule that after Chanukah one may no longer offer bikkurim, seeing that any fruit which ripens after that date is considered as part of the following year’s crop and must therefore be stored until the following Shavuot if it already ripened at such an early time of the year. (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 2,6)
   ושמת בטנא, “and you shall place it in a basket.” According to the plain meaning of the text the bikkurim were a distinctive present for the priest, an honour for the Almighty, and its presentation was of great practical use for the people of Israel. It was a present of great distinction for the priest seeing that the farmer personally carried the gift all the way to Jerusalem from whatever part of the country he lived in. It was an honour for the Almighty seeing that the farmer came all the way to offer prayers of thanksgiving to the Lord in connection with the bikkurim. The farmer acknowledged that all blessing originates with the Lord. The bikkurim procedure was of practical use to the Jewish people seeing that fulfillment of this commandment resulted in the bounty of the fields and orchards being greatly increased as G’d’s response to fulfillment of the commandment. The word טנא means the same as סל, “basket.” It serves as a receptacle for the fruit. This verse is the source for the ruling that the bikkurim must be presented in a receptacle (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 3,7). This is one of seven different parts of the procedure of bringing the bikkurim. They are: 1) bringing them to the designated site, 2) presentation in a suitable receptacle; 3) reciting the appropriate verses from the Torah; 4) the actual presentation to the priest; 5) an accompanying song, 6) the “heaving” of the fruit. 7) The remaining of the owner inside Jerusalem on the night following presentation. Let us describe the stages in detail: Bringing the fruit to a designated place, i.e. Jerusalem, is based on the line: “you will proceed to the place designated by the Lord to make a residence there for His name” (26,2). The need to deposit the bikkurim in a receptacle is based on the words ושמת בטנא, the same verse. The best way to comply with this instruction is to present each species of bikkurim in its own receptacle. However, if the various species have all been presented in the same receptacle this is acceptable. They must not, however, be mixed inside that receptacle but inferior species must be placed below superior species, such as the wheat which must be on top of the barley. Dates would have to be placed on top of both species of grain, etc. The figs are to be on top of all the other species. There is not to be a foreign substance intervening between the various layers of the fruit if they are all presented in the same receptacle (basket). It is best to surround the figs with grapes. (Maimonides ibid.)
    The donor brings pigeons and turtle doves at the same time as a sacrificial offering seeing the Torah writes: “you shall rejoice with all the goodness” (and there is no true enjoyment unless accompanied by the eating of some kind of meat (Pessachim 109). These birds were suspended on the sides of the basket in order to decorate the bikkurim. The birds attached to the baskets were offered as burnt-offering, whereas the ones carried by the donors in their hands served as peace-offerings, and they were given to the priests of the respective roster. The priests divide them among themselves as they do with other offerings (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 3,1). The recital of the verses pertaining to this commandment consisted of the reading of verses 5-to the middle of verse 10. This recital is to be in a loud voice and in Hebrew (the text of  the verses of the Torah in its original). This requirement is based on the words of Deut. 31,21 וענתה השירה הזאת, “this song shall speak up as...” Just as that song has to be recited in the original Hebrew, so the acknowledgment of G’d’s bounty when bringing the bikkurim has to be in the original Hebrew. Both the passages employ the word וענית when introducing the obligation. We find that expression also in connection with the recital of the confession of the elders that their hands are free from guilt of the unidentified victim of murder described at the end of Parshat Shoftim (Deut. 21,7). This declaration also has to be made in Hebrew. (Sotah 44)
     קרבן, the presentation of the offering; every person offering bikkurim must also offer a peace-offering. Song; the need to accompany the offering by a “song” is based on the verse: “you shall rejoice with all the goodness,” and joy is traditionally expressed as a form of song. Our sages base this on Psalms 33,3: הטיבו נגן בתרועה, “play sweetly with shouts of joy.” This is what the Levites did, beginning when the donors brought the bikkurim to the lobby of the Temple (עזרה). The “heaving,” waving of the basket with its contents. This is derived from the word והנחתו, “you are to deposit it,” implying that prior to being deposited it was “lifted, waved,” etc. The procedure consisted of the priest placing his hand under the hand of the owner and waving it to and fro (Sukkah 16). This is the meaning of the words (verse 4) “and the priest shall take (accept) the basket from your hand and place it in front of the altar of the Lord your G’d,” i.e. to swing it in front of the altar.  לינה, the requirement for the donor to spend the following night in Jerusalem. This rule is derived from Deut 16,7: “and you will turn in the morning (after the Passover) and return to your tents.” It is forbidden to depart from Jerusalem except on the morning after (or later). (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 3,14)
    The bikkurim are forbidden to non-priests as the Torah has compared them to תרומה, describing them as תרומת ידך, “the gift of your hand,” in Deut. 12,17. Our sages in Makkot 17 base this inference on the word מידך which follows the word הטנא in verse 4 of our chapter. Just as a non-priest must not eat תרומה, so he is also forbidden to eat bikkurim. A priest who is in pre-mourning for close relatives (אונן) is also forbidden to eat the bikkurim while in that state. Clearly, he is not in a joyous frame of mind, a prerequisite for eating bikkurim as we have explained (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 3,6). Someone offering his bikkurim may have his servant carry same while he is on the way to Jerusalem as far as the Temple Mount. Once he reaches that mount, he must place them on his own shoulder and carry them forthwith. This ruling applies even to the king. The recital of the passage from the Torah has to take place while the basket with the fruit is still on his shoulder. When he reaches the words (verse 10) “the earth which You have given to me,” he may deposit the basket, take hold of it with his hand, and the priest will then place his hand beneath his own and begin the weaving motion.
    If someone does not own any soil (farmland) but has bought a tree and wishes to offer the first fruit ripening on his tree he may do so without reciting the “confessional” (the term refers clearly to the passage from verse 5-10). This is because if he were to speak of the fruit of “his” soil he would make a liar of himself. A proselyte also may not recite the relevant passage seeing he cannot acknowledge that his forefathers cried out to the Lord while enslaved in Egypt (verse 7). There is an opinion in the Talmud according to which such a proselyte may recite the relevant passage seeing that Avraham is perceived as being the “father” of all proselytes. The author of that opinion cites as proof that G’d said to Avraham Genesis 17,5) “here I have made you the father of a multitude of nations.” This means that Avraham is the adopted father of all those who decide to take shelter under the benevolent wings of the Shechinah (convert to Judaism). Maimonides adopts this interpretation as halachically valid (Hilchot Bikkurim 4,3). Perhaps we may even detect a hint in the language of the text that proselytes may recite the passage, seeing that the Torah writes: “you as well as the proselyte and the Levite in your midst.” (verse 11) This appears to show that the Torah treats all three categories of Jews mentioned in that verse as equal in respect to the bikkurim legislation. 
    Priests and Levites who have planted orchards within their cities  in the outer rim reserved for gardens, etc., are subject to he law of bikkurim in every respect of that law. This is why the Torah wrote: “you as well as the Levite.” In the olden days the rule was that farmers who were able to read Hebrew would recite the passage unassisted, whereas those unable to read Hebrew would have it read for them and they would repeat it. It was found that as a result of this practice farmers who were illiterate would cease bringing their bikkurim to save themselves embarrassment. The Rabbis therefore decreed that the passage is to be read before everyone who brings bikkurim and will be repeated word by word by the farmer in order to save the illiterate farmers any possible embarrassment. (Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 3,11) This practice was similar to the practice nowadays not to allow individuals to read the passage from the Torah to which they have been called up so as not to put to shame those who are unable to read it by themselves.
    Maimonides Hilchot Bikkurim 4,16-17 describes the bringing of the bikkurim to Jerusalem in these words: “the notables of the respective towns along the route to Jerusalem would accompany the donors so that these would not appear as being solitary individuals bringing these gifts.” They based themselves on Proverbs 14,28 that “a throng of people constitutes honour for the king (the Almighty).” The donors would spend the night in the public square of the respective town they were passing and would not enter private houses so as to avoid entering an area which might house ritual impurity capable of being conferred upon them. On the morrow, early, the person appointed for this task would address them and say: “arise and let us ascend to the Lord our G’d.” The ox representing their peace-offering would precede them, its horns decorated with gold leaf, a laurel of olive (leaves) on its head. This was to alert people to the fact that the bikkurim consisted of the seven species which we mentioned earlier. A flute would play in front of them until they came close to Jerusalem. They would walk all along the way (not ride or travel in a coach) proclaiming the verse from Psalms 122,1: ”I rejoiced when they said to me we are going to the House of the Lord.” They would not walk all day long but only for two “hours” daily (points on the sundial). As soon as they approached Jerusalem they would dispatch messengers ahead  to inform the people of Jerusalem of their impending arrival. They would decorate the bikkurim at that time with kinds of crowns. If the bikkurim contained both fresh fruit and dried fruit they would place the former on top. The various dignitaries of Jerusalem would come out to welcome these donors of bikkurim. The welcoming committee would correspond to the size of the delegation of people bringing their bikkurim at that time. As soon as they entered the gates of Jerusalem they would chant the verse from Psalms 122. All the skilled artisans (who would not be required to interrupt their work to welcome Torah scholars) did come out to welcome these farmers honouring them for performing this commandment. When the processional reached the Temple Mount, each farmer would place his basket on his shoulder and proclaim the verse from Psalms 122,1. This would be followed by the recital of Psalms 150,1: “Praise the Lord in His holy Sanctuary” until the end of this hymn, i.e. “let all that breathes praise the Lord, Hallelujah.” When the procession reached the foyer of the Temple the Levites would commence their song commencing with Psalms 30,2: “let me extol You O Lord, for You have lifted me up, and have not let my enemies rejoice over me.”
    A Midrashic approach to the subject of bikkurim and the words: “and you will place it in a basket.” The wealthy farmers would bring their bikkurim in baskets made of silver threads, whereas the poorer farmers would make the baskets out of bark peeled from  the willow tree. Both the fruit and the basket would be presented to the priests as it is written: “the priest will take (accept) the basket from your hand.” You should pay especial attention to the spelling of the word הטנא, as its numerical value equals that of the name of G’d spelled א-ד-נ-י, =65. I will refer to this allusion and its meaning still later. The sages of the Midrash also explained (Tanchuma Ki Tavo 1) that it behooves us to compare the tremendous impact of the performance of the commandment of bikkurim in securing G’d’s goodwill with other efforts made by man to secure the grace and goodwill of his monarch. When one has a request to make of one’s king (flesh and blood), one may have to bribe liberally in order first of all to secure an audience. Even when one has spent all this money to secure the audience one does not have a guarantee that the king will grant one’s request. Compare this with the performance of the commandment of presenting the bikkurim to one’s King (G’d). Not only is a single fig, date, or stalk of grain an adequate price of admission to the presence of the Almighty in the Temple, but G’d assures us of His goodwill, seeing that the sages interpreted the wording of verse 15 in our chapter to mean that the petitioner is saying to G’d that he will not leave from the Temple precincts until he has been assured that his plea has been answered. Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai said that a heavenly echo would be heard assuring the petitioner that in the following year he would again be able to fulfill this commandment just as he had done on the present occasion. This is implied by the words of verse 16: “on this day the Lord your G’d commands you to perform these statutes, etc.” [If G’d were not willing to accept future bikkurim from the farmer why would He command him to do so again? Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: In the words ושמתא בטנא, the vowel patach under the letter ב which is unusual as we had not heard about this basket previously, is a reference to the last letter ה in the tetragram. The bikkurim are called ראשית, a reference to the first three letters which represent the beginning of the universe and its creation. These first three letters of the tetragram are found in association with the word ראשית in Jeremiah 26,1 בראשית ממלכת יהויקים, the name of that king being an allusion to when G’d created =יקים the universe, using the previous three letters י-ה-ו. These first three letters are perceived as enabling the last letter to serve as a receptacle of the universe, holding it together, so to speak. This is somewhat similar to the basic element earth or dust, which enables the three preceding elements fire, water, and air to be joined together and retained as a whole. Similarly, the basket in our passage represents an integral part of the whole bikkurim procedure. The words ולקח הכהן הטנא [instead of את הטנא, Ed.] suggests that the priest is the representative of G’d, here described as the One holding all the components of the universe together to ensure that they do not disintegrate. The universe is maintained due to its constant motion, the planets being in unending orbit. The weaving, תנופה, which is part of the bikkurim procedure, symbolises this element.
    Furthermore, these steps are to alert us to the fact that G’d not only supervises the motions and movements in His universe in general, but also in their very detailed movement; He is perceived as standing inside the טנא looking at the periphery to ensure that all is well in His universe. Our author uses the verse in Song of Songs 2,9: “He was standing behind our wall, observing through the windows, peering through the lattices” as the way he describes G’d’s function.
    26,3. הגדתי היום לה' אלוקיך, “I have declared today to the Lord your G’d, etc.” The word “your G’d,” instead of “our G’d,” seems incomprehensible here. How could the person making  this declaration be allowed to exclude himself from the community by using such wording (grammar)? It appears as if he did not share the same belief in G’d as his compatriots! However, consider that if the wording had been לה' אלוקינו, it would not have been clear whom he considered as the Lord. Now that he uses the wording written by the Torah it is clear that when he addresses the High Priest he speaks of the Lord on whose behalf this Priest officiates. The moment he associates the Lord with the one in whose service the Priest serves, there can be no doubt that the donor also serves the same Lord, else why present the gift to the High Priest of that G’d? It is clear now that whoever is the G’d of the High Priest is also the G’d of the person bringing the bikkurim. It is possible that the expression introducing this declaration, i.e. הגדתי, represents sort of a continuation such as in Psalms 51,17 ופי יגיד תהלתך, “and let my mouth express Your Fame,” i.e. continue, extend the power of You G’d which is already evident in the world. The person engaged in prayer effectively extends G’d’s power, seeing that the very fact that he turns to G’d in supplication proves that he acknowledges G’d’s power to grant his requests. When we find the line הוא תהלתך והוא אלוקיך in Deut. 10,21, this implies that what the generation of the Exodus experienced in their lifetime was a continuation, an extension of the power of the Lord which had been not quite so manifest previously. The whole formula לה' אלוקיך, so typical of משנה תורה, the Book of Deuteronomy, which is itself a continuation of what preceded it, is therefore appropriate as an introduction to this declaration by the farmer bringing the bikkurim.
    26,5. ארמי אובד אבי, “my father (Yaakov) was a wandering Arami.” The Torah here refers to Yaakov as an ארמי (as if he had been a person born in Aram) The meaning of the line is: “my father had become a poor Arami.” In other words, by the time my father arrived in Aram he had become impoverished. The word אובד also appears in hat sense in Proverbs 31,6 where the words תנו שכר לאובד mean: “give liquor to the poor person.” We know that Yaakov endured much pain while serving Lavan. He himself testified to this when he said (Genesis 31,40) “by day scorching heat consumed me.”
   וירד מצרימה, “he descended to Egypt.” Here too the meaning is that at the time Yaakov descended to Egypt he had once again become impoverished so that the farmer reciting this prayer acknowledges that seeing he had not inherited anything from his father he owes all to the Lord. He (Yaakov) resided in Egypt, a small clan, few in numbers. Subsequently, the descendants of Yaakov developed into a numerous and great nation. Whereas the name Yisrael had once referred to an individual, it then became an appellation for a whole people. You O Lord have redeemed us from hard labour  and have set us free by performing supernatural miracles  and have given us a land flowing with milk and honey. The moral lesson implied in this whole recitation is that precisely at a time when one is prosperous and free from worry one has to look back upon what preceded this success and acknowledge who it is that enabled one to achieve this well-being. This is what Kohelet 7,14 spelled out when he said: “be pleased when things go well, but in a time of misfortune reflect.” He meant that on a day when everything is going well reflect on the days of misfortune which preceded the present. Only by reflecting that one had not always been so well-off, does one learn to appreciate one’s present good fortune. This is why it is incumbent upon us to thank the Lord on days when everything is going well.
    Onkelos understands the word אובד as a reference to Lavan who is described as ארמי אובד, meaning that Lavan wanted to exterminate Yaakov (להאביד) and would have succeeded had not G’d warned him during the night before he caught up with Yaakov not to harm him (Genesis 31,29). Our sages, following Onkelos, teach that when a pagan intends to perform a forbidden act, this very intention is already accounted for him as if he had carried out his evil plan. After all, how else could the Torah describe Lavan as destroying Yaakov seeing he never laid a hand on him! The word אובד therefore reflects Lavan’s intent rather than his deed. If a pagan intends to perform a good deed but does not get around to carry it out, he is not given credit for the mere intention of performing the good deed in question. This is based on Daniel 6,15: ”and until the sun set made every effort to rescue him.” G’d did not give the king credit for his efforts until he had actually carried them out. When an Israelite intends to commit a sin but did not carry it out, G’d does not record the thought as a deed until after it has been carried out, seeing we read in Micah 2,1: “Ah, those who plan iniquity and design evil on their beds, when morning dawns they do it.” In other words, they are not debited with the plan until it has been carried out. David said in Psalms 66,18: “Had I an evil thought in my mind, the Lord would not have listened.” On the other hand, when David had a plan such as to build the Temple, he was given credit for it though he was prevented from carrying out his plan. This is why we recite psalm 30,1: “a hymn on the occasion of the inauguration of the House (Temple) by David” [instead of by Solomon, Ed.] (compare Midrash Tehillim 30).
    
    26,13. בערתי את הקודש, “I have removed the holy things, etc.” This is a reference to Terumah gedolah, which is sacred and generally amounts to 2% of the farmer’s grain harvest.(Terumot 4,3).
   מן הבית, “from the house.”  This refers to challah, something sacred prepared in the house and given to the priests.
   וגם נתתיו ללוי, “I have also given (it) to he Levite.” This is a reference to the first tithe, i.e. 10 per cent of the grain harvest remaining after the Terumah of the priest has been set aside. The letter ו in front of the word גם refers to the second tithe, the one  consumed in Jerusalem by the farmer and his family.
   לגר, ליתום,ולאלמנה, “to the proselyte, the orphan and the widow.” This is a reference to what is known as מעשר עני, “the tithe for the poor,” applicable in years when the second tithe is not applicable. The various gifts fell due in the following sequence: first the farmer sets aside the תרומה גדולה which is given to the priest. It is called ראשית, as the Torah (Deut. 18,4) speaks of ראשית דגנך.  After that the farmer sets aside the first tithe intended for the Levite, as the Torah writes: “I have given to the Levite all the tithes of Israel” (Numbers 18,21). The Levite in turn has to set aside 10% of what he received as tithe from the farmer as a “tithe from the tithe,” and give it to the priest. After that, the farmer sets aside for his own use the second tithe which he took with him to Jerusalem and consumed there. This is the meaning of עשר תעשר את כל תבואת זרעך ואכלת לפני ה' אלוקיך in Deut. 14,22. The reason the Torah repeated the words עשר תעשר is because two different tithes are referred to. After that, in the third and sixth year of the שמטה cycle, the farmer set aside the tithe for the poor and distributed it according to how he saw fit. This is the meaning of Deut. 26,12: “to the proselyte, the orphan, and the widow, you shall give it,” as these categories of people are presumed to be most likely the ones having a claim to it. This is what the Torah speaks of in the paragraph commencing with verse 12 “when you have completed the tithing of your harvest in the third year, the year of the tithe.” The Torah teaches that at the end of the third year of the cycle a new kind of tithe has to be set aside, the tithe specifically intended for the poor. In the years that this tithe applies the second tithe does not apply, i.e. the farmer does not have to take it to Jerusalem in order to consume it there but he hands it out locally. After having properly observed all the commandments pertaining to gifts to the priest, the Levite, to the poor (and consuming the second tithe in Jerusalem), he is to recite the declaration recorded here affirming that he has done his duty and that as a result he looks forward to being in G’d’s good graces (verse 15). He is not allowed to recite this “confessional” until after he has completed the whole series of gifts prescribed in the Torah. The declaration in question is recited on the last day of Passover of the fourth and seventh year of the shemittah cycle respectively, seeing that the words תכלה לעשר imply “on the festival when all the tithes have to come to an end.” The harvest from many trees is still collected long after the Sukkot festival, so that the confessional cannot be recited until the following festival, i.e. Pessach. Anyone who has failed to distribute the various tithes by that time must remove them from his house (destroy them). This is why we are told in Avot 5,12 that certain disasters (pestilence) which occur in the fourth year of the cycle are due to the failure of the farmers to discharge their obligations of tithing properly. (a plague in the fourth year indicates failure to distribute the tithe to the poor in the third year, whereas a plague in the seventh year is indicative of the tithe for the poor not having been distributed during the sixth year of the cycle). The destruction of the leftover tithes occurred on the penultimate day of the Passover so that the confessional could be recited on the afternoon of the last day (Maimonides Hilchot Maasser Sheyni 11,7).
   ככל מצותך אשר צויתיך, “in accordance with all of your commandments which I have commanded you.” A reference to the setting aside of all the aforementioned tithes. Our sages in the Mechilta Mishpatim 19 state that the words imply that not only have the tithes been given but that they had been given in the required sequence. They base the requirement to do so on Exodus 22,28: מלאתך ודמעך לא תאחר, “do not be late in giving your respective offerings.”
   לא עברתי ממצותיך, “I have not infringed on any of Your commandments.” The farmer declares that he did not use an excess contribution from one species to save himself part of the contribution of another species. Neither did he use produce which had already been harvested to be part of the tithe for produce which had not yet been harvested. He had not used last year’s harvest to discharge the duty to tithe from this year’s harvest, nor vice versa.
   ולא שכחתי, “and I did not forget.” This means that when giving (setting aside) the respective tithes the farmer did not omit mentioning the name of the Lord. We know that any benediction which does not include mentioning the name of the Lord and His kingdom is as if it had never been recited at all (Berachot 12). 
    
    26,14. לא אכלתי באוני ממנו, “I have not eaten of it while in a state of (pre)mourning.” A person engaged in preparing for the funeral of near relatives is forbidden to eat any sacred foods. (Sifri)
   ולא בערתי ממנו בטמא, “and I have not removed or used up any of it while in a state of ritual impurity.” I did not set it aside while I was contaminated.
   ולא נתתי ממנו למת, “neither did I give any of it for a dead person.” I did not use it to buy a coffin or other necessities for the dead person’s burial from the proceeds of the produce designated as tithes. (Sifri 303 on this verse) The reason that the Torah makes the farmer recite this is that not only did he not use the proceeds from such produce for something merely permitted, but even if he had “misused” it in order to fulfill a commandment such as a burial from the proceeds this is also forbidden and he has to declare that he had not done so. In other words, one must not appear as if one pays one’s debts by diverting funds destined for another commandment in order to do so. The tithes must be used only for food and drink. One must not even buy clothing from the proceeds.
   שמעתי בקול ה' אלוקי, “I have hearkened to the voice of the Lord my G’d.” I did so when I brought the tithes to the Temple.
   עשיתי ככל אשר צויתני, “I did in accordance with all that You commanded me.” I rejoiced and made others happy with it (Maasser Sheyni 5,11); this is based on the instruction: “you shall rejoice with all the goodness” (verse 11).
    
    26,15. השקיפה ממעון קדשך, “Please look down from the holy site where You reside.” The farmer concludes as if to say: “we have done what we have to do, now do what You have promised, please.” (Maasser Sheyni 5,13)
   וברך את עמך, “and bestow blessing on Your people,” sons and daughters;
   ואת האדמה אשר נתתה לנו, “and the earth which You have given to us;” in the form of beneficial rain expressing Your goodwill.
   כאשר נשבעת לאבותינו ארץ זבת חלב ודבש, “as You have sworn to our forefathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.” Your promise was that the rain would make the produce of the land tasty. (Maasser Sheyni 11,16) Elsewhere, according to Rashi, this verse is understood to mean: “seeing that we have done what is obligatory for us, You ought to do what is obligatory for You.” The reason the Torah uses the expression מעון קדשך, instead of the word מכון, as Solomon used in his prayer at the inauguration of the Temple (Kings I 8,39), is that the farmer acknowledges that he has rejoiced in fulfilling G’d’s command- ments and the heaven known as מעון is traditionally perceived to be the area in which joy resides and originates (Chagigah 12). This is why Moses chose to refer to the term מעון when formulating this declaration/prayer. The term השקיפה used here for “looking down,” a word never used elsewhere except in connection with disaster, (Jerusalem Talmud Maasser Sheyni 5,5) is to teach how great is the reward for fulfillment of a commandment when it is fulfilled joyfully. It has the power to convert a normally negative virtue into becoming a positive virtue. Rabbi Chanina, son of Papa, is on record as saying: “come and observe the powerful effect of giving alms to the poor. Every time the word השקפה, i.e. וישקף appears in the Torah it is always a preamble to something destructive occurring. Here it is a preamble to blessing being bestowed.”
    If you will analyse the subject of giving alms to the poor more profoundly you will find that the תרומה which has been described as ראשית, is an allusion to the emanation חכמה which comprises within it the emanation בינה so that it completes the cycle of the 50 “gates” of wisdom which exist in the universe. This is why (generally) תרומה represents one 50th part of the harvest. This is why the sages when defining תרומה referred two it as “2 parts in 100.” The מעשר ראשון which consist of ten per cent alludes to the tribe of Levi (the original Levi) whom we proved to have been the “tenth” son of Yaakov [starting the count from Binyamin, compare Korach 18,19]. The מעשר שני also represents the same principle; seeing it is the first tithe which we retain, it is in reality also a kind of “first tithe.” It is the first tithe of the original tithe. The tithes for the poor which are being set aside in the third and sixth year of the שמטה cycle are an allusion to the emanation יסוד, so called because it is of decisive influence on events in our world and is “distilled” from the seventh emanation. It occurred precisely in the middle of the seven year שמטה cycle.
    With the setting aside (and distributing) the מעשר עני, the tithe for the poor, all the various tithes have been concluded whether in respect of higher emanations or lower emanations. This is the meaning of the words: “when you have completed all the tithe(s) of all of your harvest in the third year” (verse 12). It is why the Torah chose the expression כי תכלה [an expression reminiscent of when G’d had concluded the creation of the universe in Genesis 2,1, Ed.]. The tithe to the poor represents the essence and hence the final tithe of the various tithes legislated here. This also accounts for the otherwise unusual wording of Deut. 14,22 עשר תעשר, [which sounds at first glance as if a tithe could be given repeatedly. Ed.] This is why in that chapter the Torah legislated that at the end of three years the farmer is to remove from his house all the tithes of that year and deposit it in “your” gates, (Deut. 14,28). The word “your gates” in that connection is an allusion to the “gates of prayer. Just as in a physical sense these tithes which had not yet been distributed must be made available to all in a public area of the town, so in a spiritual sense, by doing so, the farmer’s accumulated merits due to his fulfilling these commandments are concentrated in the spiritual domain known as the gateway to prayer, to the regions in heaven where prayer is heard and answered. This is why the declaration listed in our chapter must be recited in Hebrew and audibly. [Although, according to Maimonides Hilchot Maasser Sheyni 11,16 this declaration may be recited in any language, the concluding verse commencing with the word השקיפה has to be said in Hebrew, seeing it is a prayer, i.e. a petition. Ed.] When reciting the whole of this declaration the farmer acknowledges the sum total of what Judaism is about, it is a declaration of faith including a statement that he has not only not deviated from the מצות מעשיות, the performance of the deeds prescribed, but that he is in full agreement with the theological/philosophical symbolism repre-sented by these commandments. [I paraphrased this passage somewhat. Ed.] The author understands the words אדמה and ארץ in this passage as also referring to the celestial counterparts of these regions.
    
    26,15. היום הזה ה' אלוקיך מצוך לעשות, “This day, Hashem your G’d commands you.” When Moses said these words, this was during the fortieth year. How could this be since 40 years had elapsed since the Torah had been given, and nothing new had been added to the Torah since? The wording (this day) teaches that Torah legislation is to be considered as beloved as if it had only been given on that very day at Mount Sinai (Tanchuma Ki Tavo 1). Regarding a similar statement in the wording of the Kriyat Shema (Deut. 6,6) where we read: “which the Lord your G’d has commanded you this day,” our sages (Pessikta Zutrata) comment “they should be as fresh for you as if they had been received from Mount Sinai on this very day.” There is a reason why once the Midrash uses the word “new, fresh,” and another time it uses the term “beloved” as the manner in which we are to relate to Torah legislation. People’s reactions to certain pheno-mena vary not only individually, but are also affected by prevailing attitudes in different generations and environments. Man’s heart has a tendency of being governed by what his eyes behold. When something is within his range of vision he is liable to remember it, whereas as soon as it is out of sight he tends to no longer focus on it and to forget it. Miracles, etc., do not continue indefinitely and therefore are apt to be forgotten. The Torah therefore has to warn us not to allow this natural process to affect us and to insist that just as the people at the time of the miracles were firm in their faith and belief, we in our respective generations must be no less so. This lesson applies particularly to periods when the Jewish people are in exile and miracles do not manifest themselves. We are therefore exhorted by the Torah to relate to the Torah with the same degree of fondness as we did when we were a sovereign nation in our own land. At the same time, we have to be urged to view the Torah legislation as something new, reminding us of all the miracles that preceded the giving of the Torah. In other words, the very experience of the revelation at Mount Sinai is to be recalled by us every time we study any of the laws of the Torah.
    One may view this subject as if our verse here commenced with the words היום הזה, and concluded with the words ובכל נפשך, i.e. the last words in the first paragraph of the Kriyat Shema. This is to teach that we are to dedicate ourselves to such a degree to all the commandments of the Torah that just as we would have been prepared to lay down our lives for any of these laws on the day they were commanded at Mount Sinai, so we are prepared to lay down our lives for them if called upon at the present time, as if we were still under the psychological impact of the revelation at MountsSinai. 
    
    26,17. את ה' האמרת היום, “You have distinguished Hashem today, etc.” The word האמרת means “to elevate, to distinguish.” (Ibn Ezra) It is found in this context in Isaiah 17,6 בראש אמיר, “on the topmost branch.” Onkelos also understands the word in that sense when he renders it as חטבת, similar to Proverbs 7,16: חטובות אטון מצרים, “coloured sheets of Egyptian linen, (excellent linen).” It is reported in the name of Rabbi Yehudah Halevi that he understood the word האמרת as a derivative of ויאמר, “he said,” in which case the meaning would be that “you have done the right thing in the eyes of the Lord by accepting His Torah until you turned around and proclaimed that He was to be your G’d.”
    
    26,18. וה' האמירך, “and the Lord reciprocated with similar sentiments towards you.” In other words, just as you accepted Him as G’d, so He performed so many miracles on your behalf that as a result you agreed to view yourself as exclusively His people. G’d confirmed this at Mount Sinai when he said in Exodus 19,5: “if you will surely hearken to My voice and be loyal to My covenant, then you will become a treasured people for Me, more so than any of the other nations.”
   ולשמור את כל מצותיו, “and to observe all His command-ments.” This means that the statements about Israel’s status which we just described are contingent on the people observing the Lord’s commandments. A Jewish people who fails to observe these commandments does not qualify for the distinctive title עם סגולה.
    
    26,19. על כל הגוים אשר עשה לתהילה ולשם ולתפארת, “over all the nations that He made, for praise, for renown, and for splendour.” Whereas the Lord will make the Jewish people supreme in these respects, He does not do so with any of the other nations as they have been assigned to the various planets which govern their fates. Jeremiah 10,16  לא כאלה חלק יעקב כי יוצר הכל הוא, “not like these is the portion of Yaakov, for it is He Who formed all things.” This difference is meant when the Torah describes the Jewish people as being לשם ולתהילה. Israel’s fame is its praising the Lord and His great name. He is Israel’s G’d in a somewhat exclusive manner.
    
    27,1. שמור את כל המצוה, “Observe the whole command-ment, etc.” The Torah refers to the impending command to erect stones on Mount Eyval (verse 4) after they have been inscribed, stones taken from the river Jordan at the time the people would cross that river. These stones are intended to commemorate the miracles which occurred enabling the Israelites to cross the river without becoming wet at a time of year when it was swollen with melting snow from Mount Hermon. There were a total of 12 such stones as we know from Joshua 4,2 that one stone per tribe was to be erected. Joshua commanded the twelve men to whom he had assigned the task of taking these stones from the river after the people had completed crossing. These stones were carried on the shoulders of the twelve men, each of whom represented his tribe (Joshua 4,1-8). These stones were deposited next to the place at Gilgal where the Israeites spent the first night in the Holy Land, close to the river. The stones which were erected on Mount Eyval had the entire text of the Torah inscribed on them. Another twelve stones (Joshua 4,9) were erected in the river bed of the Jordan at the site of the miracle where the priests with the Holy Ark had crossed and G’d had arrested the flow of the river so as not to swamp the Holy Ark (Joshua 4,7). The reason the stones are described as having to be “large,” is to enable the engravers to inscribe the whole text of the Torah on their surface. The latter stones are reported as still being in existence at the time the Book of Joshua had been written. [What is written in Joshua 4,3-4 is an elaboration of what was mentioned in summary in the preceding verse 2.] (compare Daat Mikra). There were a total of 36 stones, three groups of 12. Twelve were erected in the river bed of the Jordan, before the Jordan had resumed flowing south. 12 were erected at Gilgal. The final twelve were taken all the way to Mount Eyval. These latter stones were made into the altar on Mount Eyval as mentioned by Rashi in his commentary on verse two of our chapter. [According to a view also mentioned by Rashi in conjunction with the Baraitha in Sotah 35, the stones which were made into a (temporary) altar on Mount Eyval were brought back to Gilgal and erected there.
    Our author feels that the plain meaning of our verses allows for only a total of 24 stones, 12 of which were erected in the river bed, whereas the other 12 were taken from the river. The stones erected in the river bed remain to this day and their purpose had been to enable the feet of the priests carrying the Holy Ark not to get wet in the slime while crossing the river. [the actual flow of the water had been arrested in deference to the presence of the Holy Ark. Ed.]
    We find the expression באר used in Deut. 1,5 when Moses is reported as “explaining” the Torah. We find it used again in verse 5 of our chapter here. This gives rise to the exegesis by means of a גזרה שוה that just as Moses explained the Torah in 70 languages, the inscribing of the stones with the Torah also was in 70 languages.
    The words והקמות לך אבנים גדולות (verse 3) may be understood as a כלל, a general summary of the subject under discussion, whereas the words (verse 4) והיה בעברכם את הירדן תקימו את האבנים האלה may be viewed as the details elaborating on the summary mentioned before. It is as if the Torah wanted to say that the twelve stones mentioned earlier were to be treated in a certain manner. Verse four refers to the aforementioned stones and instructs for them to be erected on Mount Eyval. They are to be covered with plaster and then inscribed after the altar on Mount Eyval has been erected. [the building of the altar is to precede the erecting of these stones, not as the wording appears at first glance. (Rabbi Chavell) Ed.] Following all this, the stones are to be inscribed with the text of the entire Torah, well clarified (verse 8). If we do not explain the verse in this fashion i.e. on the basis of A) summary (כלל) followed by B) detailed instructions (פרט), the entire passage will sound confusing. What would be the point of writing in verse 8 that the entire Torah, well clarified, is to be inscribed on these stones, seeing that G’d had already instructed the Torah to be inscribed on the stones in verse 3? Furthermore, how could the Torah first write: “you are to write upon them” (verse 3), and subsequently “you shall build an altar there?” (verse 5) The Talmud in Sotah 32 also appears to understand our paragraph as an example of the exegetical principle  of כלל ופרט.
    
    27,2. ושדת אותם בשיד, “and you shall coat them with plaster.” The Torah did not use the term גיר, chalk, in this instance as the prophet Isaiah 27,9 used when describing shattered altar stones. This in spite of the fact that גיר is a far stronger material than שיד. The reason the Torah ordered the stones to be covered with שיד is that this is a material which stands up to rain better than גיר.
    
    27,3. וכתבת עליהן את כל דברי התורה הזאת, “You are to inscribe on them all the words of this Torah.” This teaches that the entire Torah was written on these stones. This is also the view of Nachmanides who writes: “for we have found in the book of Tagai that the entire Torah was inscribed upon them starting with Genesis and concluding with the words: ‘before the eyes of the whole of Israel’ (Deut. 34,12), complete with all the decorations of the letters which we are familiar with.” These stones were the model from which the script of the Torah nowadays was copied. Thus far Nachmanides. According to Rabbi Saadyah Gaon, quoted by Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra, these stones only contained a list of the 613 commandments as they are recorded in the Book Halachot Gedolot in the form of warnings.
   למען אשר תבוא אל הארץ, “so that you may arrive in the land,” etc.; this means that on account of your keeping these commandments of the Torah you will be allowed to enter the Holy Land. The reason the stones had to be erected and inscribed was to remind the people that their conquest of the land was only designed to enable them to keep the Torah in that land. This is the way Nachmanides understands these words. (verse 6) This would then be the reason that the sages decreed that mention of the Torah must be made when reciting the benediction acknowledging our taking possession of the land of Israel (in the recital of grace, ועל תורתך שלמדתנו) 
    It is possible to explain the words למען אשר תבוא אל הארץ as “in order to enable you to come to the land,” seeing that the power of the Torah destroys all our enemies in the land enabling us to settle in their land as our heritage.
    
    27,12. אלה יעמדו לברך. “These are to stand (on Mount Gerizim) to bless the people.” Our sages (in Sotah 32) state that the blessing consisted of: “Blessed be the man who has not made a hewn image, etc.,” whereas the curse consisted of the words spelled out in verses 15-26. Six tribes whose ancestors were sons of either Leah or Rachel stood on the mountain facing which the blessing was pronounced, whereas the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah as well as Reuven and Zevulun stood on Mount Eyval, in whose direction the curses were pronounced in order to complete the number of six tribes required to stand there. The reason the tribe of Shimon was also associated with the tribes in whose direction the blessings were pronounced was that the Torah lists here eleven different curses and the Torah wanted to avoid pronouncing a curse in his direction. Moses decreed that all the tribes receive a blessing, seeing, however, that the tribe of Shimon was not deserving of a blessing on account of Zimri its leader who had caused so much death amongst his own people, he wanted to at least not make it appear as if he were being cursed, i.e. of associating the word ארור with something pronounced in his direction. Had he allowed this to occur Shimon would have been beyond redemption. (Rashi in the name of Rabbi Moshe Hadarshan)
    Our sages in Sifri Vezot Habrachah item 348, claim that the blessing of the tribe of Yehudah contained within it an allusion to a blessing for the tribe of Shimon, seeing that Shimon’s tribal territory was described as an enclave within that of the tribe of Yehudah. The fact that the tribe of Reuven was placed on the mountain in whose direction the curses were pronounced does not constitute something negative against this tribe. I believe that this was the final part of the apology for the episode described in the Torah involving Reuven and Bilhah. Cursing someone who sleeps with the wife of his father (verse 20) was meant to draw our attention to the fact that actually Reuven had never been guilty of that sin. This is why the sages of the Midrash (Yalkut Shimoni Vayechi 157) claim that Yaakov, his father, had already told him that the stigma which had attached itself to him on account of what is described as יצועי עלה in Genesis 49,4 would not be totally removed from him until the one (leader Moses) of whom the Torah had written עלה, “arise!” would come. As soon as Moses arranged for the tribe of Reuven to take his place among the tribes facing the pronouncement of the curses, Reuven’s stigma had been completely wiped out. What occurred at Mount Eyval enabled our sages to say (Shabbat 58) that anyone accusing Reuven of having committed the sin of sleeping with his father’s wife is in error.
    What precisely was the arraignment of the respective tribes like on these two mountains? Our sages in Sotah 32 have described it in these words: “6 tribes ascended the top of Mount Gerizim whereas 6 other tribes ascended the top of Mount Eyval. The priests and Levites took up their position in the valley separating these two mountains. The priests would surround the Holy Ark. The Levites would surround the priests. The Israelites would be on either side of them (on the mountain). This is the meaning of ‘and all of Israel its elders and law-enforcers and judges would stand on either side of the Holy Ark facing the Priests who carried the Ark of the Covenant’ (Joshua 8,33). The Priests and Levites turned their faces in the direction of Mount Gerizim, beginning to recite the blessing, commencing with the words: ‘blessed be the man who has not constructed a hewn image, etc.’ The tribes standing on both mountains would respond by chanting “Amen.” The blessings were followed by the curses, a similar procedure being followed.” After completion of this ceremony they brought the stones and built an altar of them, covering the altar with plaster and inscribing on it the entire Torah in seventy languages. This is proven by verse 8, i.e. באר היטב. After this they took the stones with them returning to their assigned place for the night (Gilgal). Thus far the wording of the Mishnah. [The difficulty in all this is the distance from Gilgal to Mount Eyval and the impossibility to accomplish all this within a day without miracle. [compare the various commentators of the Mishnah, Ed.]
    
    27,15. ארור האיש אשר יעשה פסל ומסכה, “cursed be the man who will construct a hewn image, etc.” Our sages in Avodah Zarah 52 understand the wording to mean that the curse becomes effective from the time construction of that image commences. We find proof of this in Deut. 9,21: “and the sin which you had constructed, the golden calf, etc.” Clearly, Moses considered the golden calf as a sin before it had even emerged from the crucible.
   ושם בסתר, “and he emplaced it secretly;” the Torah refers to idolatry which had not come to the attention of the authorities. Had it come to the attention of the court, the court would have dealt with the perpetrator and there would not be a need to pronounce a curse on him. Our sages in Avodah Zarah 51 state that idols made by Israelites become forbidden only from the moment they have been worshipped, whereas idols constructed by pagans become forbidden immediately. This is why the Torah refers to פסילי אלוהיהם, “hewn images of their deities” (Deut. 7,25) as having to be burned even if they have not yet served their intended function.
    Among the eleven sins listed here, the sin of idolatry is mentioned first as it is equivalent to all other sins combined (Chulin 8). This is followed by the sin of belittling father or mother, seeing that G’d, father, and mother, are the three partners who between them produce another human being (Kidushin 30). This is why the Torah is insistent that all of these three be treated with honour and respect. The reason the Torah singled out these eleven sins from among all the others, is that they result in exile for the people if they become habitually guilty of these sins. Now that the people were about to enter the Holy Land, it was important for them to realise which sins, if committed knowingly, would result in their forfeiting the land.
    According to the plain meaning of the text, the selection of these eleven sins was due to their being capable of being perpetrated without the sinner having to expose himself publicly and therefore facing either the court or the disapproval of his peers. The Torah started by listing the worst of these sins, a sin committed vis-a-vis one’s Creator only. It followed with sins which are perpetrated between man and his parents, not necessarily involving anyone else. Who would know if the son belittled his parents? Similarly, the sin of השגת גבול, making adjustments (illegal) to he boundary between one’s property and that of one’s neighbour, is one committed surreptitiously, not publicly. Misleading a blind person by causing him to go astray is also something which the person against whom the sin has been committed is unable to pinpoint and accuse the sinner of. Perverting the judgment of proselytes, orphans, or widows also belongs into this category as these people have no one who will take up their cause; the sinner expects to get away with what he does. Perverting justice is altogether something that is covered up by the one doing it. The various examples of illicit sexual relations are in the nature of something secretive seeing they are perpetrated between consenting adults, neither of which is liable to admit to having been involved in such acts. Moreover, the examples of which the Torah speaks here are the kind that no one would be suspected of in the first place, thus preserving the likelihood that it will go undetected except by G’d. The accepting of bribes is also, by definition, something secretive seeing that it is neither in the interest of the judge nor the litigant involved to publicise what he has done. The Torah lists sleeping with an animal, as the animal, if raped, cannot protest its treatment, so that in effect the deed has been committed in secret. [There is some debate as to the correct text in the wording of our author as to why the sleeping between two males (homosexual relations) has not been listed. According to one view it was omitted because the second male, the passive one, could protest what has been done to him as opposed to the weaker sex, the women, who are afraid to complain. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach to the above. The eleven sins listed here correspond to eleven virtues mentioned by King David in Psalms 15 as determining who is entitled to sojourn in G’d’s tent, i.e. Temple. Anyone residing outside the land of Israel is obligated to practice these virtues; they are the very opposite of the sins listed in our chapter here. When David demands that the person be הולך תמים, live without blame, this parallels the Torah’s demand in Deut. 18,13 תמים תהיה עם ה' אלוקיך, “you shall be wholehearted with the Lord your G’d.” David’s demand to be פועל צדק, “do what is right,” means he must not rob or steal anything belonging to his fellow. Our sages (Baba Batra 88) phrased it as “righteousness should emanate from you, you should give a little extra to your customer rather than a little less than called for by the scales.” This is the opposite of adjusting boundaries in one’s favour. The next stipulation of David, i.e. “speaking the truth in one’s heart,” means that one’s heart and one’s mouth, one’s pronouncements, should by in harmony with one another. This is the reverse of steering the blind person the wrong way, pretending to be helpful to him. The words לא רגל על לשונו, “his tongue is not given to evil,” is the opposite of “striking his fellow in secret” (verse 25). This is a form of slander, הולך רכיל. The words לא עשה לרעהו רעה, “he has not committed any harm to his fellow,” is the reverse of perverting justice, listed in our chapter in verse 20. The words וחרפה לא נשא על קרובו, “he has not brought shame on his relative,” mean that  he has not perpetrated deeds which result in his relative becoming guilty of a sin, i.e. the reverse of the sexual acts described in our chapter. The words נבזה בעיניו נמאס “a contemptible man is abhorrent in his eyes,” mentioned by David (verse 4) as a qualification required to entitle one to be at home in the Temple, is the opposite of the sin of belittling one’s father and mother. The cause of such belittling is that one feels haughty and superior. Honouring those who are G’d-fearing, another prerequisite listed by David as part of the entrance fee to the Lord’s Sanctuary, is the reverse of belittling one’s parents. “Not having lent money to a fellow Jew and charging interest on it nor accepting a bribe against the innocent” (verse 5), is in stark contrast to the sin of spilling blood. People who take David’s moral/ethical demands to heart will be sure not to become shaky in their faith and fair conduct, ever. 
   וענו כל העם, “and all the people are to respond, etc.” This expression is reserved for the response in respect of committing idolatry. In connection with all the other ten sins listed, the Torah merely describes the people’s response as ואמר כל העם. The reason for this distinction is that the people had heard the prohibition of idolatry (the first two of the Ten Commandments) with their own ears directly from G’d. Their response therefore would be “a response in the true meaning of the word.”
    
    27,26. ארור אשר לא יקים את דברי התורה הזאת, “cursed he who will not uphold the words of this Torah.” This includes all the commandments in the Torah. The meaning of the verse is: “a person must acknowledge all the commandments of the Torah as true and emanating from G’d; he may not exclude a single one of them from his acceptance as such by denying that it is of value to body and soul. He must not view a single commandment as superfluous and meaningless.” This is the meaning of אשר לא יקים לעשות אותם. He must be convinced in his heart that all the commandments are worthwhile observing seeing they are all full of meaning to people engaged in studying them. A more literal meaning of the words לא יקים is cited by the Jerusalem Talmud Sotah 7, which claims it refers to a reader of the Torah who fails to raise the Torah scroll with the text visible to the entire congregation.
    
    28,2. ובאו עליך כל הברכות האלה והשיגוך, “and all these blessings will come upon you and will overtake you.” The meaning is that instead of having to chase after these blessings the blessings will “chase” after the Jewish people.
    
    28,4. ברוך פרי בטנך, “blessed will be the fruit of your womb.” In this instance, the blessings accruing to the body are listed before such blessings as having abundance of food and drink, blessings which commence only with verse 5. When the curses are listed, the Torah begins with describing deprivations involving the people’s food supply (verse 17) before describing afflictions of the body (verse 20). This teaches the concern of G’d for us in that before harming us physically, He warns us by depriving us of something affecting our pocketbook, something not involving pain to our bodies.
    
    28,10. וראו כל עמי הארץ כי שם ה' נקרא עליך ויראו ממך, “and all the nations of the earth will realise that the Lord’s name is proclaimed over you and they will be afraid of you.” If someone is a servant of the king’s minister his stature does not compare to someone who is a servant of the king himself. Even the ministers of the king are in awe of the king’s “private secretaries,” etc. This is because the title of the private secretary contains the appellation “Royal such and such,” i.e. reminds people of the proximity of this individual to the king.
    This is the subject discussed by our verse. Whereas the nations of the world are subjects (servants) of the King’s ministers, i.e. the sun and the moon, etc., all of whom are servants of the Lord, Israel knows of no intermediaries in its relationship with the Lord. As a result of appreciating this when aware of the bounty with which G’d provides the Jewish people, these nations will develop a sense of awe of the Israelites.  Seeing they will develop awe of the Israelites, they will most certainly develop awe of the master of the Israelites, i.e. the Lord.
    Our sages in Menachot 35 explain the words כי שם ה' נקרא עליך as a reference to the phylacteries on the head (עליך), according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrkanus. This would account for the fact that that phylactery has two letters ש (a three stemmed one and a four-stemmed one) as part of its housing, a halachah dating back to the times of Moses. It is as if our verse would tell us that when the nations of the world observe these two letters ש on our phylactery on our heads they will be seized by a sense of awe and develop fear of us.
    Furthermore, another mystical aspect of this verse is that when you read the alphabet in a reverse order i.e. exchanging letters such as א=ת, ש=ב, ר=ג, you will find that the letters of the great and Holy Name of the Lord, the tetragram, i.e. normally י-ה-ו-ה, are instead מ-צ-פ-צ whose combined numerical value is 300, or the same as ש. This is the letter ש written in larger than normal script at the beginning of שיר השירים, the beginning of Song of Songs. The year comprises 300 days on which the phylacteries are worn (after the Sabbath days and festival days have been deducted from the 365 days of the solar year). If you will look still  more deeply into the significance of this letter ש, you will find that it is an allusion to the שכינה, a manifestation of the presence of the Lord. The letter ש of the four “heads” is an allusion to the Shechinah which orbits (surrounds) the entire globe as well as outer space and which exerts its influence on the 4 “chayot” of the Divine entourage (מרכבה) described both in the visions of Ezekiel and Isaiah.
    The strap to which the phylactery of the head is tied, and which has a knot in the shape of the letter ד, is an allusion to the four kinds of wind which operate (low) on earth from four directions guided by the Shechinah. These winds sometimes blow upwards and sometimes downwards. The straps (the part under the knot which looks like the letter ד and which continue in a downward direction), indicate that the Divine input into this earth’s domain occurs from above in a downward direction, i.e. emanates from the higher emanations חכמה and בינה.
    Consider the fact that already in the manner in which man’s body has been constructed the nose may be considered as analogous to the letter שין, the two nostrils leading in the direction of the brain, the site of חכמה and בינה. The significance of this organ  (brain/nose) which is “stamped” by the letter ש is that it is viewed as teaching the lesson that the Shechinah itself collects Divine input (from a still higher source, [the eyn sof, Ed.?]. Similarly, we may view man’s נשמה as both suffusing and surrounding his entire body, its power (influence) extending in all four orifices of the brain. The first two orifices are the seat of the ability to record by means of an illustration (כח הציור), the centre orifice is the seat of מחשבה, entertaining abstract concepts, thinking without the aid of illustrations; the last orifice is the seat (source) of memory, retaining impressions gained over a period of time. All of the foregoing teaches us that the letter שין is an allusion to the Shechinah and he four chayot  by means of which the prophets Ezekiel and Isaiah have tried to illustrate these concepts for us inasmuch as they reflect celestial images as well as how these concepts are reflected in the microcosm, i.e. the human being which itself reflects powers in the celestial regions.[I assume that the second set of two orifices the author speaks of are the ears. Ed.]
    
    28,15. והשיגוך, “and they will overtake you.” In this verse, introducing the curses (afflictions), the word is spelled plene, i.e. with the letter ו, whereas in the previous appearance of this word in verse 2 describing the blessings the word was written defective, without this letter ו. The reason may be to reflect the verse in Psalms 91,15: “I will be with him (Israel) in distress.” This message is, however, alluded to in those words, i.e. עמו אנכי בצרה in the last letters of each of these words, the letters of the tetragram ו-י-ה, which whenever they appear in reverse order allude to the attribute of Justice. The veiled message is that in spite of the awesome list of afflictions in this chapter they will not result in the extinction of the Jewish people. G’d will continue to watch over the Jewish people though they may not be aware of this.
    
    28,21. ידבר ה' בך את הדבר עד כלותו אותך, “the Lord will make the pestilence adhere to you until it consumes you.” The word כלותו refers to the word הדבר, i.e. the pestilence,  [the pestilence in its most violent form, Ed.] The word כלתו, usually understood to mean “it will totally consume,” is written defective, without the latter ו, to hint that the result will not be as terrible as we might think at first glance.
    
    28,22. יככה ה' בשפחת, “the Lord will strike you with fever, etc.” Notice that in both these verses the instigator of the affliction is the attribute of Mercy, Hashem, not the attribute of Justice, i.e. אלוקים. However, there is no question that in this instance the term Hashem is used to describe the attribute of Justice as it has been used in Genesis 6,7 when the Torah wrote (using the attribute Hashem) “I will wipe out man whom I have created.” We also find the term Hashem used to describe the attribute of Justice in Exodus 17,14 when G’d describes His intention to wipe out Amalek. By the same token, there are instances when the term אלוקים refers to the attribute of Mercy, and not as usual, to the attribute of Justice. One such instance is Genesis 8,1 ויזכר אלוקים את נח, “G’d remembered Noach.” Another such example is found in Genesis 20,17 when the Torah describes G’d as curing Avimelech and his household, employing His attribute of אלוקים. All that these examples teach, -as we have pointed out repeatedly,- is that neither attribute ever operates in an undiluted form. Each of these respective attributes of G’d contains at least minor elements of the opposite attribute at the time when G’d employs the respective attribute which is mentioned. This principle is alluded to in our verse by the otherwise redundant addition of the latter ה at the end of the word יככה. This letter reminds us of the disciplinary function even within the attribute of Mercy, i.e. Hashem. We encounter this extraneous letter ה also in Leviticus 26,18 (during the list of the afflictions) when the Torah warns of further disciplinary afflictions using the word ליסרה instead of simply ליסר. in our chapter the extra letter ה appears with all the seven categories of afflictions.
    
    28,27. בגרב ובחרס, “with wet boils and itch, etc.” The word גרב refers to an itch which the afflicted person scratches with a shard of earthenware. This is the approach taken by most commentators (Ibn Ezra quoting unnamed sources). It is, however, possible to understand the word ובחרס as related to שמש pronounced shamash (Pessikta Zutrata), that this affliction is due to G’d wanting to frighten the victim who faces such an affliction. The affliction is known by three names, שמש, חמה, חרס. The reason it is known as שמש is because man is supposed to be a servant serving his master, which the Jew afflicted with this disease has not been. Seeing that the servant (Israel) is of an especially high-ranking nature, this reflects on his Master and His High Rank. The name חמה reflects the fact that the skin affected becomes especially hot; it is also called חרס, reflecting the fact that the sun is supposed to spread light on earth (Job 9,7). [both man and the sun have a similar task, the former to provide spiritual enlightenment, the latter to provide physical light. Ed.]
    Furthermore, if you examine the three words שמש, חרס, חמה, you will observe that the combined final letters of these three words spell שס'ה (365) an allusion to the number of days in the solar year. This is a reference to the orbit of the sun created on the fourth day of creation. It is the outermost orbit of the four respective orbits, i.e. daily rotation of earth on its axis, the cycle of the week, and the cycle of the month, i.e. lunar orbit. The veiled warning in all this is that if one does not obey the rules laid down by G’d the result will be a universe which will eventually self-destruct due to our not having observed the commandments of the Torah which are part of the laws of nature. [I have translated this somewhat freely. Ed.] The author cites various verses from Scripture such as Judges 14,18, in which the word חרס means “sun.”  Seeing that in Psalms 121,6 David appears to view the  sun as a negative force, i.e. “the sun will not strike (יככה) you by day nor the moon by night,” it appears that the thrust of David’s words is that disease and malfunctions in nature are all due to faulty eating habits (involuntary at times), or to exposure to an inclement climate. All of these things are caused in one way or an other by the motion of the sun.
    
    28,29. והיית אך עשוק וגזול כל הימים, “and you will only be cheated and robbed all the days.” The same message is repeated once more in verse 33 with a minor variation, the word רצוץ, “downtrodden,” being substituted for the word “robbed,” in our verse here. As usual, the word אך or רק, represents some exclusion to what preceded them. In this instance the word אך excludes other nations who will never be as downtrodden as the Jewish people when they are being disciplined by the Lord. On the other hand, the word רק, in connection with the elevation of the Jewish people in verse 13, also means that such an elevation as will be experienced by the Jewish people as part of the blessings is unparalleled amongst the Gentile nations.
    
    28,42. יירש הצלצל, “the chirping locust will impoverish.” The word יירש is from the same root as להוריש, to dispossess in Deut. 4,38. This is also the way Onkelos understands it, i.e. in Deut. 4,38 when he writes יתרך. Rashi, on the other hand, understands the word as derived from the word רש, poor. In that case, the Torah would describe the locust as making the fruit “look poorly.” The word צלצל describes a certain species of locust, based on the noise this species makes when it appears in swarms. The word is found in a similar meaning in Psalms 150,5 צלצלי תרועה, “the cymbals making loud noises.” The Targum renders this word here as סקאה, suggesting that it is a kind of locust or beetle equipped with a sack-like bag. The word appears in Baba Kama 116 as robbery with violence, the Talmud quoting our verse as proof for the meaning of ונטלוהו מסיקין. The meaning there is that one robs from the robber.
    
    28,47. תחת אשר לא עבדת את ה' אלוקיך בשמחה, “because you did not serve the Lord your G’d joyfully.” The Torah accuses people who do serve G’d not to have done so joyfully. A person is obligated not merely to carry out G’d’s instructions but to do so gladly, in a happy frame of mind. Joy when performing any of G’d’s commandments is considered as fulfillment of a command-ment by itself, meriting additional reward. This is why one may be punished for failing to perform the commandments with a joyful heart. This is why the Torah requires that its commandments be performed with full intent and joyfully. Our sages in Midrash Ruth Rabbah 5,6 comment concerning this that if Reuven had been aware that G’d would write in the Torah concerning his attempts to save Joseph’s life from the hands of his other brothers (Genesis 37,21) that he would receive a reward not only for his deed but for the good intentions accompanying same, he would have carried Joseph on his shoulders and brought him back to his (their) father. The Torah also makes a point of underlining the joy in Aaron’s heart when he saw his brother Moses again after so many years. Had he known that his feelings would be commented upon favourably (Exodus 4,14), he would have gone out to meet his brother accompanied by an orchestra of many different musical instruments. Had Boaz known that his offering Ruth food and drink in abundance would be recorded for eternity as a good deed of his, he would have fed her the choicest parts of a fatted calf, instead of merely bread and vinegar. (Ruth 2,14)
    
    28,48. ועבדת את אויביך  ומחוסר כל, “You will serve your enemies...deprived of everything.” This is another example of how G’d makes the punishment fit the crime (Sanhedrin 90). Seeing that the people did not serve the Lord when they had “plenty of everything,” they would wind up serving their enemies when being “devoid of all.” We read in Chagigah 9 that the words of Isaiah 48,10: “I have refined you, but not as silver, I test you in the furnace of poverty,” mean that G’d reviewed all the various positive attributes He could treat the Israelites with and found that only the attribute of poverty would be appropriate. The scholar Shemuel commented on this statement  that this is the meaning of the popular saying: “poverty is as appropriate for the Jewish people as a red harness for a white horse.”
    
    28,49. כאשר ידאה הנשר, “as the eagle will swoop.” This is a reference to the Roman Emperor Vespasianus and his general (and son) Titus (before the latter became Emperor). He had thought that it would take him 10 days to reach Jerusalem whereas he found that he reached the city after only five days of travel. He had overheard a young child quote our verse in which G’d describes a nation being carried against the Jewish people from the end of the earth much like an eagle which swoops down out of the sky. He applied this verse to himself when he experienced such an extraordinarily fast journey in his campaign against Jerusalem. Just as this particular verse applies to the destruction of the second Temple, so the entire chapter speaks of events happening at the end of the period of the second Temple.
    
    28,52. והצר לך בכל שעריך, “It will besiege you in all your cities.” The word שעריך is a simile for “in every location.” It is possible to explain the fact that the Torah uses the word שעריך four times in our context  (verse 52 twice, plus verses 55 and 57) as meaning that the first time the word is mentioned it is in the nature of a heading, כולל. The second time the reference is to the gates guarding the country. The third time it refers to gates guarding entrances to houses of individuals, whereas the last time it is derived from the word שעור, “measure” in the sense of “planning.” It describes how the enemy would thwart whatever plans the Jews would make to counter him and fight him. Such planning of counter measures would only result in additional hurt and confusion among the Jewish people. The entire passage then would express the very reverse of what happens when one plans successful activities. Israel would be frustrated in every single move it makes. It would endure the reverse of what has been described as the fate of the wicked in Psalms 10,5: ”his ways prosper at all times.”
    
    28,58. אם לא תשמור לעשות את כל דברי התורה הזאת הכתובים בספר הזה ליראה את השם הנכבד והנורא הזה, “if you will not observe to carry out all the words of this Torah which have been written in this Book, in order for you to revere His honoured and awesome name.” The meaning of this verse is that there must be one overriding consideration running throughout all the commandments of the Torah, i.e. to infuse reverence in the people for the Lord. This is not the first time that Moses explains this as the overall purpose of Torah legislation. He had already made this point in Exodus 20,17 during the revelation at Mount Sinai, when he said: “G’d has come in order to test you and to ensure that the awe of Him shall be on your faces so that you shall not sin.” King Solomon also concluded his Book of Proverbs with the need for יראת ה', “reverence and awe of the Lord” (Proverbs 31,30). We also find that Isaiah 33,6 emphasises the need for this important virtue. Our sages, in elaborating on this theme in Shabbat 31, imply that even if one has studied all the tractates of the oral Torah, the yardstick by which man is measured after death is whether he did relate to all of this with reverence for the Lord or not.
    
    The plain meaning of the verse in Isaiah 33,6 יראת ה' היא אוצרו is that it is a virtue stored up in G’d’s treasury, something very dear to Him, consisting of the cumulative virtues of awe of Him by G’d-fearing people which G’d treats like a most precious possession, “locking it away” in His most inaccessible treasure chamber. The reason that the prophet employs the term “treasure, something to be stored,” in connection with this virtue is that a king cannot establish a treasury unless he collected the funds for it from outsiders, from people. Anything the king locks away is called אוצר, “treasure.” What all this teaches is that of all the virtues we must acquire, a measure of awe and reverence of the Lord is the overriding virtue, “colouring,” i.e. lending value, to all the other virtues man practices. One of the reasons that this is so is that all the other commandments can be performed only at certain times, such as the wearing of a tallit or phylacteries. When one has put on these phylacteries one has effectively concluded performing this mitzvah. Not so with the commandment to relate to the Lord with יראה, with awe. It is a commandment which permeates all our waking hours. This is what David had in mind when he wrote (Psalms 19,10) “the reverence for the Lord is pure and endures forever.” Such a statement could not have been made concerning performance of any of the other command- ments which [require active performance, [as opposed to the mark of circumcision on our flesh. Ed.] It is a commandment which is both positive and negative, i.e. cultivating it is the positive aspect of the commandment, whereas failure to cultivate it and to maintain it at all times is a violation of it, i.e. equivalent to transgressing a negative commandment.
    
    28,68. והתמכרתם שם, “and you will offer yourselves for sale there.” you will actively beg to be bought as slaves. (an ultimate demeaning of yourselves) ואין קונה, “but there will be no buyer.” This is a promise by G’d who spares you this ultimate degradation.
    
    29,3. ואזנים לשמוע עד היום הזה, “and ears to listen, until this day.” The message is that a student does not truly appreciate the opinions and knowledge of his teacher until he reaches the age of 40. This is why the sages in Avot 5,27 characterise the attainment of the fortieth birthday as a time when one is granted בינה, a measure of insight.
    
    29,6. ותבואו אל המקום הזה, “and you arrived at this place.” Moses inserted these two verses in the middle of his lecture as he wanted to reinforce the people’s faith in the fact that they would conquer and inherit the land of Israel, just as they had conquered and inherited the lands formerly belonging to Sichon and Og who also belonged to the seven Canaanite tribes whose land had been promised to the Jewish people (Avraham and the other patriarchs). The two and a half tribes Reuven, Gad, and half the tribe of Menashe had already taken possession of these lands at the time Moses was speaking, leaving the land on the West Bank of the Jordan for the other 9 1/2 tribes.
    You should appreciate that the warnings of doom enumerated in this whole portion are Moses’ own wording as distinct from similar warnings of disaster in Leviticus chapter 26. This does not mean that Moses “made up the תוכחה by himself.” Rather, it means that the syntax used by the Torah reflects that G’d approved of the choice of words Moses had used so that effectively everything recorded in the written text of the Torah is equivalent to something dictated by G’d Himself.
    
    If our sages (Megillah 31) stated that the “curses contained in the Torah and which were uttered by the priests were words put in their mouths by G’d Himself,” whereas those contained in the Book of Deuteronomy reflect Moses’ words, they meant that Moses succeeded in voicing thoughts which reflected exactly what G’d would have told him to say.
    The reason that the Torah chose to write two versions of these exhortations and warnings, one being G’d’s initiative and words, the other at the initiative of Moses who had divined what G’d wanted him to say, is that the version we read at the end of the Book of Leviticus is that which became true at the time the first Temple was destroyed, whereas the longer version we read here in the Book of Deuteronomy was not fulfilled until the second Temple was being destroyed. One proof that this is so is furnished by the words (Leviticus 26,30) והשמדתי את במותיכם והכרתי את חמניכם, “I will destroy your private altars and demolish your sun-idols.” These are phenomena which existed only during the period of the first Temple when idolatry was widespread among the people during the reigns of many kings. The curses listed in Deuteronomy were all fulfilled during the collapse of the second commonwealth and its Temple. Seeing that the Shechinah resided in Jerusalem during the period of the first Temple David wrote (Psalms 24,7) “lift up your heads o gate! Up high, you everlasting doors, so the King of glory may come in!” The words מלך הכבוד used by David there mean מלך של הכבוד, a reference to the Shechinah resident in Jerusalem, i.e. the Temple during that epoch. During the period of the second Temple the Shechinah did not reside permanently in Jerusalem, but merely straddled the Temple from time to time as described by Chagai 1,8: ”I will look upon it (the second Temple) with favour and will be glorified, said the Lord.” The letter ה at the end of the word ואכבדה in that verse is a hint that the Shechinah will be there as a loose cover, חופף. In the future, when the third Temple will be built, the Shechinah will return in full force as it had been manifest during the first Temple. In fact, its manifestation will be even more pronounced than it had been during the period of the first Temple. This is what Isaiah meant when he said (Isaiah 60, 1-2) “Arise, shine, for your light has dawned; the Presence of the Lord has shone upon you! Behold! Darkness shall cover the earth, and thick clouds the peoples, but upon you the Lord will shine, and His Presence will be over you; nations shall walk by your light, kings by your shining radiance.
    
    
   אתם  נצבים
    
   טובה תוכחת מגולה מאהבה מסוטרת, “Better an open rebuke than love which is concealed.” (Prov.27,5) In his Book of Proverbs Solomon taught us important principles about the nature of rebukes and how to administer them. He taught the people that life itself is closely linked to rebukes and the ability to accept same, whereas death is inextricably involved with people who resent being rebuked and are unwilling to accept rebukes. We know that life is closely linked to rebukes from Proverbs 6,23: “instructive rebukes are a way to life.” We also have a verse expressing similar sentiments in Proverbs 10,17: “he who accepts rebukes is on the way to the path of life.” Yet another verse from Scripture dwelling on the same subject is found in Proverbs 15,4: ”a healing tongue is a tree of life,” i.e. the way to heal a tongue (which has wagged) is to rebuke the owner. On the other hand, death attaches itself to people who hate being rebuked as we know from Proverbs 15,10: “Harsh discipline is needed for those who abandon the right path; he who hates rebuke will die.” He who departs from the right path (of Torah) only temporarily but does not hate being rebuked will be judged by harsh discipline in order to make him abandon the path of evil; the one who hates rebukes, however, cannot be brought back to the right path by afflictions. There is no hope for him. As a result, such a person will be sentenced to death (by the celestial court).
    A love to accept rebukes is a strong indication that the person in question possesses fine qualities, generally. A negative attitude to rebukes indicates that such a person also suffers from other negative traits. This is the reason Solomon says (Proverbs 9,8) “do not rebuke a scoffer lest he will hate you, rather rebuke a wise man and he will love you.” When rebuking a fellow human being one must reveal sincerity and not engage in flattery. One should give him credit for whatever good points he has, and at the same time restrict oneself to point out such a person’s shortcomings, for the righteous and the wicked are two total opposites. When someone has escaped the path of wickedness he does not automatically qualify for the appellation of צדיק, a righteous person, until he has embraced the path of righteousness in his lifestyle. This is because the character of a wicked person is so totally different from that of a righteous person. When such a wicked person has abandoned his former path in life he has only reached the half-way mark separating him from the truly righteous person. This is why the rebuker has to be candid and explain to him the whole truth and not indulge in flattery, praising him for abandoning the path of evil, thereby lulling him into the belief that he has already completely rehabilitated himself. This is what prompted Solomon to say: “better open rebuke than concealed love.” He may appear to reveal hatred by rebuking so candidly; however, better to appear in that guise than to appear as loving 
the subject of the rebuke by suppressing further guidance and congratulating the subject as if he already had completed the path of rehabilitation.
David Kimchi, (Redak) quoting his father, takes a different view of the meaning of our introductory verse. He understands Solomon as saying that an open rebuke is good; however it is so only if the rebuker reveals underlying love for the rebuked by speaking to him privately, not exposing him to embarrassment.
A Midrashic approach mentioned in Devarim Rabbah (Lieber-man edition item 8) states that the “open” rebukes are the ones addressed by Moses to his people, whereas the ones described as “from hidden love,” refer to the rebukes of Bileam who flattered Israel by pronouncing blessings, whereas in his heart he hated the very people upon whom he showered all his blessings. For instance, when he complimented the people on preserving each other’s privacy by saying: “how goodly are your tents O Yaakov,” etc., (Numbers 24,5) what he really wanted to say was: “how goodly are your tents O Moav, your dwellings, children of Ammon.” Had G’d not twisted his mouth this is what would have come out of it.
There is yet another way to understand this saying by Solomon. The words: “open rebuke,” refer to the rebukes we read in Leviticus chapter 26, whereas the ones in Deuteronomy, all of whom originate with the Lord Himself, though the wording may have been Moses’, were approved by G’d as we explained already. The words מאהבה מסוטרת, may mean: “from the One whose love is not manifest, i.e. G’d, the attribute Shechinah.”
This attribute is often referred to as אהבה, “love,” such as in Proverbs 15,17: “better a meal of vegetables where there is love than a fattened ox where there is hate.” The “love” referred to in that verse is a reference to the Presence of the Shechinah. The basis for such exegesis is found in Song of Songs 2,7: אם תעירו ואם תעוררו את האהבה, “do not dare to arouse the love,” [a reference to premature attempts to secure the redemption, return to Israel of the Shechinah. Ed.] The word באהבה in Song of Songs 8,7 “that vast floods cannot quench love,” also refers to the Shechinah. Similarly, the word אהבה, love, is used in our liturgy when we say להודות לך וליחדך באהבה, “to give thanks to You and to declare Your unity in the form of the Shechinah,” (prior to reciting the Kriyat Shema). [the reason the word באהבה in that paragraph is not taken at face value, is presumably that the same word occurred immediately before the word להודות already, thus making it redundant unless it meant something different than usual. Ed.] Therefore, Solomon describes open rebuke as emanating from G’d’s attribute Shechinah. Wherein then is the goodness of which Solomon speaks manifest? Even though the Israelites had violated so many of the commandments that G’d had been forced to bring upon them all the various afflictions mentioned both in Leviticus chapter 26 and in Deuteronomy chapter 28 so that the people were progressively deprived of the first Temple and the second Temple, all this was for their own good. Moses explained this to the people already in Deut. 8,21 when he said that G’d starved the Jewish people “in order to afflict you, to subject you to trials in order to treat you well in your distant future.” All afflictions serve an educational purpose, to ensure that in the end you will become worthy of your lofty destiny. Although all the curses have been exhausted (fulfilled) i.e. Israel deserved the afflictions, the Jewish people have not ceased to exist. This is the meaning of Maleachi 3,7: “I the Lord have not changed, and you the Children of Yaakov have not perished.” Our sages in Tanchuma Nitzavim 1 comment on this verse that when the Gentile nations experience a single series of afflictions this results in their demise from history, whereas the Jewish people, in spite of having experienced one holocaust after another, are still around and flourishing. They cite Micah 7,8 as proof of this. We read there: “Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy! though I have fallen, I rise again, though I sit in darkness the Lord is my light.” Deut. 32,23 proclaims the same message when the Torah writes: “My arrows I have used up against them, yet they have not perished.” The matter can be compared to a warrior who erects a beam shooting all his arrows at the beam. In the end, the warrior finds that he has exhausted his supply of arrows but that the beam is still standing. Although Israel has collapsed frequently under the afflictions G’d has disciplined it with, it always emerged from these afflictions and was rehabilitated. This is also the meaning of Jeremiah in Lamentations 3,12: “He has bent His bow and made me the target of His arrows.”
    This is also what Moses said in his admonitions here in
29,9.  אתם נצבים היום כלכם, ראשיכם, שבטיכם וזקניכם ושוטריכם כל איש ישראל, “You are all standing upright here his day, your chiefs, your tribes, all the men of your elders, your law-enforcers, all the men of Israel.” All of the Israelites were assembled there in one place in anticipation of the renewal of the covenant just as they had all been assembled on the occasion of the first covenant at Mount Sinai. Seeing the people had been unfaithful to the first covenant when they had said (about the golden calf) “these are your gods O Israel” (Exodus 32,4), there had arisen the need to conclude a second covenant with this generation in the wilderness of Moav which the people had to confirm with an oath and a curse in the event that they would again dishonour their commitment. This is the reason Moses used the preamble: “you are standing here upright, all of you in the presence of the Lord your G’d.” Moses meant to compare the present assembly to the one 40 years earlier at Mount Sinai. Whereas on that occasion Israel’s word, unsupported by an explicit oath, had been deemed sufficient, this time they were required to confirm their undertaking by an oath.
It is possible to understand that our verse contains 2 promises: 1) that the Jewish people would endure and would never become extinct but would survive (as a people) all future catastrophies befalling mankind. 2) that the people would merit life in the hereafter if they would observe the commandments of the Torah. The need to give the people this assurance arose out of the fact that if they were to experience the full brunt of the curses mentioned in the pervious portion, they would surely think that this spelled their doom. Moses therefore reminded them that just as they were all standing before him upright and well now, so they would emerge from even the worst aspects of the afflictions listed in the Torah and would be rehabilitated. The effect of the afflictions suffered in this life would be to erase the impact of their sins so that their claim to a life in the world to come would remain intact. This is what was meant when the Torah wrote in Deut. 6,25: “it will be a merit for us if we are careful to perform this entire commandment before Hashem.” This is the assurance of life in the hereafter. This is also a meaning of the word כלכם which is an allusion to the statement of the sages in Sanhedrin 90 that כל ישראל יש להם חלק בעולם הבא, that “the entire Jewish nation has a share in the hereafter.”
A Midrashic view (Tanchuma Nitzavim 1) of the words: “you are all standing here upright this day;” just as this day commences in darkness, the darkness later giving way to light, so the darkness that you find yourself in as a result of enduring the afflictions listed previously will be replaced by bright light,” as described by Isaiah 60,19: “the Lord will become for you an eternal light and your G’d will be your source of splendour.”
ראשיכם שבטיכם, “your heads (leaders), your tribes, etc.”  The meaning is: “your heads, who are the leaders of your respective tribes.” Moses listed the more distinguished people first, afterwards the adult males, followed by the male children who were under age, followed by the women, concluding with the proselytes.
כל איש ישראל, “every man in Israel.” The sages in Tanchuma Nitzavim 1 use this expression to teach us that every man in Israel is co-responsible for the sin of every other Israelite. They bring practical proof for this from Joshua 7,11 where G’d told Joshua that the sin of one man, Achan ben Karmi, was the reason that the entire people had suffered a military setback at the hands of a small town, Ai. The words describing Achan’s sin are: “Israel has sinned.” This spells out the extent to which every Israelite shares in the sin of another Israelite. [obviously, there are degrees in such sharing of another Israelite’s sin. Ed.] This is also why we read in Leviticus 26,37: וכשלו איש באחיו, “they shall stumble one over the other.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 27 interpret these words as meaning “they shall stumble over the sins of one another.” This teaches the principle of reciprocal responsibility of one Israelite for the conduct of (all) other Israelites. If such reciprocal responsibility extends to all Israelites sharing misfortune on account of the sins committed by a few, how much more so will it apply to the reciprocal entitlement to enjoyment by all Israelites of good fortune (life in the hereafter),  the entitlement to which was merited by the few! This is the meaning of the words of Eliphaz to Job ימלט אי נקי, “he will deliver the guilty; He will be delivered through the cleanness of your hands.” (Job 22,30) In other words, a single individual with “clean” hands can be the instrument through which all the inhabitants of an island are saved. One single individual whose lifestyle is beyond reproach may save [for a period of time, Ed.] all his peers from impending doom. It follows that seeing while a righteous person is alive he saves his compatriots from doom, the death of such a man is a signal for all his compatriots to repent their sins, as they have been deprived of the protective merit of this righteous person. We have a principle that מדה טובה מרובה על מדת פורענות, that the range of the application of measures of good exceeds the range of the application of measures of evil. Hence if the righteous shares in the guilt of the sinner, the sinner benefits even more strongly from the merits accumulated by the righteous (Sotah 11).
 
29,11. לעברך בברית ה’ אלוקיך, ”for you to pass into the covenant with the Lord your G’d.” This “passing” is equivalent to “entering into.“ This is evident from the fact that the Torah does not use the regular preposition used with the verb עבר, i.e. לעבור על, but the preposition ב. What occurred here is similar to what occurred when G’d concluded the covenant with Avraham in Genesis 15,17 when He passed between the pieces. This is why Onkelos translates לאעלות בקיימא. The word ובאלתו refers to the people of Israel; in other words: “by means of its oath which He made you swear and which you accepted upon yourselves.”
It is possible to understand the word ובאלתו as referring to G’d, meaning “and by means of His oath which He swore to you.” The whole verse then would mean: “you are standing here today ready to enter the covenant and oath of the Lord by means of which He swore that You will be His people and that He will be your G’d.” The verse following would prove that this is the meaning, seeing the Torah writes there: “as He said to you and swore to  your fathers.” Further reinforcement of this interpretation is provided by Samuel I 12,22: “seeing that the Lord had agreed (sworn) to make you His people.” Even though all the commentators there understand the word הואיל to be an expression of G’d’s goodwill, grace, I believe the word הואיל in that verse derives from the word אלה, and means “for G’d swore to make you His people.” This does not preclude that the oath itself was an expression of G’d’s goodwill towards the people so that there is no conflict between the two interpretations. Still further proof of the meaning of אלה in our verse is the comment in Tanchuma Nitzavim 3 on Song of Songs 7,6: מלך אסור ברהטים, usually translated as “a king held captive by tresses” (of hair). According to the Midrash the meaning is “a king who is bound by his oath.” The word אסר meaning oath, occurs in Numbers 30,7. G’d’s oath to the patriarchs that He would not exchange the Jewish people for any other nation is what ties Him to Israel. The word רהטים in the verse from Song of Songs which we quoted is a reference to the patriarchs; this word occurs in the record of their life stories both in Genesis 18,7 where the word הבקר is rendered by Onkelos as רהט; as well as in connection with Yaakov in Genesis 30,38. This is why G’d cannot violate His oath to the patriarchs .
You will find that in Ezekiel 20 when the Jewish people challenged the continued validity of the Torah’s commandments by describing themselves as having been freed (sold) by their master (G’d) since they had become exiled, that the prophet did not accept that argument and vehemently pointed out that the basic relationship between G’d and the Jewish people is an eternal bond, that severing it would mean the total demise of the party who severed it. [I have merely summarised the dialogue in Ezekiel 20. Ed.] Basically, Ezekiel’s argument was that as long as the master had not received monetary compensation from the “buyer” of the slave no transaction had taken place at all; the Jewish people still belong  to their erstwhile master, i.e. G’d. This is also reflected in the words of Isaiah 52,3: “you have been sold חנם, without price, therefore you will also be redeemed without monetary compensation having to be paid.”

29,13. ולא אתכם לבדכם, “And not only with you, etc.” Moses means that although G’d concludes this covenant with the present generation of Jews as well as the oath warning against non-performance, seeing that you are standing here this day, the fact is that even future generations of Jews unable to stand  here today are included in this covenant. The reason that Moses is able to make such a statement is that the trunk of the tree is viewed as the father, i.e. “the root ” of all subsequent branches. All the branches are only the offshoots of the original roots. Concerning how it s possible to include unborn generations in this covenant, i.e. reciprocal undertaking, our sages in Tanchuma Yitro 11 comment that all souls ever created since the days of the creation of the earth were present at this assembly. They are not all described as “standing,” as souls without bodies cannot “stand.” The words אשר איננו פה, “who are not here,” refer to the bodies of such souls. The words עמנו היום, refer to their souls, which are present even today. The word עמנו, “with us,” refers back to the word עומד, “standing,” in verse 14.  It is as if the Torah had written: “and all those not standing here with us this day.” The reason Moses uses the word “standing,” is because the angels in Zecharyah 3,7 have been described as בין העומדים האלה, “among these who are standing.”
Our sages in Tanchuma Yitro 11 also claim that all the prophets who ever lived (after Moses) all received their prophetic powers when their souls were at the assembly at Sinai; however they were not allowed to make use of their prophetic powers until their respective generations when they were alive on earth. This is also the meaning of Maleachi 1,1 משא דבר ה’ ביד מלאכי. It is significant that the wording is not על מלאכי, but ביד מלאכי. The present formulation means: ”A pronouncement: ‘the word of the Lord to Israel through Maleachi,’” whereas the other formulation would have meant that the “message only now came to Maleachi.” The present formulation describes only the point in time when this message, which the soul of the prophet had received at Mount Sinai, was released for publication. We find something similar in Isaiah 48,16 where the prophet writes: “from the beginning I did not speak in secret; from the time anything existed I was there. And now, the Lord G’d has sent me, endowed me with His spirit.” The meaning of the verse is that the soul of the prophet had received this communication from G’d already at Mount Sinai but it had only now been released for publication.

29,15. כי אתם ידעתם, “for you have known;” a reference to the fact that among the people Moses addressed here there were some who remembered the abominations practiced by the Egyptians, whereas all of them had observed the abominations practiced by the peoples whose land they had crossed in the meantime, i.e. Edom, Moav, Ammon and Midian.

29,16. ותראו את שקוציהם...עץ ואבן, “you have seen their detestable idols, wood and stone, silver and gold.” The former were on display openly; the latter -due to their value and the owners being afraid of theft- were kept inside their homes (Tanchuma Nitzavim 3).

29,17. פן יש בכם שרש פורה ראש ולענה, “lest there be among you a root flourishing with gall and wormwood.” Venom is considered the ראש, ‘principal’ of all bitter roots or leafs, being more bitter than any other variant. Some commentators explain the meaning of the word ראש here as a reference to the venom of the viper in whose head it is found, i.e. animal-based. The word לענה, by contrast, refers to some bitter vegetable matter. We find the expression in Numbers 30,14: לענות נפש, “to cause bitterness in a person.” It describes the person making such a vow as causing herself the utmost anguish.

29,18. והיה בשמעו את דברי האלה הזאת, “it will be when he hears these words of a curse, etc.;” a reference to what we read above in Deut. 27,15: “cursed the man who makes a hewn image, etc.” The person concerned is under the mistaken impression that he will be a beneficiary of the merit accumulated by the many people who do observe the Torah and have forsworn any form of idolatry.
בשרירות לבי אלך, “I will walk as my heart sees fit.” He says to himself that in spite of the fact that he does not accept any part of the Torah which does not appeal to him he will not be punished, seeing that he is only an individual whose actions are not relevant when the vast majority of his fellow Jews are observant and therefore the whole people is deserving of G’d’s bountiful blessing as promised. Seeing that he reasons in such a way, the Torah adds immediately that he is totally wrong. G’d will not forgive him, i.e. turn a blind eye to his conduct; on the contrary, G’d’s wrath will be fuming, etc., against such an indvidual. The word אז in our verse is understood to mean “immediately,” by Ibn Ezra.
It is also possible to understand the words בשרירות לבי as an expression of aggressive obstinacy. This individual deliberately disregards the opinion of the multitude, “doing his own thing” openly. The meaning of the expression is similar to what is known in the Talmud (Gittin 26) as אשרתא דדייני, “a document signed by judges testifying to the fulfillment of conditions in an accompa-nying document,” i.e. confirmation.
The reason the Torah writes למען ספות הרוה את הצמאה, is that the wicked person prides himself with his evil deeds and determines to continue in his evil ways, thereby adding more “thirst” to his whole system which previously was adequately supplied with moisture. He had hoped to become satiated by indulging his cravings for sin. His punishment consists of the fact that instead of deriving satisfaction from his sins, he constantly feels the irrepressible urge to commit more and more sins. Instead of slaking his thirst for whatever it is he wishes to achieve, he will find that he gets ever thirstier. [a form of the principle described by our sages in Avot 4,2 עברה גוררת עברה, “one deliberately committed sin brings in its wake another.” Ed.] The desire to sin acts like a roller-coaster; once on that path it is almost impossible to stop and to reverse course.
It is also a well known fact that man’s heart is the “root” of the body. His thoughts are like the branches, his deeds like the fruit of the tree. The Torah has already stated (Genesis 6,5) that “all the thoughts of (wicked people) are centered all day long on doing evil.” Such people will not cease producing bitter fruit (Jeremiah 17,8). Even if all the planning of the wicked people is not translated into deeds, such wicked people are punished for the wicked thoughts they entertain. This is what Solomon referred to when he said (Proverbs 15,13) “a happy heart makes for a cheerful face; a sad heart causes a despondent spirit.” The meaning of the entire verse is that one should not think that mere thoughts have no bearing on one’s personality. If a person has a positive attitude to life, is joyful, or has a negative attitude to life, is despondent, all depends on the kind of thoughts he entertains. In other words, the thoughts have their origin in the heart; when these thoughts are translated into action they have an impact on the body, i.e. the body reveals the nature of the thoughts a person entertains. It follows that the despondent person is in line for punishment even more so when he actually enjoys contemplating the performance of sins.
This is also what the sages (Yuma 29) had in mind when they said that the contemplating of sins is a more serious offense than the actual carrying out of the sin. The sinful thoughts, when carried out, leave their mark on the body of a person, whereas spontaneously committed sins do not leave such marks on the body. This statement, i.e. psychological insight, of the sages is of very great importance. The statement has given rise to many and varied interpretations as I have already mentioned elsewhere where I said that it means that contemplating sins is more serious than committing the actual sin seeing that the contemplating of the sin is what brings about its execution. By contemplating sins on a regular basis, the heart becomes involved in one’s deeds. Seeing that the soul has its home in the heart, such evil thoughts tend to corrupt the soul. [the author clearly feels that the soul, something disembodied, abstract, must be housed in something physical in order to be able to function. One cannot think of the soul as being something detached from the body, independent. Therefore, the part of the body in which the soul is “at home” is of crucial significance. Ed.] Contaminating the soul by entertaining these sinful thoughts is therefore a more serious offense than the actual spontaneous commission of a sin which had not previously had such an impact on one’s soul.
Another interpretation of the statement that הרהורי עבירה קשין מעבירה involves often “follow-up” sins. Let us say that a person entertains the thought of breaking into someone’s house. If he is contemplating this sin instead of spontaneously stealing, he most likely weighs what action to take if his plan encounters opposition. He will think of how to deal with the opposition, i.e. possibly decide to kill the person who would frustrate his plan. Thus he already adds further sinful thoughts before even committing the original sin.
Should someone ask: “how can the Torah decree penalties for thoughts which have never been carried out? How can the Torah expect a person to be so perfect that the temptation and intention to commit a sin never occurs to him?” Let me explain the essence of the subject. We know that man is in charge (has the choice) of the actions he carries out. This is what the Torah alluded to in Deut. 30, 15-19: “see I have today given into your hand (control) over life and goodness, over death and evil;......you shall choose life.“ Just as man can control his actions, he can also control his thoughts. True, the latter require some preparation, education. We are commanded to entertain constructive thoughts and to avoid thinking potentially destructive, sinful thoughts. G’d gives credit for our entertaining positive constructive thoughts, whereas He punishes us for thinking sinful thoughts. 
If, on occasion, one does entertain unworthy thoughts, thoughts which creep up on a person uninvited, such thoughts reflect the fact that the individual in question has not trained himself sufficiently not to entertain unworthy, potentially sinful thoughts. The only cure for this is to concentrate on G’d and what He expects us to do and how He expects us to relate to His universe and our environment. One must relate to such unworthy thoughts with anger at oneself for such thoughts to have occurred to one at all. If one does so, one may rely on the saying of our sages that הבא לטהר מסיין אותו, “when a person makes a genuine effort to purify (himself or others) he receives a divine assist.” (Yuma 38) There are numerous verses in the Bible testifying to the principle that there are divine assists for people trying to do the right thing. One such verse is found In Chronicles I 28,9: ”for the Lord searches all minds and discerns the design of every thought, if you seek Him, He will be available to you.” Another verse in a similar vein is found in Proverbs 21,2: ”G’d probes the (content) of one’s hearts.” Solomon means that when man entertains positive thoughts, G’d will help translate them into reality. Other verses from Scripture which convey similar messages are found in Psalms 10,17, as well as in Chronicles I 29,18. 
Maimonides explains the statement that the contemplating of commission of sins is קשין, something more severe than the actual commission of the sin, by reference to the fact that the ability to entertain thoughts is one of the major factors elevating man above the beasts. Abusing such a faculty is more serious than committing sins with the body, something we have in common with the animals, i.e. the  lower forms of life. Perverting the very distinctive feature given to us by the Almighty by contemplating actions aimed against our Creator, is indeed an unforgivable abuse of the powers granted to us. By turning the dominating element of his personality into a tool to commit sins, the subservient part of man, i.e. his body, will automatically tend to become corrupted thereby. When someone commits a sin using as his instrument a foolish slave, this is not nearly as serious as when one uses a free man to carry out one’s nefarious schemes. This is what Maimonides wrote at the beginning of the second part of his Moreh Nevuchim. [actually it is found in section 3, chapter 8]

Yet another reason why planning a sin is more serious than the actual commission of it (a thought attributed to Nachmanides by the author), is that the author of the statement had in mind the satisfaction one derives from having carried out the sin. The fact that the perpetrator still thinks about the sin as an accomplish- ment results in his punishment becoming harsher. According to this interpretation no penalty accrues to the contemplation of a sin not carried out. The author, in his volume Kad Hakemach, reasons that seeing that we do not have control of our thoughts, we cannot be held culpable for them. [I am quoting from Rabbi Chavell’s notes, seeing I have neither seen the comment by Nachmanides nor the author’s book Kad Hakemach. Ed.] This is based on the statement of our sages in Kidushin 40 that G‘d does not combine the sinful thought with the actual performance of the evil deed. There is no penalty for the thought. This is also supported by a verse in Psalms 66,18: ”Had I an evil thought in my mind, the Lord would not have listened.” The only exception to this rule is contemplating idolatry. Such thoughts are punishable even if not carried out. This too is supported by a verse from Scripture, i.e. Ezekiel 14,5: “Thus I will hold the House of Israel responsible for their thoughts, because they have all been estranged from Me through their fetishes.”
29,22. שרפה כל ארצה, “a burning up of its entire land;” according to the plain meaning of the text the word ארצה refers back to what the Torah described in verse 21 as “the plagues which afflicted that land.” In that verse the land had been described generally, whereas in our verse the Torah gives some details of what precisely happened to the land, i.e. that it was “burned” by sulphur and salt. The Torah now makes clear that this affliction struck the entire land.

Alternatively, the words כל ארצה, can mean that the choicest part of Israel’s land was turned into something similar to Sodom and Gomorrah which had been destroyed by sulphur and brimstone. It is also possible that the word כל in the expression כל ארצה refers to the land which had formerly contained everything, i.e. כל; the land which epitomised every thing good under the sun. When G’d related to that land (and its people) with goodwill, benevolently, the land of Israel was לא תחסר כל בה, “did not lack for anything,” (Deut. 5,9) whereas now when the Divine Presence had withdrawn in anger, it once more came to resemble a land which had been burned.

29,25. וישתחוו להם, אלוהים אשר לא ידעום ולא חלק להם, and they served their gods; gods they did not know of and which He did not apportion to them.” Moses meant that the Jewish people had never known that these idols were supposed to possess independent divine powers. Not only this, but G’d had not assigned these powers to the Jewish people but only to the Canaanites (Nachmanides). This is based on Deut. 4,19 where we discussed it and pointed out that Israel had been assigned as its protective Power the Creator of the entire universe, and that the Lord Himself is described as מנת חלקי וכוסי, “the Lord is my allotted share and portion” (Psalms 16,5). We also have a verse in the Torah itself, Deut. 32,9 כי חלק ה’ עמו, “for He is the share of His people.” 

29,27. ויתשם ה’ מעל אדמתם, ”the Lord uprooted them from their soil.” This whole paragraph refers to the period of the first Temple, seeing that this was the period during which the people were guilty of idolatry. The expressions ויתשם and וישליכם refer to the fate of the ten tribes, exiled by Shalmanesser, who never returned to their homeland. Such people are considered נדחים, “outcast.” This is why the Torah uses the expression כיום הזה, i.e. their fate became similar to yours as of this day. Just as you are all together in one place, not spread out over the area comprising your homeland, so these exiles will be in a closely confined area. As long as you (the Jewish people) have not yet come to your homeland, i.e. אל המנוחה ואל הנחלה, (compare Deut. 12,9) you too can be considered as נדחים. Your descendants will once more face such crowded conditions, if and when they are exiled due to breaking the conditions of this covenant. Whenever a people are not on their own land where they have space to spread out they are considered as נדחים, outcast.
וישליכם אל ארץ אחרת, “He expelled them to another land.” The letter ל is anyway the largest of the letters in the א-ב. Here it is written even larger. This may be an allusion to the exceptionally high spiritual level from which the people were flung down at the time they were exiled. The prophet Jeremiah (Lamentations 2,1) already speaks of this when he says: השליך משמים ארץ תפארת ישראל, “the Lord has cast down from heaven to earth the majesty of Israel.” Another verse referring to the same experience of the Jewish people is found in Psalms 78,61: “His majesty is in the hands of an oppressor.” This is similar to Daniel 8,12: ”it hurled truth to the ground.” This is a reference to the countenance of Yaakov engraved on the throne of G’d [he is known as personifying “truth” just as is G’d Himself, Ed.] This is also what we read in Midrash Eychah 2,2: “G’d said to Israel the reason you have the audacity to anger Me is that you rely on the fact that the picture of your patriarch Yaakov’s countenance is engraved in My throne, This is why I will fling it back at you right into your faces.” This (according to the author of this Midrash) is the meaning of the verse we quoted from Lamentations 2,1 that “He hurled the majesty of the people of Israel from the heaven.” This is also what David referred to when he wrote (Psalms 102,11) כי נשאתני ותשליכני, “for You had lifted me up high only to cast me down.” G’d flung down the Jewish people whom He had raised previously to such great heights (spiritual). It is as if the psalmist said that the very great height to which the Jewish people had risen previously was a reason why their fall became so phenomenal. Seeing that G’d had flung the Jewish people down from such great heights, “He no longer remembered the footstool of His feet on the day of His wrath* (Lamentations 2,1). [the thrust of this commentary, if I understand correctly, is that the upheaval caused to the Jewish people by its exile was matched by a similar upheaval in the celestial spheres. Ed.] The various portions of verses from Lamentations (5,16) or Amos (5,2), as well as from Ezekiel (19,12) cited by the author, all tend to describe the decline of Israel’s image in the celestial regions before this was followed by Israel’s physical decline and exile. It is part of the mystical aspect of what is referred to in our verse.

29,28. הנסתרות לה’ אלוקינו והנגלות לנו ולבנינו, “The hidden (sins) are for Hashem, whereas the revealed (sins) are for us and our children forever to deal with.” Rashi comments that the reason why the eleven letters commencing with the letter ל in the word לנו have dots above them is to tell us that G’d did not punish the multitude for revealed sins committed prior to the crossing of the Jordan. Once they confirmed the blessings and curses at Mount Gerizim and Mount Eyval respectively, the period of reciprocal responsibility began. [the following is not found in our editions of Rashi’s commentary. Ed.] Rashi quotes the Jerusalem Talmud in Sotah 7,5 in support of his view. The Talmud quotes that Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai said that at these two mountains the people accepted the responsibility for hidden sins.
Joshua had said to them: “if you do not accept reciprocal responsibility for the hidden sins you will all be swept away by a great flood.” Rabbi Shimon ben Sevidai added that we should know that the majority of the sages who were members of the Sanhedrin died during the battle of Ai (after the assembly at Mount Gerizim, proving that the elders are held responsible even for hidden sins, i.e. that of Achan ben Karmi). Joshua said to the people after that, that by the death of these 36 members of the Sanhedrin that בכם הותרה הרצועה “as of now you are held responsible also for hidden sins committed.” [this statement is not found in our editions of the Jerusalem Talmud; I am relying on the notes and research of Rabbi Chavell, Ed.] At that time, a heavenly echo was heard announcing that the Sanhedrin, and certainly lesser dignitaries, have no business investigating hidden sins. There are different interpretations of the meaning of the words בכם הותרה הרצועה. Some say that what is meant is that when Moses had warned the people (29,17) “lest there be amongst you a root flourishing with gall and wormwood,” that as of that time reciprocal responsibility for hidden sins already commenced. [seeing that the people at that time accepted the oath and the covenant. Ed.] This is Rashi’s view as it appears in Sanhedrin 43.
The dots really should have appeared also over the letters in the words ל-י-ה-ו-ה אלוקינו in order to show that the hidden sins are not G’d’s exclusive domain to investigate, except that for reasons of etiquette it was deemed inappropriate to place those dots over the name of the Lord. According to Rashi there, although a penalty accrues to the people and/or their leaders for not bringing sinners who committed their sin in private to justice, the duty to investigate if such sins had been committed begins with the time when the people crossed the river Jordan. [If I understand Rashi correctly, investigation of such sins, rather than sentencing the sinner, is of the essence. We have to do what we can in order to become free from this reciprocal responsibility we described earlier. Ed] Seeing the dots could not be placed on the letters of the name of Hashem, they were moved sideways and had to include a dot over the letter ע of the word עד in order to total 11.
Nachmanides, tackling the problem, writes as follows: “my opinion is that if we follow the plain meaning of the text the word הנסתרות refers to sins committed in private and not witnessed by credible witnesses. The word reflects David’s exclamation in Psalms 19,13: שגיאות מי יבין מנסתרות נקני, ‘who can be aware of errors? Clear me of unperceived guilt!’ David means that such hidden sins are exclusively G’d’s domain to investigate and to punish. No guilt attaches to the Jewish people or their representatives concerning such sins. However, the revealed sins, הנגלות, are forever our obligation to investigate and deal with as a חוקת עולם, an eternal statute, etc. This responsibility devolves upon us due to the wordsאשר איננו פה , (verse 17) for all future generations. Seeing that with these words all Israelites for all future times had been committed to observe the Torah, etc., the Torah saw fit in our verse to exempt us from sins committed  without our knowledge so that we would not be held responsible from the curse devolving us for such sins.” Thus far Nachmanides.
The sage Ibn Ezra writes as follows: “the word הנסתרות refers to acts of idolatry committed by individuals in the privacy of their homes. Bringing such people to justice is exclusively G’d’s business; He will take care of such individuals. No guilt attaches to us for the commission of those sins.
I have heard it said in the name of Maimonides about this verse that that the words הנסתרות לה’ אלוקינו refer to the fact that mystical dimensions of the Torah, such as the true reason behind the various commandments, are the exclusive domain of the Lord; if man succeeds in revealing even a small portion of such reasons, this does not excuse him from fulfilling the respective commandment in accordance with what the Torah has revealed about it in the text. It is our duty to perform all the commandments as written, even if we are certain that seeing we know the true reason for them this would make performance redundant in our eyes. This is the meaning of והנגלות לנו ולבנינו עד עולם, i.e. “and what has been revealed we are duty bound to fulfill forever more.” While this is a wonderful and profound explanation, it has nothing to do with the text in our paragraph. We must understand the text as related to the previous verse in which the fact that the people have been exiled and apparently abandoned by Hashem has been described.
One may explain the whole matter of reciprocal responsibility described here as follows: “the hidden ones (sins) are G’d’s problem, seeing that in the previous verse the syntax is exceedingly long, i.e. the words: ‘Tte Lord removed them from their soil in anger and wrath and with great fury and He expelled them to another land as of this day.’” The verse is a reference to this long and seemingly interminable exile we find ourselves in. The word הנסתרות is a warning not to try and figure out when this exile will end. This knowledge is reserved for Hashem alone. However, as soon as G’d reveals the advent of the redemption it will become clear that our future and that of our children will endure forever (in spite of the gloom and doom prevailing during the long years of exile). Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to carry out the commandments of the Torah seeing the Torah is valid forever. It will not become redundant even in the days of the Messiah. Its applicability is as basic during the years of exile as during the glorious era following our redemption.
This is reflected in the exegesis by our sages of the words in Deut. 16,3 למען תזכור את יום צאתך מארץ מצרים כל ימי חייך, “in order that you may remember (by the performance of this legislation) the day you came out of Egypt for all the days of your life.” Had the Torah omitted the word כל, “all,” in that verse, I would have been entitled to conclude that when a greater redemption such as that of the Messiah will take place, the provisions to observe Passover will become redundant. Seeing that the Torah wrote the word כל ימי, it is clear that it meant to legislate the observance of Passover (and other laws) even for the period when it is overshadowed by a more recent and all-embracing redemption (Berachot 12). By adopting this explanation, the whole verse by itself as well as how it relates to the previous verse and to what follows becomes crystal clear. As to the missing letter ו in the word הנסתרת which appears as if it were singular, the word as it is should be viewed as an allusion to the שכינה, the hidden Presence of G’d. 
After all, G’d had warned us that in times of exile He would “hide” His face from us, אסתירה פני מהם in Deut. 32,20. The reason the Shechinah is described as something hidden is that the clouds of glory covered it both when it was inside the Tabernacle and elsewhere in the desert. The word הנסתרת in our verse may be understood as an appeal to the Lord our G’d by the Shechinah to reveal Himself, for His Presence to become manifest, and to reveal itself when this exile will come to an end. Our sages (Midrash Tehillim 9) follow a similar approach in the way they understand the words אגילה בישועתך, “I want to have a revelation of Your salvation” in Psalms 9,15. Significantly, the psalmist does not speak of ישועתנו, “our salvation,” but of “Your salvation.” This is not the only verse in which the Shechinah is perceived as asking mercy, salvation, for itself from the higher emanation of Hashem. Other verses in Scripture carrying a similar message are found in Isaiah 30,18, as well as in Psalms 60,7 where the words הושיעה ימינך וענני, “deliver Your right hand and I will have been answered,” are understood as an appeal by the Shechinah to Hashem to manifest Himself. Israel’s salvation and the Shechinah’s salvation are equated. A still clearer verse attesting to this phenomenon is found in Samuel II 7,23: “which You have redeemed for Yourself” [a reference to G’d’s personal self-interest (instead of Israel’s). Ed.]. We have already elaborated on the mystical aspect of this whole subject in our commentary on Deut. 5,26.
You ought to realise also that our sages derive from our verse here that an expert may be able to interpret dreams by his knowledge of the deeper meaning of the letters in the holy names of G’d and the ability to rearrange same. [the author goes into greater detail, the meaning of which escapes me. Ed.] 
30,2-3. ושבת עד ה’ אלוקיך...בכל לבבך ובכל נפשך...ושב ה’ אלוקיך את שבותך, “and you will return unto the Lord your G’d with all your heart and with all your soul. Then the Lord your G’d will bring back your captives, etc.” You have already become familiar with the statement of our sages in Avodah Zarah 5 “that the son of David (redeemer) will not come until all the souls in the bodies have expired;” this is based on Isaiah 57,16: “until a belated spirit from Me envelps them and the souls which I have made.” The meaning of the whole verse is that G’d will not be angry at the Jewish people forever, nor will He remain furious indefinitely by not redeeming the people, seeing that a spirit  יעטוף מלפני, “certain spirits emanate from Me belatedly,” and the souls which I have created enter the body at this stage of history. [Rashi understand the word כי in that verse as meaning “when.” Ed.] The word יעטוף is a kind of “being late,” such as when it occurs in Genesis 30,42 “for the ones born late belonged to Lavan.” [If I understand correctly, the author understands that just as the evil spirit enters man at birth, whereas the urge to do good does not enter him until he is of age, (13), so one cause of his corruption is due to the belated entry of the יצר הטוב. This affords G’d an opportunity to find some excuse for man’s (the Jewish people’s) behaviour and to redeem them after a sufficient interval. Ed.]
Nachmanides, in commenting on our verse, focuses on the reason why the verses 2 and 3 appear sequentially, i.e. the words נפשך ושב follow each other. He understands the first verse as saying that if all the Jewish people (“all your souls,” כל נפשך) become penitents) only then will the redemption occur, i.e. G’d will bring back your captives (ושב ה’ אלוקיך את שבותך). The meaning is that totally new (renewed) souls will enter the bodies of the Jewish people. This is why the Torah here stresses אתה ובניך, i.e. this תשובה movement must embrace not just a single generation. These two words are an allusion to the whole people of Israel (historically speaking). We find yet another pronouncement on this subject by our sages in Yevamot 62, in which this conclusion is arrived at from the same verse in Isaiah, and the Talmud adds that immediately after this statement [actually immediately preceding this statement, Ed.] the prophet continues with the words ואמר סולו סולו פנו דרך, “Pave (a road,) pave a road, clear a path!” The prophet paints the scenario which alone will clear the way to the final redemption.

ושב וקבצך מכל העמים, ”then He will bring you back collectively from all the nations to which He scattered you.” I have already mentioned (29,27) that the previous paragraph speaks of the period of the first Temple when the people sinned by committing idolatry and they were punished by being banished to ארץ אחרת, a different country, and the ten tribes were cast out, הנדחים, by King Shalmanesser of Assyria to Chalach, Chavor on the river Gozan and the cities of Media (Kings II 17,6). This passage proves that our assumption was right, seeing it commences where the last passage had left off, i.e. the נדחים, the outcasts of King Shalmanesser, by referring (verse 1) i.e. “to which the Lord your G’d had cast you out there.” Clearly, it speaks of the exile to which the ten tribes had become doomed. They represented the bulk of the Jewish people. Having dealt with the ingathering of the ten tribes from their exile, the passage continues speaking  about yet another ingathering, the countries to which the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin had been exiled where we have been enslaved by people who hated us and persecuted us. These people are the Arabs and Edomites. We are scattered throughout their countries until this present day and this is why the Torah speaks of “the countries to which the Lord your G’d has scattered you” (verse 3). In that verse the Torah addresses us. The Torah twice mentions ושב, “He will bring back,” to hint  that there will occur two separate ingatherings, one of the ten tribes and one of the tribes Yehudah and Binyamin. Concerning these ingatherings we read in the prophecy of Isaiah 56,8: “I will gather still more to those already gathered.” It appears therefore, judging by the syntax of the text in our verses, that the principal ingathering of the tribes who will do penitence will be that of the ten tribes, the ones described as אשר הדיחך ה’, “whom the Lord cast out.” G’d assures the ten tribes that repentance will immediately trigger their return to their homeland. After having dealt with the redemption of those tribes, the Torah adds ושב וקבצך, (verse 3) that there will occur a second ingathering, that of the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin. This is why the Torah had employed the expression והפיץ, “He scattered,” seeing that these two tribes are scattered all over the globe. After that, the Torah once more addresses the נדחים, the ones who had been cast out, i.e. the ten tribes, assuring them that even if they had been scattered in the meantime to the ends of the earth, G’d would not fail to gather them in and bring them back to their homeland which they would once again inherit. Actually, we find allusions to three separate “inheritances” here. The third will outrank the former two inheritances, will encompass more territory than the Israelites controlled during the glorious days of King Solomon. Moreover, G’d promises the people that the evil urge will be banished and that such emotions as envy and jealousy will disappear from among them. This is the meaning of verse 5: ”He will do good to you and make you more numerous than your forefathers and circumcise your heart and the heart of your offspring  to love the Lord your G’d with all your heart, etc.” The meaning of the words ואתה תשוב, “and you will return,” in verse 8, is that the penitence of which G’d speaks is an assurance, a promise by G’d to the people.

30,5. אל הארץ אשר ירשו אבותיך וירשתה, “to the land which your forefathers had inherited, and you will inherit it.” Our sages in Seder Olam (chapter 30, an ancient historical text) have explained that the words: “which your forefathers inherited, and you will inherit it,” mean that whereas they inherited it twice, they did not (need to) inherit it a third time. The first time the people inherited the land and sanctified it by their presence was under Joshua. This sanctification remained effective only until their expulsion and the destruction of the Temple. The second sanctification (and inheritance) occurred during the time of Ezra. That sanctification was for all times so that after the present exile there is no need to inherit and sanctify the land once again. This is how my teacher Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet, may his light shine, explained this matter to me.
It is possible to explain our verse as meaning that whereas the first and second inheritance by the Jewish people extended only to the land of Israel, the third inheritance will include entitlement to any part of the globe. This is what the Torah means in our verse when it writes: “He will do good for you, and increase you more so than for your forefathers.” This is why the expression “inheritance” is used by the Torah in connection with the period of the first two Temples, but not in connection with the future. The expression used in that connection clearly envisages an additional distinction the Jewish people will enjoy then. This is similar to what our sages (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,37) expounded on as the reason why whenever we read about the word שירה in the Bible it is feminine, except when the song refers to events in the future, such as in Psalms 96,1 or Isaiah 26,1. It is the nature of a woman to become pregnant and give birth and to experience the same procedure time and again. The redemption of the Jewish people in the future will be a final redemption, something not needing to be repeated. This is why, when the Bible speaks of such times, the song sung then will be a masculine song, i.e. שיר חדש. It is the function of the male to inherit his father’s property absolutely, once and for all, as distinct from when daughters receive such an inheritance, as an emergency and interim measure. (compare Ezekiel 48,33: שער יששכר אחד, שער זבולון אחד, “the gate of Issachar-one; the gate of Zevulun- one”). Midrashim  link the verse in Ezekiel with Zecharyah 13,8 describing the destruction of two thirds of the inhabitants of Israel. A Midrash in Pessikta Zutrata on Deut.1,8 on the words לתת להם ולזרעם אחריהם, “to give to them and to their descendants after them,” breaks up this verse into three sections. The words לתת להם refer to the people leaving Egypt; the word ולזרעם refers to the immigrants in the time of Ezra; the word אחריהם refers to the returnees during the messianic epoch.

30,6. ומל ה' אלוקיך את לבבך, “the Lord your G’d will circumcise your heart, etc.”  Nachmanides writes on this verse: “this means that the Lord will remove the ‘foreskin’ covering the people’s heart”, a simile for desires of sexual and other varieties which are described as ערלת הלב. We know that someone who is captive to such desires is known as ערל, from Jeremiah 9,25 where the prophet describes the Jewish people as being of uncircumcised heart [although they do not have a foreskin on their sexual organ. Ed.] Just as the removal of the foreskin of that organ helps to restrain excessive sexual urges, so the removal of its equivalent covering of the heart will control the cravings responsible for committing other sins. G’d assures the people in that verse in Jeremiah that a time will come when such obstacles to obedience to G’d’s laws will be removed. [Although what the author wrote here is the gist of what Nachmanides writes, it does not represent an accurate translation of his words. Ed.]

30,7. על אויביך ועל שונאיך, “against your enemies and those who hate you.” The former are the Ishmaelites, Arabs; the latter refer to the descendants of Esau. The prophet Micah (Micah 5,8)  speaks of “your hand shall prevail over your foes, and all your enemies shall be cut down.” This is a reference to the two nations to which we are enslaved and amongst which we are scattered. This is why the sages in Baba Batra 73 refer to two geese in a story related by Rabbi Bar bar Chana. The story goes as follows: “I once walked in the desert and we saw these two geese which lost their feathers due to their excessive obesity. I extracted a continuous thin line of honey from them. I said to them: “are we going to have a share in the world to come?” One of them lifted its body, whereas the other lifted its flank.” When Rabbi Bar bar Chana came to Rabbi Eleazar (and told him of his experience) the Rabbi said to him that the meaning is that in the future the Jewish people will have to render an accounting. Thus far the Talmud. [the fact is that the entire story does not appear in our editions of the Talmud. Rabbi Chavell claims he has found it in a similar form in Agadot haTalmud. Ed.]

The meaning of the whole story is that the sage (Rabbi  Bar bar Chana) saw in his mind, while in an isolated part of the world, i.e. the desert, that these two Empires, that of the Mohammedans and that of the Romans, attained tremendous power in this world. This was symbolised by the obesity of the geese. When the Rabbi asked them: “are we not going to have a share in your prosperity in the future?,” the meaning of the words: “one of them lifted its wings” is a reference to Ishmael This was a symbol that the Ishmaelites will flee to us in the future and take refuge under the wings of the Shechinah. They will give us their beasts to use as sacrifices to the Lord on their behalf. This is the meaning of  Isaiah 60,7: “all the flocks of Kedar shall be assembled for you (the Jewish people); the rams of Nevayot shall serve your needs.” This indicates that these Ishmaelites will convert to Judaism. It also is an allusion to the fact that they will wear phylacteries, seeing the phylacteries have been compared to wings (Shabbat 49). Concerning the other goose which raised its rump, this is a reference to Edom, whose protective angel had dislocated Yaakov’s hip joint in the nocturnal encounter described in Genesis 32,26. It is also an allusion to the commandment of circumcision, i.e. that in the time under discussion these people would convert and circumcise themselves. There is no need to add that at that time political and moral sovereignty will be restored to the Jewish people. This is the symbolism portrayed by the fatness of these two geese and the honey which dripped from them. As to the words of Rabbi Eleazar that the Israelites would be called upon to give an accounting at that time, the meaning is that they will have to give an accounting for not having become penitents during all the preceding years, and have tarried so long before living as true Jews. The reason the term אויב is applied to the Roman Empire, whereas the term שונא is applied to the Islamic Empire, is that the former is a term describing fiercer hatred and animosity than the word שונא. אויב  is an enemy who is full of hatred in his heart, knows no mercy. A שונא, on the other hand, though he too inflicts hurt and death, tempers it with a degree of mercy. Proof of this found in Isaiah 47,6: ”but you showed them no mercy. Even upon the aged you made your yoke exceedingly heavy.” [actually in that chapter the prophet speaks of the cruelty of the Babylonians, not the Ishmaelites. Ed.] The very etymology of the word אויב, reflects that it refers to unrelenting hatred; it is derived from אבוי, a word which has the same letters as אויב, and means “woe.” The reason that the Torah mentions אויביך before speaking of שונאיך, [when we would have expected the Torah to describe matters in an ascending order, Ed.] is that it wanted to link the שונאיך to the pursuit, i.e. אשר רדפוך, “who have pursued you.” This nation has traditionally uprooted our exiles wherever their rule extended. The reason they are referred to by the term שונא, “someone who hates,” is that G’d Himself describes His relationship with Esau with the words: “I have hated Esau,” (Maleachi 1,3). Midrash Mishley confirms this when explaining the words (Proverbs 30,23) “because of the loathsome woman when she becomes married.” The “loathsome, hateful one,” is understood to be a reference to Esau. The verse from Scripture cited as proof is also the one from Maleachi I,3. The final words in that verse in Proverbs, i.e. ושפכה כי תירש גברתה, “and when a slave-woman inherits her mistress” (another pheno- menon confounding Solomon who describes such phenomena as intolerable), is a reference to Ishmael, seeing his mother Hagar was the slave-woman of Sarah.) Seeing that the attitude of the Ishmaelites towards the Jews is more hostile than that of the Edomites, the Torah describes them as “your enemies.” This is confirmed by the popular saying: “rather under the Edomites than under the Ishmaelites.” [The idea is that if Jews have a chance which exile to choose they would invariably prefer to live under the yoke of the former. Ed.] G’d, when describing for how long He will hold generations responsible for the deeds of their forefathers, says ועל רבעים לשאוני, “and to the fourth generation concerning those who qualify for the term שונאי, “those who hate Me” (Exodus 20,5).
Concerning G’d’s אויביו, “His enemies,” however, we read in Psalms 37,20: ואויבי ה' כיקר כרים כלו בעשן כלו, “and the enemies of the Lord shall be consumed like meadow grass consumed in smoke.” The verse teaches that nothing at all will remain of these “enemies.” This is why they are compared to the fat of the fat sheep which goes up completely in smoke (on the altar). Solomon refers to both of these nations as “two daughters,” mentioning that both are destined for Gehinom, hell. This is what he meant when he wrote in Proverbs 30,15 that “the leech has two daughters, ‘give give’!;” He compared Gehinom, the place where judgment is meted out to the souls of the wicked, to a leech which is a blood-sucker. Concerning these two nations the prophet in Isaiah 66,17 wrote: “those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves to enter the groves;” the former who sanctify themselves are the Edomites whose habit it is to shake their fingers in different directions. The latter are the Ishmaelites whose habit it is to bathe their hands and feet  (to cleanse them) but not their hearts, which is their essence. The prophet in that verse continues אחר אחד בתוך, and alludes to the manner in which the Edomites sanctify themselves in the centre of the garden. Alternatively, these last three words may be an allusion to the day of their judgment, a day already appointed for that purpose. One of these nations will be judged on a Friday preceding the onset of the Sabbath, whereas the other will be judged immediately after the Sabbath, the Sabbath remaining “in the centre;” when the prophet describes one of these people as “consuming swine,” he refers to the Edomites, whereas the ones described in that same verse as eating reptiles and mice, are the Ishmaelites. The verse concludes by saying: “they will perish together.”

30,8. ועשית את כל מצותיו אשר אנכי מצוך היום, “and you will carry out all His commandments which I command to you this day.” After having spoken about Israel’s repentance, and their return to the Holy Land, the Torah now speaks of the commandments being commanded “this day;” we find a similar formulation already in verse 2 of our chapter where the repentance had also been featured. All of this is to focus on the fact that the essence of repentance is to accept the Torah as governing our lives. This is why whenever repentance is mentioned the reference to the commandments of the Torah is appended. The prophet Jeremiah employs a similar style when he writes (Jeremiah 2,17)  “is this not what has happened to you for forsaking the Lord your G’d at the time He led you on the way?” “The way” is the path of Torah. This was the path which earlier generations of Jews observed and their lives were successful.

30,9. כי ישוב ה' לשוש עליך לטוב כאשר שש על אבותיך, “when Hashem will return and rejoice over you for good as He rejoiced over your forefathers.” It is possible that this verse alludes to the time when the King will return with His bride (the Jewish people), i.e. an allusion to the time of the redemption. At that time He will provide you with all the benefits accompanying such a return to favour. Should you enquire when exactly all this would happen, the Torah adds: “when you will hearken to the voice of the Lord your G’d to observe, etc.” The Jewish people are always expected to make the first move towards reconciliation with G’d, i.e. observing His commandments. Immediately G’d notices this, He in turn will hasten the rapprochement. Our fortunes depend on our becoming penitents. All this has been expressed in unmistakable language by Maleachi 3,7: “שובו אלי ואשובה אליכם, “return to Me and I will return to you.” The letter ה at the end of the word אשובה in that verse is a reference to the final letter in the tetragram, the attribute which created the universe.

30,11. כי המצוה הזאת, “for this commandment, etc.” In this instance the word המצוה refers to the entire Torah, just as it did in Deut. 8,1 where the Torah spoke of כל המצוה.
לא נפלאת היא, “it is not hidden.” The Torah is not so mysterious and mystical that you cannot fulfill its commandments. This is why Moses added immediately: “it is not in heaven.” Neither is it beyond the ocean. All these comparisons are only variations of the words לא נפלאת. The ocean that Moses speaks about here is the great ocean, which is dark and beyond man’s ability to navigate (Ibn Ezra). Moses does not refer to seas which man is able to navigate [with the existing means of navigation, Ed.] The words compare such an ocean to “heaven,” neither of which is accessible to man.
30,12. לא בשמים היא, “it is not in heaven;” it is possible that the reason Moses makes this point is because prior to bringing the Torah to the people it had indeed resided in heaven, and we have quoted arguments offered by the angels opposing its descent to earth. The word היא which we might have considered as redundant, is a reference to the highest level of חכמה, the emanation wisdom, which does indeed reside in heaven.
ולא מעבר לים היא, “neither is it beyond the sea.” This is a reference to the great ocean which surrounds all the land mass, an area where this superior wisdom is located. The reason the Torah (Moses) had to refer to it as ים, is that otherwise it would have to be described as תהום, and the Torah would have had to write לא בתהום היא. This is the way Job referred to it when he quoted the deep as saying: “it is not with me” (referring to wisdom compare Job 28,14). It is stylistically more elevating to refer to the ocean as something elevated than as something conjuring up visions of a deep abyss, as does the word תהום. The reason Moses added the word היא to each of these descriptions of different locations is that each time the word היא appears it represents a diminution of the area meant. In order to include the supreme wisdom we spoke of, the planetary system should also have been included seeing it surrounds the ocean. Seeing that the supreme wisdom surrounds the entire visible universe, Moses when referring to parts of it, made this point plain by limiting each part with the word היא, i.e. “it only.”
The word הים used here is a reference to the part of the universe inhabited by man. This is why he added: “it is not too far from you,” implying that there are indeed levels of wisdom which are beyond man to attain [even by means of studying the Torah and observing it. Ed.] 
We may surmise that Moses used the word היא four times in order to allude to the four basic celestial fundamentals which are emanated from this supreme wisdom. They are alluded to in the names of the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, and David. The vision of the prophet Ezekiel (chapter 1) in which four חיות, beast-like figures equipped with angels, are featured also correspond to these four fundamentals of celestial wisdom emanated to creatures on earth. They are described elsewhere as ארבע אופנים, “four wheels,” an allegorical description of what supports the מרכבה, the chariot the Shechinah is perceived as riding in. Translated into our terrestrial language, these are the four elements which are the constituent parts of all tangible matter on earth. They ensure the continued existence of the terrestrial universe when they are combined in the correct proportions.
A Midrashic approach to our verses, based on Eyruvin 55:  The words “it is not in heaven,” mean that Torah is not to be found amongst haughty, arrogant people. The words: “it is not beyond the ocean,” mean that Torah is not to be found among people who constantly journey from place to place to make their livelihood, i.e. hawkers. Samuel said that Torah cannot be found among astrologers or professional astronomers, seeing that the Torah writes: “it is not in heaven.” The Torah may be found only among people preoccupied with the pursuit of matters which are oriented toward heavenly concerns. People challenged Samuel, saying to him that seeing he himself was an astronomer how could he make such a statement? He answered: “in all my days I have never looked at חכמה except when I was relieving myself” [at a time when I was forbidden to engage in the pursuit of Torah. Ed.] (compare Devarim Rabbah 8,6). Thus far the Midrash.
Concerning these disciplines, i.e. astrology and astronomy, Isaiah warned the people of Israel, saying to them (Isaiah 55,2) “why do you spend money for what is not bread and your toil for that which does not satisfy?” Isaiah meant that his compatriots were wasting their money in order to acquire “wisdom” which would neither satisfy their bodies nor their souls; he added: “give heed to Me, (G’d) and you shall eat choice food and enjoy the richest viands. Hearken and you shall be revived.” Torah is described in Proverbs 4,2 as לקח טוב, “a good purchase.” It is the true food, satisfying those that “consume it.” When Isaiah said תתענגו בדשן נפשכם, “enjoy with your souls the richest foods,” he refers to the “bread” which truly satisfies the soul of man, spiritual food, the Torah. The simile of דשן, something physical, material, is used by the prophet to illustrate in human language the spiritual essence of what Torah supplies to those who study it. Such metaphors for spiritual matters are also found in Psalms 63,6: “milk and fatness satisfy my soul.” Clearly, David does not mean for the soul to be fed milk.
All of the above teaches that Samuel did not engage in the study of astronomy at a time when this would have competed with the study of Torah. Seeing that it is forbidden to engage in the speaking of Torah, or even contemplating thoughts of Torah, while one is in the bathhouse or in the toilet, he could use such time to increase his knowledge in other disciplines. Our sages (Menachot 99) said: “go and study Greek philosophy at a time which is neither day nor night.” What they meant was that preoccupation with any disciplines other than Torah study exposes the student to the danger of being influenced by the theologically unsound element, some of which is always found scattered in those texts. This is the reason these disciplines have been compared to silver, seeing that silver invariably contains some impurities unless it has been refined over and over again. Our Torah is compared to such silver, i.e. כסף צרוף. This is what David meant in Psalms 12,7 when he wrote: “the words of the Lord are pure words, silver purged in an earthen crucible, refined sevenfold.”
מי יעלה לנו השמימה, “who would ascend heaven for us?” We find a hint here that only people who have been circumcised have a chance to attain a true appreciation of the unique nature of Hashem. Only the Jewish people who wear the sign of the covenant on their very bodies have a chance to attain such a spiritual level. We also find that even prophets cannot prophesy while in a standing position unless they had been circumcised. As long as Avraham had not been circumcised he always fell down when G’d spoke to him [other than in a dream when he was prostate anyway. Ed.] Compare Genesis 17,3: “he fell on his face.” This was prior to his circumcision. On the other hand, after he had been circumcised and recovered from the effects, and prayed on behalf of the righteous people in Sodom, the Torah speaks of him as עודנו עומד לפני ה', “still standing in the presence of the Lord.” (Genesis 18,22 compare Tanchuma Lech Lecha 20). Bileam, by contrast, prophesied only when in a prone position as we know from Numbers 24,4. Moses also alluded to the inability of the Jewish people in his time to attain a true appreciation of the holy name of G’d. This is why he said to G’d: “if the people will ask me what is His name (the G’d in whose name you claim to speak), what shall I tell them?” He may have meant that the few Israelites who were circumcised at that time would ask such a question.
Seeing that המצוה (the term used in our passage for the entire Torah) which bears the seal of the Holy Covenant requires as a precondition of being fulfilled that the persons doing so have been circumcised, the sages of the Midrash (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2,18) said concerning בצבאות או באילות השדה, “by the Hosts or by the hinds of the fields,” that the word “Hosts” refers to the Upper Hosts as well as the lower Hosts, those on earth who witnessed the covenant (Song of Songs 2,7). The Hosts referred to are the ones which already bear a distinguishing mark, (circumcision) as opposed to those who will only bear this mark in the future.
Our verse indirectly refers to the circumcision of our flesh after having openly referred to the circumcision of our hearts with the words: “and the Lord your G’d will circumcise your heart.” This latter circumcision brings in its wake the neutralisation of the evil urge. Once this has occurred all organs of a person are eager to play their respective parts in the fulfillment of the Torah’s commandments, something that reason dictates. Being drawn to the name of the Lord will then be a natural state of affairs. This is all alluded to in the words: “who will ascend to heaven on our behalf?” [at such times when you no longer suffer from the evil urge, there is no need for an intermediary, for someone to ascend to heaven in your behalf; you can do it yourself. Ed.] The prophet Jeremiah refers to this state of affairs when he writes (Jeremiah 31,33) “for all of them know Me, from the least of them to the greatest.”
30,14. בפיך ובלבבך לעשותו, “with your mouth and your heart to perform it.” The Torah mentions three things here; the mouth, the heart, and the performance. All the laws of the Torah are included therefore as belonging to one of these three categories. There are commandments which require to be fulfilled by use of the mouth; others can be fulfilled by means of the heart only; still others require “performance,” i.e. the involvement of other organs and parts of our bodies. This is what may have prompted our sages in Avot 1,20 to state that “the world stands on three things, on Torah, on service to the Lord, and on the performance of deeds of loving kindness.” When the sages said: “on the Torah,” they meant on our engaging our mouth in the service of the Lord; when they said: “on service to the Lord,” they meant that our hearts had to be involved in fulfilling the commandments. Commandments which require the participation of our heart rank higher than those which can be discharged by means of only our mouths. This is the reason that when someone who is engaged in studying Torah (using his mouth to serve the Lord) must interrupt his studies when it is time to perform a commandment requiring our heart, i.e. the reading of the first line of the Kriyat Shema. (compare Shabbat 11) According to Rabbi Yehudah hanassi (Berachot 13) it is only the first verse in that paragraph which requires the kind of concentration that one must interrupt regular Torah study in order to perform it properly.
Mitzvah-performance which necessitates the mouth is ranked higher than the performance of commandments which involve other parts of our body such as offering sacrifices. (Tanchuma  Tzav 14) This is based on Leviticus 7,31 seeing it does not say זאת התורה , עולה וגו' but זאת התורה לעולה, למנחה, וגו', “i.e. that there are viable or even superior alternatives to the offering of sacrificial animals. Ed.] This is the reason the word ובלבבך has been written in the middle of the three categories, to emphasise its centrality, the fact that it is the most important of the three. This is why performance, i.e. with the limbs and organs of the body, has been written only at the end of the verse. 
Nachmanides, at the end of verse 11 writes as follows: the words בפיך ובלבבך refer to the subject of penitence, repentance, a commandment spelled out in verse 2 of our chapter. When the Torah speaks of this repentance it draws attention to the fact that it is not so difficult to fulfill this commandment. The Torah does not demand all sorts of difficult tasks such as ascending to heaven or crossing the ocean for a person to have fulfilled this commandment. All it takes to become a true penitent is the mouth and the heart. It may be performed anywhere; you do not even have to come to Jerusalem and the Temple to have your repentance accepted by the Lord. It is the easiest thing to do, i.e. כי קרוב אליך הדבר מאד לעשותו, “the matter is right at hand for you to carry out.” All you need is to employ your mouth and your heart.

30,15. ראה נתתי לפניך היום את החיים ואת הטוב, “see here, I have placed before you today life and the good.” This verse shows that man has been given the choice to do either good or evil; for, if he did not have a free will, how could the system of reward and punishment be relevant? The way we have to understand the verse is that if you do good you will reap life, if you do evil your “reward” will be death.
An alternative explanation of this verse: the words “life and the good, death and the evil,” are a reference to the Torah itself. Torah can be the elixir of life for the righteous; at the same time it could be the source of death for the wicked. Our verse would be similar in meaning to Ezekiel 20,25: “and I also have given to them statutes which are not good and social laws that they cannot live by.” [the words “to them” in the verse refer to the wicked, Sabbath-profaning Jews. Being in exile due to their sins, and forbidden by their hosts in exile to keep the Torah, makes the continued violation of the Torah a source of the people’s death for non-observance, or for death by their masters for violating local laws and insisting on observing Torah law instead. The Jewish people’s failure to keep Torah while on their own land, ultimately places them in a no-win situation in the land to which they have been exiled.
It is also possible to explain the words: “see I have given you life and the good,” to mean that this passage was written as a follow-up of the previous paragraph which dealt with the promise of redemption. Seeing that the time for the resurrection of the dead is understood to be close to that of the redemption i.e. 206 years later, it is appropriate that this verse commences with the word ראה which is an allusion to that time. In view of all this Solomon said in Song of Songs 8,12: האלף לך שלמה ומאתים לנוטרים את פריו, “I have my own vineyard; the thousand silver pieces are yours Shlomoh, and two hundred more to the ones who guarded its fruit.” [I translated the whole verse, using the conventional translation. Ed.] The word ומאתים is understood as if it had been written ו-מאתים, i.e. “plus 206,” the letter ו meaning the digit 6. Solomon would reveal in this verse that  the time when the resurrection occurs is 206 years after the 1,000 years (the traditional interval after the first 6,000 years of our universe have been concluded and a period of complete metamorphosis of the universe has begun. Ed.] The arrival of Shlomoh, described as someone granted 1000 (years?) is a reference to the coming of the Messiah, also known as Shlomoh, which would occur at the end of the 6,000 years we have mentioned. (The source of this whole exegesis is Nachmanides כתבי הרמב'ן חלק ב עמוד תקטו, Mossad Harav Kook edition, commentary on Song of Songs, edited by Rabbi Chavell) The Messiah, of course, is a descendant of Solomon just as much as he is a descendant of David.
The reason why the passage above (verse 14) concluded with the word לעשותו, the same word we find at the conclusion of the Torah’s report of the story of creation (Genesis, 2,3), is that the Torah wants to establish a conceptual linkage to the beginning of conventional time and to the end of conventional time, i.e. the arrival of the Messiah. The Torah wants you to know that from the point of view of natural laws, both points in time are no different from one another. The universe will continue to function normally, according to the rules G’d established at the time of creation also after the arrival of the Messiah. The Talmud in Shabbat 63 stated so explicitly, the wording being: אין בין העולם הזה לימות המשיח אלא שעבוד גליות, “the only difference between this present world and the epoch of the Messiah will be that Israel will no longer be subservient to other nations politically.” The addition of the letter ו at the end of the word לעשתו, instead of לעשות as in Genesis 2,3 is meant to symbolise the number 6, i.e. that the 6th millennium will be no different from the first millennium as far as the conventional laws of nature are concerned. The words ראה נתתי לך היום, are intended to convey that immediately after the 6,000 years the period of the Messiah will commence. During that life the people of Israel will experience all the good that it is possible to experience. The word החיים is synonymous with the life in the world to come, i.e. the life after death and resurrection concerning which we read in Psalms 31,20: “how abundant is the good that You have in store for those who fear You.” the word הרע refers to a category of sinner for whom resurrection will actually spell disaster. They are the ones referred to repeatedly in both Isaiah 66,24 and  Daniel (Daniel 12,2) of whom the prophet and Daniel say: “many are those that sleep in the dust of the earth who will awake, some to eternal life, others to reproaches, to everlasting abhorrence.”

The view of Maimonides, in his treatise about the resurrection, is that the people resurrected will lead normal lives, will eat and drink and produce children. These functions with which G’d has equipped them will certainly not cease. They will lead exceptionally long lives, after which they will die a physical death and continue a life of the spirit in what we are fond of terming עולם הבא, “the world to come, the hereafter.” This is what is always meant when the sages speak of someone who has been invited to the hereafter, i.e. עולם הבא. Concerning this world the sages wrote (Berachot 17): “in the hereafter there is no eating, no drinking, there are only disembodied spirits, etc.” If these people had been equipped with the organs enabling them to eat and drink and procreate, these organs would be redundant, and G’d does not create anything which does not fulfill its assigned purpose. If you were to query this by saying that Moses and Elijah went without eating and drinking for long periods although they did have a body equipped for eating and drinking, and that therefore what Moses and Elijah were able to do in this world, people could do in the world to come in spite of having bodies, this is not a viable argument. The normal bodily functions of Moses and Elijah were made redundant for a limited period and a specific purpose, so that they were never really redundant seeing they were in use both before and after the period when they were temporarily out of use. The people (souls) who are transferred to the עולם הבא will never have any use for the organs in question. Hence it would not make sense for G’d to equip them with such useless organs. This is why every intelligent person has to believe that in the region we call עולם הבא there are no bodies at all, only souls. This is the view of Maimonides which clearly emerges from his words.
However, the sages of the Talmud are of a different opinion. (Nachmanides elaborates on this at the end of the treatise שער הגבול). The experts in Kabbalah believe that there will be no more death after the resurrection of the dead. They base this primarily on Isaiah 25,8 בלע המות לנצח, “He will destroy death forever.” They also refer to Sanhedrin 92 where the Talmud says that “the dead who will return to life will not again turn into dust.” Concerning the world (life) after death, the sages in Berachot 17 say that that a very precious statement made by Rav was that “in the world to come there will not be eating, drinking, no jealousy or competition, but the righteous will sit with their crowns on their heads and enjoy the brilliance emanated from the Shechinah.” This latter statement makes it obvious that the author does hold that there will be bodies in the world to come. This is why the fact that there will not be eating and drinking, etc., had to be mentioned, seeing that if there were not presumed to be bodies this would be obvious to all. Therefore, it is proper for us to believe that there will indeed be bodies in the עולם הבא but that many bodily functions as we know them will cease to operate, just as they ceased functioning for a period in the lives of Moses and Elijah. What all this means is simply that in that world the spiritual powers of the soul will triumph over the body and what are perceived in our world as its needs.
If you were to ask why the organs of the body which are not being used should exist, the fact is that they are not really redundant at all. On the contrary, these organs receive the reward for all the effort they put in while on earth in fulfilling G’d’s commandments. Seeing that G’d does not withhold reward from anyone entitled to it, or even shortchanges such a creature (compare Baba Kama 38), He does not want the body to be in a position to complain; therefore He transfers the body to the regions called עולם הבא to enable it to also enjoy these outpourings of the brilliance of the Shechinah. Support for this view comes from Psalms 17,15: ”when one day I awaken, I shall be satisfied with seeing a picture of You.” This means that the people in the world to come will experience satisfaction from beholding the brilliance of the Shechinah while their body is intact.” (Just as the disembodied soul functioned in this terrestrial life, there is no reason to believe that the body cannot function in the celestial life). This is the view of Nachmanides, and he cites proof from a Midrash in Sifri Nitzavim, according to which Moses (his body) was hidden in the regions of the עולם הבא. This does not mean that his body is there at this point in time and that he enjoys a physical existence there now. [the text refers to the body of Aaron, Ed.]
The sages made a similar comment about the manner of Rabbi Akiva’s death when they said: “hail to you Rabbi Akiva; your soul exited with the pronouncement of the word אחד (first line of Kriyat Shema), you are ready for immediate entry to life in the עולם הבא.” In Berachot 58 the Talmud, in dealing with bene- dictions to be recited when one witnesses different events, states that when seeing the tombs of the Jewish people one is to recite: “blessed be the One who let you die in accordance with true judgment and Who will bring you back to life in the world of the future.” Bereshit Rabbah understands the words: “G’d blessed the seventh day and sanctified it” (Genesis 2,3) to mean that G’d blessed the עולם הבא which commences with the seventh millennium. The words: “He sanctified it,” refer to the fact that He allotted it to the Jewish people. This is the meaning of the words מזומן לעולם הבא, “ready for entry into the world to come.”
30,19. העדותי בכם היום את השמים ואת הארץ, “I call as witness against you this day both heaven and earth.” I have already explained in connection with Deut.4,26 that the reason Moses chose heaven and earth as witnesses was because they endure forever and can always be called upon to testify. Human witnesses, due to their limited life span may no longer be alive when their testimony is required. Another reason for the choice of heaven and earth as witnesses is that they are perceived as signatories to Moses’ words.
It is also possible to interpret the choice of heaven and earth as witnesses as due to the fact that they would survive destruction of the Temples seeing that in the seventh millennium (as the author described the meaning of the words היום השביע in Genesis 2,3) only heaven and earth survive the metamorphosis occurring at the end of the 6th millennium. It makes sense therefore that after Moses had spoken of the redemption that he should continue with an allusion to the subject of the resurrection. This then is the meaning of: “see I have given before you this day “the life.”  Close upon the heels of the resurrection follows the era known as עולם הבא which Moses alludes to as הטוב, the good.” 
It became necessary to invite witnesses who are of an enduring nature, remain in the universe forever, as we know from Isaiah 2,11: “none but the Lord shall be exalted in that day,” just as on the first day of creation when there was only heaven and earth. At the time we described nothing but the bare essentials of heaven and earth will remain functional. 
A Midrashic approach based on Sifri Haazinu. G’d told the people that He had created earth to serve their needs. He asks the people if, perchance the earth became disloyal and produced barley in response to the Jewish farmer sowing wheat? Or, did the heaven which He had similarly created in order to provide the Israelites with light and useful navigational information, etc., ever changed its path so that the expectations of the people were disappointed? Does not the Bible testify of the sun that “the sun rises, shines and sets at the appointed time” (Kohelet 1,8)? G’d reasons that if these planets which do not receive a reward for being loyal and carrying out their appointed tasks do not deviate therefrom, how much more so must the Jewish people who do receive a reward for keeping the Torah, and who do have to fear punishment for failure to keep these laws, be concerned with not deviating from the path of Torah? Keeping these thoughts in mind, Moses suggests to them: ‘better choose for yourself life.” This is the way Rashi explains our verse. This is what David had in mind when he said in Psalms 16,5: “the Lord is my allotted portion and my share; You control my fate.” It is as if David had said to G’d: “place my hand on the fate which spells ‘good.’” G’d Himself is called “Good,”  as we know from Psalms 145,9: “טוב ה' לכל, “ or  טוב וישר ה', (Psalms 25,8). Both verses equate G’d with “good.” G’d also gave the Jewish people the Torah, which is also known as “good,” as we know from Proverbs 4,2 כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם, “for I have given you a good acquisition.” The reason why the Torah is referred to as a “good acquisition,” is because the Jewish people can hang on to it both in this world and in the world to come. The sages cite our verse as proof for the fact that Torah will be with us in both worlds. This is the meaning of the words in Deut. 5,16: ‘in order that your days on earth will be long.” The Torah refers to a life which is long, infinite, i.e. the world to come. The last words in that verse, i.e. למען ייטב לך, “in order that He will be good for you,” also refer to a world which is totally good, the world to come. Solomon pursues the same approach when he said (Proverbs 24,25) “but those who rebuke the wicked will experience delight, blessings of good (things) will come upon them.”
The sages cite our verse as proof of the fact that Torah will be with us in both worlds. This is the meaning of the words in Deut. 5,16: “in order that your days on earth will be long.” The Torah refers to a life  which is long, infinite, i.e. the world to come. The last words in that verse, i.e. למען ייטב לך, “in order that He will be good to you,” also refer to a world which is totally good, the world to come. Solomon pursues the same approach when he said (Proverbs 24,25) “but those who rebuke the wicked will experience delight, blessings of good (things) will come upon them.







וילך



לכו לחמו בלחמי ושתו ביין מסכתי, “Come and eat my bread, drink the wine which I have mixed.” (Proverbs 9,5.) In this verse Solomon compared the Torah to bread and wine, seeing that bread and wine are the principal sources of food for the body. Similarly, Torah and wisdom are the principal sources of nourishment for the soul. The reason why Solomon commences with the expression לכו, and did not say בואו, “come,” is to teach that a person has to follow wisdom, i.e. go out in search of it and after the people who teach it. We find this verb used in this connection also in Proverbs 13,20: הולך את חכמים יחכם, “he who walks with scholars will himself become wise.” The expression is unusual as we would have expected the author to say: “he who sits with the scholars will become wise.” The only reason that in both instances Solomon used the verb הולך to describe how one is to relate to the scholars in order to benefit from their wisdom is to teach that one has to actively go after the wisdom which comes out of the mouth of the Torah scholars. One needs to denigrate oneself vis-a-vis the scholars; as a result one will absorb wisdom.
It is also possible that the reason for the use of the word לכו by Solomon is a hint that even if one has to travel a long way from one’s home in order to acquire this wisdom one should do so. The message is that it is worth while to travel to distant countries in order to hear and study “My bread,” i.e. Torah. The same thought is echoed by Isaiah 55,3 who quotes the Lord as saying: “incline your ear and come to Me, hearken and you shall be revived.” G’d (The prophet) did not say: בואו אלי, “come to Me,” as man sometimes has to travel to distant places in order to study Torah.
The words לכו לחמו בלחמי, may be perceived as “go to one another those who are anxious to eat of My bread.” it is a warning to remove jealousy and envy from one’s heart and that the scholars should not project an image of superiority which would prevent them from going to colleagues of equal stature. Most certainly they should not be arrogant enough to refrain from going to scholars who are of still greater stature. Wisdom increases through the interchange of ideas among equals. Our sages in Makkot 10 used the verse in Jeremiah 50,36: חרב אל הבדים ונואלו (concerning people who love to study in large groups) to illustrate this thought by understanding these words to mean “a sword against the loners!” The prophet condemns the people who want to study in solitary meditation only. Not only do these people not increase their knowledge by doing so, but they are even apt to become foolish, i.e. arrive at faulty conclusions. In the verse quoted from Jeremiah, we have the word נואלו and we have a similar word in Numbers 12,11 i.e. אשר נואלנו, where it means: “we have acted foolishly.” The message is clear.

Concerning the words: “drink from My wine;” the letter ב in the word בלחמי in the first half of the verse appears superfluous. Why then did Solomon write it? Similarly, the letter ב in the word ביין also appears unnecessary. Actually, the letter ב in both instances means the same as in Genesis 41,2 where Ibn Ezra understands the letter ב in ותרענה באחו as not part of the word אחו. I believe that whereas when one drinks wine it is only healthy in diluted form, and damaging if drunk in its full strength, so that the word בלחמי and ביין could be understood as warning not to eat or drink all of the bread and the wine, the word מסכתי, “what I (G’d) have mixed” is to teach that when it comes to Torah and the performance of its commandments, all of them are to be studied and performed in undiluted form.
This simile contains yet another lesson which is worth mentioning. If someone spends a lot of time engaged in the pursuit of his livelihood, i.e. the needs of his body, and travels abroad in order to secure himself such a sound economic existence, even though he should have concentrated the major part of his energies amassing Torah knowledge, i.e. food for his soul, he errs, seeing that when one spends all kinds of energy on the amassing of Torah knowledge a measure of success is guaranteed, whereas the energy spent on the amassing of material wealth does not always result in success. Solomon encourages the pursuit of food for the soul more so than the pursuit of physical food for the body. He makes this plain in Proverbs 2, 4-5: “if you seek it (Torah) as silver, and search for it as for treasures, then you will understand the fear of the Lord, and will find knowledge of G’d.”
Every single commandment may be perceived of as “soul-food;” it provides the kind of nourishment which the soul will imbibe in the future when it is exposed to the brilliance of G’d’s Shechinah in עולם הבא, the world to come. If one is able to perform commandments and good deeds locally, his reward is most certainly substantial; imagine how much more will be his reward if he travels far and wide in order to fulfill some of the commandments of the Torah! The reason is that he also receives a reward for the distance traveled and the effort and fatigue involved. We find proof of this when the eagerness to fulfill a commandment is described by the Torah (Exodus 12,28) as “they went and they did.” Similarly, the Torah describes Moses’ leaving the camp of the Levites in order to go to the camp of the Israelites in these terms. He could have waited for the Israelites to come to him and take leave of him. In fact, although they had all been assembled around him to listen to the rebukes, and he could easily have said his good byes then, he waited till each one of them had returned to his tent, and only then

31,1-2 וילך משה וידבר את הדברים האלה אל כל ישראל. בן מאה ועשרים שנה אנכי היום, וגו', “Moses went and spoke these words to all of Israel. ‘I am 120 years old this day.’” It is possible that the 120 years Moses lived corresponded to the 120 days he spent on Mount Sinai. During the first 40 days he received the first set of Tablets. During the second 40 days he pleaded for G’d to forgive the people the sin of the golden calf; he spent the next 40 days on the mountain in order to receive the second set of Tablets. This may be the reason why he used the term אנכי instead of אני. 

Our sages in Sotah 13 feel that he meant to say that on that day he was precisely 120 years old, i.e. that he died on the same day of the same month as he had been born. This may also be the reason why he used the word היום at the beginning of the previous Parshah, so that all these speeches took place on the same day. The day in question was the seventh day of Adar at the end of the Israelites 40th year in the desert. We have further proof of this in 34,8 where the Torah reported that the people mourned Moses for 30 days during which they did not journey. The Torah states explicitly that the days of Moses’ mourning came to an end. It is proper to read this verse in conjunction with Joshua 1,10: “Joshua commanded the law-enforcement officers of the people: ‘prepare for yourselves provisions for in another three days you will cross the river Jordan.’” Anyone reading these two verses together will realise that Joshua would not command the people to prepare these provisions until the mourning period for Moses had passed. To make this plain, the Torah had to write the verse: “the days of crying for (the death of) Moses had  concluded.” The Book of Joshua 4,19 reports that the Jewish people completed crossing the river Jordan on the tenth of the first month, i.e. 3 days after the conclusion of the mourning period for Moses. By counting backwards you will arrive at the date of the 7th Adar as the date on which Moses had died. When the Torah in Exodus 2,3 reported that Moses’ mother was unable to hide him any longer, the date referred to is the 6th of Sivan, the day on which the revelation at Mount Sinai took place 80 years later. On that day, the light which filled only his parents’ home on the day he was born became so powerful that it shone for the whole Jewish nation. The light which had filled the house of Amram had already forecast the eventual greatness of the boy that had been born to Yocheved. The reason Yocheved had to hide Moses in a basket, well insulated, was that the light surrounding the baby had become so much stronger that it represented a danger to the family. The Torah speaks of Yocheved having hidden Moses for שלשה ירחים ‘three lunar months,” rather than שלשה חדשים, “three months,” (Exodus 2,2) to indicate that these were lunar months. The months Adar, Nisan, and Iyar are 29,30, and 29 days long, respectively. This gives us a total of 88 days during which Moses was kept “hidden” at home, or it takes us back to the 7th day of Adar as Moses’ birthday. From all this it becomes clear that Moses died on the same day of the same month on which he had been born. The word חדש implies a period which equals 1/12th of the year, something not subject to variation either by adding or subtracting from it. The same is not true of the period known as ירח, a period which may comprise either 29 or 30 days. The reason why the Torah used the term ירחים in the verse mentioned was to enable us to calculate the precise date on which Moses was born. This prompted our sages in Kidushin 38 to state that G’d completes the life cycle of the righteous from day to day (to grant them whole years) something they base on Exodus 23,26: את מספר ימיך אמלא, “I will fill (round out) the number of your days (meaning “years”).
 
לא אוכל עוד לצאת ולבא, “I am no longer able to go out (to war) and to come back.” Moses refers to the times he had led the armies of the Jewish people against Sichon and Og, respectively.

Nachmanides claims that the reason that Moses made this statement was to console the people about his impending death. No doubt, his physical powers had continued undiminished, as the Torah testifies about him in Deut. 34,7. He simply wanted to enhance the people’s regard for Joshua who would henceforth lead them in battle, and ensure that they would inherit the land. Our sages in Sotah 13. understand the words: “to go out and to come back” as referring to words of Torah. They claim that Moses felt that his ability to teach the Torah had waned, that the fountains of wisdom had dried up for him. This by it self was a miracle as it prevented him from relating to his impending death with worry and sadness. G’d also allowed this to happen so that Joshua could take over from him during his lifetime.
ה' אלוקיך הוא העובר לפניך, “the Lord your G’d, He will cross (the Jordan) in front of you.” Moses speaks to the whole nation. He repeats this line almost verbatim at the end of his address in verse 6. Personally, I feel that this paragraph was addressed by Moses exclusively to the ears of Joshua. By emphasising the words ה' אלוקיך, Moses wanted to tell Joshua something about the high level of his prophetic powers. Targum Yonathan ben Uzziel also understood it in this sense when he rendered the words as שכינתיה, i.e. implying that “the Lord your G’d is walking ahead of you.” The word הוא is a limitation, suggesting that whereas the Lord Himself had walked ahead of Moses, His Shechinah, a lesser attribute, would walk in front of Joshua. Proof of this is found in verse 3 where Moses described the attribute of Hashem as speaking to him. No mention is made there of a lesser attribute than that of Hashem. Moses referred to the time  in Deut. 3,26 when G’d had told him that he would not cross the Jordan. It says there ויאמר ה' אלי אל תוסף לדבר, “the Lord said to me: ‘do not continue to speak, etc.’” The careful phrasing of every single word in the written Torah reveals the nuances of intimacy with which G’d related to people such as Moses or Joshua, etc. This reflects the statement of our sages that if we compare the face of Moses to the sun, that of Joshua is comparable to the moon. (Baba Batra 75)

31,9. ויכתוב משה את התורה הזאת, “Moses wrote down this Torah.” This means that he wrote down the entire Torah commencing with Genesis up to the last words in Deut. 34,12: “before the eyes of all of Israel.” When we read in verse 11 of our chapter: “you will read this Torah,” this refers only  to the Book of Deuteronomy (Sotah 41).

31,10 מקץ שבע שנים במועד שנת השמטה בחג הסוכות, “at the end of seven years, at the time of the Sabbatical year, on the festival of Tabernacles;” this is a reference to the command- ment known as הקהל, “assembly.” The word מקץ means “at the end.” Wherever we encounter the expression מקץ it means “at the end.” [I suppose the reason that our author tells us this is that the preposition” מ in front of the word קץ might have suggested a different meaning. Ed.] The first time we encounter the word in Genesis 6,13 it also means “end.” In our instance, the Torah refers to the end of the Shemittah year (the year concluded 2 weeks before the festival of Tabernacles). In other words, “after that year has passed completely.” In actual fact the command-ment is observed during the eighth year during the intermediate days of the Sukkot festival. When we have a different verse in which the word מקץ is also used in connection with the year when the Shemittah is being observed, (Deut. 15,1), the meaning is that the duty to relinquish overdue loans falls due on the last day of that year by sunset (Erchin 28). If the Torah there uses the term בשנת השמטה, it means: “while the Shemittah year is still in force.” Although in both instances the word מקץ means “at the end” [as opposed to Ibn Ezra. Ed.], here it means “after the end,” whereas in Deut. 15,1 it means “just before the end.”
If you will analyse the mystical dimension of the commandment of הקהל, you will find that just as the Shemittah year itself is an allusion to the 7th millennium during which our universe will revert to chaos, so the commandment of הקהל, which commences after completion of the seventh year alludes to the word לעשות in Genesis 2,4 which follows the report of the conclusion of the seven days of creation after the Torah had introduced the concept of the Sabbath. We also find in Psalms 92, the hymn dedicated by David to the Sabbath, that he speaks about the righteous who will flourish like the palm tree. (presumably after the seventh millennium) I have already dealt with the meaning of that psalm in connection with Genesis 2,2. The mystical dimension of the commandment of hakhel is that all people who exist at that time are called to appear before the Lord, the King of the universe. This is why this commandment had to be performed by the king. He represented the King in the celestial spheres. He had to read from the Torah (not the High Priest). This is reflected in the statement of the scholars of the Kabbalah who posit that before proceeding with the creation of the universe the Lord consulted His blueprint, i.e. the Torah.

 Another reason for reading from the Torah on that occasion was to remind the people that without Torah the universe cannot endure, just as it could not have been created without it. The reason the site for the fulfillment of the commandment is described as במקום אשר יבחר, “the place which the Lord will choose,” is that the Temple-site was the place whence the universe started being created. This is the meaning of Psalms 50,2: “for from Zion, perfect in beauty, G’d appeared.” As the sages say in Yuma 54: “the world was perfected starting with Zion.”

31,14. הן קרבו ימיך למות, “here your days to die are drawing near.” According to the plain meaning of the text this verse teaches that the period man has to live has been predetermined, every single human being having a time allocated to him at birth. G’d sees to it that every person lives out the time thus allocated to him at birth. This would correspond to Exodus 23,26: “I will ensure that you complete the number of your days (years).” The expression קריבה, “approach,” mentioned here is one which is specifically reserved for the approach of death of righteous people as we know already from Genesis 47,29 when the Torah speaks about the approaching death of Israel our patriarch. Similarly, Kings I 2,1: “the time for David to die approached.” These verses prove that such times had been determined by G’d already at birth, and that G’d’s השגחה, “benevolent supervision of history,” ensures that the individuals in question get to live out their allotted time, that their lives are not cut short by acts of violence or natural disasters. Alternatively, G’d lengthens the allotted life span of these people as a reward for merits which they have accumulated during their lives. At the same time, their allotted life span may be reduced due to demerits they have become guilty of. The important thing is that no one dies unless G’d has so determined.

According to our information that G’d has empowered planetary forces, stars and their constellations, to exercise their influence on the lives of people on terrestrial earth, and the orbits of these forces are of constructive or destructive influence on these lives so that their lives appear to depend on mazzal,” i.e. such influences (Targum Kohelet 9,2), we find that our sages did not deny the impact of such mazzal; we therefore seem to be faced with a dilemma here. Our sages said specifically that phenomena such as economic success, (duration of) life on earth itself, as well as the ability to have children, do not depend on one’s merit but on one’s mazzal (Moed Katan 28). If that is so, where is there room for G’d’s השגחה in the matter? Further details of our sages’ view is found in their statement that though both Rabbah and Rav Chisdah were righteous individuals (seeing that when they prayed for rain it materialised), one lived only to the age of 40 whereas the other lived to the age of 92. Rabbah’s 40 years on earth were filled with painful experiences. Rav Chisdah was blessed to marry off 60 children, whereas Rabbah buried 60 family members. The latter could not always afford to eat even bread made from barley, whereas the former fed his dogs with white bread. These statements are proof positive that the sages acknowledged the influence of mazzal in our lives, i.e. that there is substance to the discipline we call astrology. 

It is true that these planetary phenomena have been equipped with initial power to influence our fates. However, they are not supreme. Their influence need not be final. They are subservient to the Lord Almighty, to the attribute Hashem. If people born under adverse mazzal turn to the supreme G’d, to Hashem, and appeal to Him to neutralise their apparently negative mazzal, G’d will respond to such prayer if it is warranted. In fact, we may go further and posit that G’d instituted mazzal partly in order to encourage us to pray to Him to change adverse mazzal in His benevolent way. We know that G’d can lengthen our lives from the very verse in Exodus 23,26: “I will make full the number of your days,” i.e. “I will add to them if the situation warrants.” 
King Chizkiyah had 15 years added to his life expectancy although the prophet Isaiah had been sent to him to prepare his last will and testament as he was not going to recover from his sickness. G’d responded to his prayer and revoked the decree he had been subject to (Isaiah 38,5). We also know that when the occasion warrants it G’d reduces the number of years allocated to a person at birth, from Achazyah King of Israel son of Achav. The reason he had his life span shortened was that when he fell ill, instead of turning to G’d or to an accredited prophet, he turned to idols to inquire about his chances of a recovery (compare Kings II 9,16). He was told clearly that he would die now because he had turned to Baal Zevuv, the god of Akron, ignoring the presence of accredited prophets in Israel. The verse we just quoted makes it plain that Achazya’s death at that time was due to his having turned to idols at that time. Had death already have been decreed upon him previously, what point was there in the prophet telling him about it now? The above examples teach us that G’d reserves the right to lengthen or shorten the life span decreed for man at birth. G’d remains a free agent; this is why He is known as שדי. The word, derived from שדד, means that He is in charge of the laws of nature, changing them at will if He so desires. (compare author’s comments on Genesis 17,1) These adjustments in life span, etc., occur with a view to reward and punishment. It follows that the statement that “life (expectancy), children (ability to have them), and economic success, do not depend on merit but on mazzal,” which we quoted from Moed Katan, means that the power of prayer is so great that it can override predetermined fates set according to mazzal. The astrologers themselves admit that the general rules are set by G’d, whereas the planetary systems only supplement details pertaining to the lives of the subjects under their influence. Clearly, He who sets the general rules is able to set aside mere details, i.e. the subordinate powers assigned to the horoscopes. It follows that it is within man’s power to create the conditions for setting aside such details if his actions merit it and he appeals to the Lord to use His powers on his behalf. On occasion, G’d fulfills man’s desire without waiting for man to appeal to Him. What the statement in Moed Katan, regarding the three cardinal parts of man’s fate does mean is that in these matters G’d does not interfere with the predetermined fates of these individuals unless asked, unless appealed to. This is the meaning of Psalms 145,19 ואת שועתם ישמע ויושיעים, “and their cry He hears and He delivers them.” On the other hand, the same psalmist says in the first half of this verse: “He does the will of those who fear Him;” this refers to the unspoken requests by these people. We have proof positive from the Torah and the Books of Prophets that the three critical values of man, 1) children, 2) life, and 3) economic success, פרנסה, are all subject to prayer. Rachel, who had been unable to conceive and had prayed was granted children (Genesis 30,22): “G’d listened to her and opened her womb.” King Chizkiyah provided proof for the fact that G’d changes even decrees of death announced by one of His prophets at His command.  Elijah and Elisha both experienced that the supply of food was dramatically increased through their prayerful intervention in the fates of starving individuals (Kings I 17,13-15 and Kings II 5,42-44). These individuals were saved from famine, although clearly that had been their assigned fate.
This is the reason why our sages singled out these three aspects of life which are normally dependent on mazzal to inform us that even these matters are subject to change by means of prayer by the intended victims. 
A Midrashic approach (based on Devarim Rabbah 9,4). The words: “here the days of your death are approaching,” reflect a conversation between Moses and G’d. Moses had said to G’d: ”I have praised You using the word הן (Deut. 10,14), and You are using the same word introducing the decree that I am to die.”
    We may understand this by means of a parable. A king had an outstanding minister, one of whom he was exceedingly fond. One day this minister came across a sword, which was exceptionally beautiful, the like of which he had never seen. He immediately determined that this sword was appropriate for his employer, the king. What did he do? He bought it and presented it to the king as a gift. The king said: “may they cut off his head with it.” This is what Moses had in mind when he said to G’d: “are You going to use my gift to turn it against me?”
    Another thought which is contained in the words הן קרבו ימיך למות, is that G’d meant: “the time has come for your sun to set and for the moon to shine.” This was a reference to the statement of our sages we have already quoted in which the face of Moses was compared to that of the sun whereas that of Joshua, his successor, was compared to that of the moon. When G’d said to Moses: “here you are going to lie with your ancestors, and this nation will arise and serve idols, etc.,” (verse 16 in our chapter), He meant that “your power, that of the exceptional level of prophecy granted to you, will continue to illuminate the moon (inspire Joshua) although you are already in your grave, just as the sun even after it has set shines upon the surface of the moon to enable it to reflect its light.” The word וקם may be read together with the words הנך שוכב עם אבותיך וקם, “although you are lying with your fathers it will rise.” Just as the sun supplies light to the moon even after it has set, you Moses will inspire Joshua even after you have joined your fathers. This is also the meaning of the word ואצונו, i.e. “I will impress My power on the moon.”
   וילך משה ויהושע, “oses and Joshua went; from the camp of Israel to the camp of the Shechinah.
    
    31,15. וירא ה' באהל בעמוד הענן, “The Lord appeared in the Tent within the pillar of cloud.” The attribute כבוד was contained within the pillar of cloud, containing within it the essence of the attribute of Mercy.
    
    31,16. הנך שוכב עם אבותיך, “here you are going to lie with your fathers, etc.” When Moses had complained that G’d was using the very instrument to kill him with which he had used to praise the Lord with, G’d reassured him, calmed him down by assuring him that as opposed to other people who die and whose influence dies with them, his influence would continue to be manifest just as the sun’s influence is manifest even after it sets when it shines upon the moon enabling the moon to illuminate the earth with its reflected light. The verse is used to prove that resurrection is promised in the Torah as the sages in Sanhedrin 90 read the sequence of the words הנך שוכב עם אבותיך וקם as if G’d were saying: “here you will lie with your fathers and arise.” Similar comments are made about Moses having introduced the famous song after the crossing of the Sea of Reeds with the words אש ישיר instead of אז שר, “then he will sing,” instead of “then he sang” (Exodus 15,1). Concerning the serenity expe-rienced by the souls in the hereafter the sages in Avot 4,22 opined that a single hour of the serenity in that world outweighs all the good experienced in our terrestrial world. If G’d, as it were, introduced Moses to that world of serenity with the word הן, He did indeed set Moses’ mind at rest over the need for him to leave the arena in which he had been so influential. He convinced him that death is the entrance fee one has to pay for attaining that desirable serenity. Considering all this, Moses had no reason to view death as a penalty, on the contrary, he was to view it as an introduction to untold delights. All of this is alluded to in the otherwise extraneous letter ך at the end of the word הנך, seeing Moses had not been accurate (according to the Midrash) in comparing הן and הנך. This final letter was an allusion to the כסא הכבוד, “G’d’s throne of glory in the celestial regions,” the proximity of which Moses would henceforth experience. We have previously mentioned that the inexplicable use of that letter such as in Leviticus chapter 27,2 בערכך נפשות לה', is also an allusion to that כסא הכבוד. All the souls which truly belong to Hashem, לה', are to be found in that celestial region, i.e. are viewed as close to the throne of G’d’s glory in value.
    From all of the foregoing you will realise that although G’d introduced Moses’ impending death to him with the word הן, Moses was not correct in complaining that the very instrument he had used to praise the Lord with was now being turned against him.
    The fact that the word הן, as distinct from the word הנה, is a plural, indicates that G’d referred to two kinds of life after death which Moses would attain. The first is the life reserved for the souls while they await the metamorphosis of our universe in the seventh millennium, as we discussed repeatedly; the second is the physical life after the resurrection. Whereas the word הנך may allude to the life of the souls, the words שוכב וקם, “lie down and arise,” are an allusion to this life after the period of the resurrection when both body and soul are reunited.
   אלוקי נכר הארץ, “after the gods of the foreigners of the land.” The Torah tells us that such gods as had been permitted to the Gentile nations were nonetheless “strangers” in the Holy Land as that land was always under the direct supervision of the Lord, and He had never assigned what goes on there to the supervision of any celestial/planetary forces. This land is G’d’s own “inheritance.” This is also what the sages meant when they said אין מזל לישראל, “the Jewish people are not subject to the horoscopic influences we know as mazzal.” They meant that the Jewish people, when in the land of Israel and observing the laws of the Torah, are not subject to such influences. This must be so, as we have a clear statement by these same sages that מזלו גורם, that “his mazzal was a causative factor in his fate.” (Yevamot 64, et al) Seeing that the planets, stars, and all other celestial phenomena have been created for the sake of the righteous, how could it possibly be that these same righteous people are suddenly subject to these horoscopic constellations? Each of these horoscopic constellations has been assigned to certain nations, such as the constellation known as scorpion which was assigned to the people of Ishmael, the constellation Sagittarius, the archer, to the people of Persia, etc., etc. This was what the Torah referred to in Deut. 4,19-20 “which He assigned to them, whereas He (personally) took you out of the iron crucible, etc.” Clearly, the supervision of the fates of the other nations by celestial forces has been entrusted to agents of the Lord, i.e. the horoscopic forces, whereas that of the Jewish people is not determined by means of intermediaries. It is noteworthy that nowhere in the Torah does G’d accuse the Gentile nations of idolatry or describe them as being punished for relating to these forces as gods. Only the Jewish people have been warned again and again not to turn to any form of intermediary, and they are being held responsible for observing this commandment in the strictest possible sense. The only time Gentile nations are described as being punished for the practice of idolatry is if they did so in the Holy Land, the land which G’d claimed as His share and inheritance. The best proof of this is found in Kings II 17,26 where the prophet tells us about the Kushites who practiced the cults of their fathers after they had been forcibly transplanted to the areas previously inhabited by the Ten Tribes who had been exiled by  King Shalmanesser of Assyria.
    
    The reason that the Torah speaks here of אלוהי נכר הארץ, is that these deities are totally alien to the land of Israel, fulfilling neither a function for the local inhabitants nor for the Israelites. All kinds of idolatry is alien to that country, no intermediary force having been assigned to function in that land. Anyone practicing idolatry in that land is seen as if he were trying to expel the king of that country from his palace. This is one of the ways in which the land of Israel is superior to all other countries. This fact is alluded to in the verse in Job 5,10: הנותן מטר על פני ארץ ושולח מים על פני חוצות, “Who gives rain to the earth, and sends water over the fields.” This verse teaches that G’d’s benevolent supervision of what goes on earth concentrates on the land of Israel and spreads from there to other parts of the globe. These parts are referred to in the verse in Job as חוצות, “outlying areas.” The manner in which this proliferation has been described is שולח, “dispatches,” whereas the rain which falls in the Holy Land is described in this verses as the result of נתינה, “something given directly.” David refers to the areas described as חוצות in Job as אהלי רשע, “the tents of the wicked.” (Psalms 84,11) The whole verse there reads: “Better one day in Your courts than a thousand anywhere else; I would rather stand on the threshold of G’d’s House than dwell in the tents of wickedness.” When compared to Jerusalem, the city of righteousness, other locations do not qualify for a better description than “tents of wickedness.” Our paragraph refers to the period of the first Temple when idolatry was rampant.
   אשר הוא בא שמה בקרבו, “in whose midst it is coming.” the reference is not to the people but to the land. This is not the first time that the word ארץ appears as masculine; we have a similar masculine description of the land of Israel in Genesis 13,6.
    
    it is also possible that the word בקרבו is an allusion to the Sanctuary in the land, which is viewed as being in its centre. This would be analogous to a statement by our sages in Petichata Rabbah to Lamentations 22: “How long (did they relentlessly introduce more and more idolatry)? Until they introduced idolatry into the Sanctuary itself.” [The Midrash refers to a verse in Jeremiah 11,6 in which the proliferation of idolatry in the towns of Yehudah is described and the word חוצות describes the innermost part of Jerusalem. It adds a verse from Ezekiel 8,5 describing penetration by idolatry of the Sanctuary itself as the ultimate act of rebellion against the Lord. Ed.]
    31,17. והסתרתי פני מהם והיה לאכול, “and I will hide My face from them and they will become prey.” Our sages in Chagigah 5 have said: “anyone who does not experience an eclipse of G’d’s face does not belong to them (the Jewish people), whereas anyone who is not subject to becoming prey is also not one of the Jews.” [this confirms the special relationship between G’d and His people Israel. Ed.] When hearing this statement, the other Rabbis said to Rava (the Rabbi quoting it) “you yourself have experienced neither a hiding of the Lord’s face nor have you become prey !” Rava answered: “do you have any idea how much I pay in bribes to King Shevor, (the local authority) in order not to become a victim of this verse in the Torah?” [he meant that the need to pay these bribes proves that he was subject to the curse, hence a Jew.] Even after this reply, the Rabbis looked at Rava suspiciously. In the interval, the king sent emissaries and incarcerated Rava. This proves that Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel was correct when he said that whenever the sages look at someone suspiciously or worse, the “someone” will either die or become poor.
     
   על כי אין אלוקי בקרבי, “because my G’d is not in my midst;”  this verse teaches that the Temple was not destroyed and the people of Yehudah were not exiled until the Shechinah had withdrawn from them. This is also what David said in Psalms 68,19: “You rose to the high regions.” Subsequently, David continues with: “You had made prisoners.” You have to appreciate  that the meaning of the word בקרבי is derived from קרב, “battle;” its numerical value is the same as that of שדי, i.e. 314. In other words, when this attribute of G’d withdrew the Jewish people lost the battle.
    
    I believe that wherever we find the word בקרב or similar in the Torah there is an allusion in that word to the “awakening” of the attribute of Justice. The root of all this is to be found in Exodus 23,21 כי שמי בקרבו, “for My name is within it.” [the angel representing the attribute of Justice] Other examples are: Genesis 48,16 וידגו לרוב בקרב הארץ, “may they proliferate abundantly like fish, in the midst of the land.” The beginning of that verse referred to the המלאך הגואל אותי מכל רע, “the angel who has redeemed me from all harmful influences,” a clear reference to the attribute of Justice. Other verses in which the word בקרב is clearly indicative of an association with the attribute of Justice are: Exodus 10,1 למען שתי אותותי אלה בקרבו, as well as Exodus 8,18: כי אני ה' בקרב הארץ, or Deut. 15,11: כי לא יחדל אביון מקרב הארץ, “there will not cease to be someone who is destitute in the midst of the land.” The author extends the list; [I will omit further examples in the interest of brevity. Ed.]
    
    31,19. ואנכי הסתר אסתיר פני ביום ההוא, “as for Me, I will most certainly hide My face on that day.” G’d had already mentioned earlier (verse 17) that He would hide His face. On that occasion it referred to the exile in Babylon. Now, when He describes this “hiding” of His face in even stronger terms, it refers to the present exile under the Romans. The repetition of the word “hiding” is a warning that this second exile will be much longer than the first. On the other hand, what the Torah writes also contains a message of consolation in Leviticus 26,44 that G’d will not forsake us even when we are in exile, i.e. “the land of their enemies.”
    This verse reveals to us something about the length of this exile we find ourselves in. The combined numerical value of the words הסתר אסתיר is 1336. This appears to correspond to a vision in Daniel 12,12 according to which the redemption would come after 1335 years. [If true the Messiah should have come in the year 1405 or 1406, which did not happen (but could have happened during the period the author wrote this). Ed.]
    31,20. ואכל ושבע ודשן ופנה אל אלוהים אחרים, “and will eat, be sated, and grow fat, and turn to strange gods.” This demonstrates that this paragraph speaks about conditions during the first Temple. During that era the Israelites ate, and grew fat and also practiced idolatry. They primarily served idols known as Baalim. This is the meaning of ועבדום ונאצוני והפר את בריתי, “and they will serve them and provoke Me and breach My covenant.”
    31,21. והיה כי תמצאן אתו רעות רבות וצרות וענתה השירה הזאת לפניו לעד; “it will be when many evils and distresses come upon it, then this song shall speak up before it as a witness.” This is a reference to the song at the beginning of Parshat Haazinu. There the Torah speaks in detail about the ones who have been cast out.
   כי לא תשכח מפי זרעו כי ידעתי את יצרו אשר הוא עושה היום, “for it will not be forgotten from the mouth of its offspring; for I know its inclination, what it does today.” Moses says that he can draw conclusions from Israel’s behaviour in his own time when the people suffer from an inclination to practice idolatry. It is likely therefore that they will put their inclination into practice in the future. This is why, when the penalties described here, i.e. the sufferings, will occur, they will find that they have all been foretold in the Torah. The reason they will find this out is that the Torah will not be forgotten among their offspring (despite their committing all these sins). The witnesses in the song in the Torah in which heaven and earth are called on will endure and give their testimony.
    The reason Moses was allowed to say such words as “for I know its inclination,” [in a negative connotation, and G’d did not punish him for slandering the people as He had done in Exodus when he had said they would not believe him (Exodus 4,1), Ed.] is that G’d Himself had described the people in these terms in Psalms 103,14 where the psalmist says “for He knows our inclinations.” Midrash Tehillim on this verse states; “woe to the dough of which the baker himself says that it is defective.”
    It seems to me that the wording of the Torah does suggest that there would come a time when the Torah would indeed be forgotten by the people. The time in question is when, in the future, the evil urge will be annulled, as distinct from the messianic era during which, as we pointed out previously, (Shabbat 138) “business will be as usual,” all the commandments of the Torah remaining applicable. As long as this present universe continues, Torah will continue as the guideline for the Jewish people to live by. The period when Torah will be “forgotten” will be during the period of the resurrection. In other words, as long as the people have the same inclination as now, i.e. they are burdened with the evil urge, Torah will not be forgotten by them. Once they are free from the evil urge there is no need to remember Torah. At that time the only holiday which will still be celebrated will be that of Purim, (seeing that it came about as a reward for the Israelites who had done תשובה). The foregoing is based on a Midrash Mishley 9, where the sages comment on the verse in Proverbs 9,2: טבחה טבחה, מסכה יינה, אף ערכה שלחנה, “she has slaughtered the meat, mixed her wine, she has also set her table.” The sages understand these words as describing the time when Queen Esther prepared the meal for the King and Haman. The words: “she also prepared her table,” which appear superfluous, mean that she prepared for the life in the hereafter as well as for that on earth when she took those fateful steps. The emphasis on this meal, i.e. a festive meal, is an allusion to the time in the future when all the festivals and their festive meals will be abolished, although the festive meal on Purim will not be abolished. This is the meaning of the words at the end of Megillat Esther 9,28: “and these days of Purim will not disappear and their memory (what occasioned them) will not be forgotten by the Jews or their offspring.”
    
    31,26. ושמתם אותו מצד ארון ברית ה' אלוקיכם, “you are to place it on the side of the Ark of the Covenant with the Lord your G’d.” It was to be placed inside the Ark, on the side of the Tablets. The verse refers to the text of the song in Haazinu. It should be deposited there next to the Torah scroll seeing that its text was part of the Torah. It was to remain there permanently.
    
    31,28. הקהילו אלי, “Assemble to me, etc.” According to Tanchuma Vayechi 2, on this day Moses did not blow in the trumpets to assemble the people (elders) as was customary, and  as Moses had been commanded to do in Numbers 10,2. The trumpets were for the exclusive use of Moses; they were never used by Joshua, but buried during the lifetime of Moses. This was in order to fulfill the statement of Kohelet 8,5 that on the day of one’s death one does not have authority. Seeing this was the day Moses was to die, he did not employ symbols of his authority. Blowing the shofar or the trumpets was a symbol of the authority wielded by the one who blew them or had them blown.
   ואעידה בכם את השמים ואת הארץ, “so that I may call upon heaven and earth as witness against you.” Concerning this introductory statement, Moses continued with the words: האזינו השמים וגו' in chapter 32, 1. At this point he merely pointed out that heaven and earth would put their seal on his words at the end of the song in Haazinu. He invited heaven and earth to be present so that at the end of Haazinu they would be in a position to “sign” the document, much as witnesses to documents prepared in court are present during the preparation of the document so that they know what they are signatories to. He had made a similar statement earlier in 30,19. All of these passages were written on the same day. We have a halachah (Maimonides Hilchot Sefer Torah 7,3) that the words ואעידה, etc., have to be written at the top of the column in which the chapter commencing with the song האזינו השמים ואדברה commences. This would be the concluding letter (acronym) of the two words ב)י'ה שמ'ו), which are scattered throughout the Torah as letters which have to be written at the top of a column, i.e. the first letter of a verse respectively. Compare Genesis 49,8, Exodus 14,28; Exodus 34,11; Numbers 24,5, and our verse here commencing with the letter ו in the word ואעידה. I have already referred to this in Parshat Beshalach 14,28 in connection with the word הבאים. The letter ו in the word ואעידה is an allusion to the same letter in the tetragram. It is symbolic of the “heaven” which Moses said he is calling as witness.
    
    31,29. אחרי מותי כי השחת תשחתון, “after my death, that you will become very corrupt, etc.” History shows that during all of the years when Joshua was in charge of the people they did not become corrupt but remained loyal to the Torah. This fact is specifically attested to near the end of the Book of Joshua (Joshua 24,31) “the people served Hashem all the days of Joshua as well as during all of the days of the elders who lived longer than Joshua.” Our sages (Temurah 28) derive from this verse that a teacher treasures his disciple as much as he treasures his own body,” (loves himself) seeing  that as long as Joshua was alive, Moses had the feeling that he himself was still alive. The corruption Moses speaks of here is the practice of idolatry. This is also what he had in mind when he said: “to anger Him with your handiwork.” Moses had a prophetic vision of the idolatry which would be practiced during the period of the first Temple.
    
    31,30. את דברי השירה הזאת עד תומה, ‘the words of this song until their conclusion.” This is a reference to the song Haazinu which commences with the next verse. Seeing that  Moses referred to his speech as a שירה, “song or poem,” this is the reason that it must always be written and read in the manner one writes and reads a poem. 
    Our sages in the Sifri Haazinu 333 state that some of the greatness of a שירה is that it deals not only with the past and the present but also deals with aspects of the future, the world to come. Tanchuma asks why the שירה which is in the past tense is completely in the feminine gender, whereas the parts referring to the future have been written in the masculine gender? The answer given is  that just as a woman who becomes pregnant and gives birth normally repeats the process again and again, so past redemptions and salvations of the Jewish people resulted in renewed exiles. Not so with the redemption of the future which will be absolute, final, not to be followed by any further exiles. This is why the prophet uses the masculine term שיר instead of the feminine term שירה, when he speaks of the future. Compare Isaiah 26,1: ביום ההוא יושר השיר הזה בארץ יהודה, עיר עז לנו ישועה ישית חומות וחל, “on that day, this song shall be sung in the land of Yehudah; “ours is a mighty city; He makes victory our inner and outer wall.” Another verse conveying a similar message is found in Psalms 98,1: שירו לה' שיר חדש כי נפלאות עשה, הושיעה לו ימינו וזרועו קדשו, “Sing to the Lord, a new song, for He has worked wonders; His right hand, His holy arm has won Him victory.”
    
    
    
   האזינו
    
    
   צדיק ינוב חכמה, ולשון תהפוכות תכרת, פי, “the mouth of the righteous produces wisdom; but the tongue of the perverted shall be cut off.” (Proverbs 10,31). Solomon informed us in this verse that a righteous person and a wicked person are absolute opposites of one another. Whereas words spoken by the righteous reflect his wisdom, the words spoken by the wicked person reflect the opposite. This is what is meant by Psalms 1,3: “he is like the tree planted beside streams of water, which yields its fruit in season and whose foliage never fades;” the tree produces leaf and fruit. This is a natural phenomenon, a law of nature which became part of trees alluded to already on the third day of creation when G’d gave the directive to earth: תדשא הארץ, “the earth is to produce vegetation, etc.” The leaf itself performs a useful function in that it protects the fruit against heat by the shade it provides. Nonetheless, the fruit is what counts. Similarly, the righteous is the person, the fruit who counts, he too has “leaves,” similar to the leaves on the tree. His everyday conversation dealing with mundane matters are described as his leaves, whereas his words of Torah are described as his fruit. Just as the leaves on a tree perform an important function, so does even the mundane conversation of the righteous.
    When our sages in Avodah Zarah 19 interpreted the words “and his leaves do not wither,” (Psalms 1,2) they said that it means that the casual conversations of the righteous are of similar value to the value of the leaves for the fruit of the tree, [For all the above reasons Solomon mentioned here that the mouth of the wise yields up wisdom]. The word ינוב is used in connection with agricultural produce such as in Isaiah 27,6 ומלאו פני תבל תנובה, “and the face of the world will be covered with fruit.” We also find that word in Lamentations 4,9 as referring to the produce of the field. This is also the subject under discussion in Isaiah 57,19 בורא ניב שפתים, “the One Who creates the fruit of the lips.” Speech may be perceived as the “fruit of the lips.” The righteous trains himself so carefully to utter only words of wisdom that wisdom becomes integral to his personality, he personifies it. It is similar to the fruit which represents the essence of the tree.
    The words: “the tongue of the perverted shall be cut off,” describe the wicked person who is the opposite of the righteous, something which is discernible first and foremost in the way he uses his tongue. Seeing that this wicked person indulges in so much slander, libel, etc., Solomon curses him saying that his tongue ought to be cut off. It is the way of the Torah to attach blessings to the righteous and curses to the wicked. This is why we have the famous saying זכר צדיק לברכה ושם רשעים רקב, “the memory of the righteous is a source of blessing, whereas the name of the wicked will rot.” (Proverbs 10,7) It is well known that the virtue of humility is associated with wisdom, whereas arrogance is a characteristic of the wicked. Just as wisdom is “the fruit” of the righteous, so arrogance is “the fruit“ of the wicked. This is why Solomon says (Proverbs 14,3) “in the mouth of the fools is a rod (branch) of pride, but the lips of the wise protect them.” The source of arrogance is in the heart of the fool and its branch becomes manifest in his mouth. The prophet Isaiah 11,10 illustrated this when he spoke of חוטר describing it as a “branch,” i.e. “a branch comes forth from the trunk of Yishai.” Branches cannot grow unless there is a trunk to support them. There is no point in describing the emergence of such a branch unless it is going to bear fruit. The fruit of such branches of the foolish, the wicked, are words of arrogance, scorn. David paraphrases the same sentiment in Psalms 123,4 הלעג השאננים, הבוז לגאיונים, “the scorn of the complacent, the contempt of the haughty.” In other words, the fool gets so used to being arrogant that arrogance becomes second nature to him. Seeing that he “branch” of arrogance is so often in his mouth, it is a foregone conclusion that it will bear fruit, i.e. that he cannot restrain himself from saying things which reveal his arrogance to all his listeners. On the other hand, the wise are protected by their very lips against their mouths saying things they should not say.
    Basically, the logic in all this is that the righteous is drawn to preoccupy himself with matters of the soul, matters which are of eternal value and meaning; the wicked, on the contrary, is preoccupied with transient values, matters which sooner or later cease to exist and have meaning. It is a well known fact that the very definition of the word “body” means that it is something “earthy,” will revert to dust, whereas the soul is something which came from heaven. As long as man is alive in this terrestrial life, he is drawn equally toward earth and heaven. He is drawn towards heaven due to his soul, and towards earthy matters due to his body. Therefore, when Moses cautioned the people to keep the Torah and its commandments, he used as witnesses heaven and earth, both of which are conceptually close to man. This is why he said:
    32,1. האזינו השמים ואדברה ותשמע הארץ אמרי פי, “listen heaven when I speak, and may the earth pay attention  to the words of my mouth.” Moses addressed the heaven in direct speech, whereas he spoke of the earth in indirect speech. He meant to emphasise the fact that we are meant to feel closer to heaven than to earth, or at least that he himself felt closer to heaven on this day, the day he was going to die. Already Parshat Nitzavim as well as Parshat Vayelech were all speeches which Moses made on the day he died. This is why he repeatedly referred to היום, “this day,” both in Nitzavim (29,9) and in Vayelech (30,2). In our Parshah the expression היום occurs also (32,49) as it does in Vezot haberachah (33,1).
    All of these four portions are linked to one another conceptually, and they deal with a number of important subjects which normally would require many days for the listeners to absorb. It was a miracle that they could all be dealt with on one single day. The overriding subject of these four portions is that Moses engages in an argument with the Jewish people reviewing what had been in the past and what would be in the future. He started speaking of matters which pertained to the creation, concluding with the messianic era. This is the reason Moses commenced his speech to the people with the words: “remember the days of yore,” (verse 7) including the period when G’d assigned pieces of earth to different nations. This is a reference to the Tower of Babel and the confusion of languages which followed (Genesis, chapter 11,1-9). He chose as His own people only the Children of Israel. This is what is meant by the words (verse 9): “for Hashem’s portion is His people.” The reason is that he found them on the way in a wilderness, in desolation. (verse 10). Having found them and adopted them, He lavished loving care upon them as described in verses 10-14.
    In spite of all the deeds of loving care G’d lavished on His people, they forgot Him and made Him angry. This is the meaning of verses 15-19. The people proved extremely ungrateful, substituting other deities, and becoming estranged to their G’d and Protector. Moses describes this process as due to the excess economic success granted to this people, as described in verse 14. This led them to reject and abandon service of Hashem. Seeing that the people turn to deities they had never known before they would be punished with exile more than any other nation before them and they would be forced to be slaves to these nations who hate them. The only reason G’d punished them by exile instead of wiping them out is that He, Hashem, does not want the Gentile nations to be able to boast that they had succeeded in destroying G’d’s people, claiming that their deities were superior in power to Hashem. (compare verse 27). All of this befalls the Jewish people because they are devoid of insight. If they would have reflected for a moment that their erstwhile successes when one of them successfully pursued one thousand and two of them put 10,000 to flight, surely they would have realised that this had only been possible because G’d had enabled them to do this, that it was not their own superiority to their adversaries. If, now (in the time Moses describes) they suffer such indignities, this again can only be due to the fact that their one-time protector, Hashem, had “sold them out.” (verse 30).
    
    In spite of all this, a time would come, Moses avers, when Hashem will avenge Himself for all the brutalities the Gentile nations have inflicted upon His people, as -even if He had reason to punish them,-- they certainly had not been given the green light to do so (compare verse 35). He, Hashem will preside over the judgment of these people. 
    At that point in time, G’d will remind them of His attribute of Mercy; this is why Moses continues to speak of G’d as describing the Israelites as His people, and His servants. Up until that time they had been the servants of the Gentile nations.
    Moses adds that G’d uses this turn of events to convince the people that only He is their true G’d (verse 39) and that there is no G’d except He. This is the conclusion of Moses’ address. 
    What follows are the words of G’d directly. He, personally, assures the people of the redemption in the future, and He swears an oath to them, i.e. “I raise My hand to the heaven that I will flash My sword, etc., etc.” G’d uses the future tense, as do the prophets, and assures us that eventually all these nations who have looked down upon us will sing the praises of His people (verse 43), and will clamour to be accepted to join our faith. The catalyst will be when they observe that we will be compensated for the erstwhile loss of our land and that we will return in triumph to that land (verse 43).
    A Midrashic approach to our verses, based on Sifri Haazinu (page 460 Malbim edition); the words האזינו השמים are an introduction to G’d saying to Israel: “take a look at the heaven and the earth which I created to be useful to you; did either heaven or earth change their ways? Did you sow seed and it did not grow, did you sow wheat and barley came up? Or, has a cow stopped ploughing or threshing? Has the donkey ceased being a beast of burden? If these planets, or animals which do not receive a reward for performing their duties and which do not even get punished for failing to do their duty have not refused to do them, how much more so could you people who are rewarded for doing your duty and who are being punished for failing to do your duty be expected to be smart enough not to deviate and rebel against Me?”
    The meaning of this Midrash is that all natural phenomena do not change their norms. If Moses singled out only heaven and earth as examples to illustrate this principle, it was because they, more than any other phenomena in our universe, are charged with preserving the laws of nature which ensure continued existence of the world as we know it. Just as if the oceans would break out of their assigned role and parameters would bring in the wake of such departure of the norm immediate calamity upon earth, so if heaven and earth were to disobey the rules laid down for them the result would be even more catastrophic. What is true of inert phenomena such as heaven and earth, is also true of living creatures such as cows and asses which are the mainstays of the farmer on earth. If all these creatures do not change their habits, man must certainly not change his habits and thereby endanger not only his surroundings but himself.
    A kabbalistic approach: The wordsשמים  and ארץ of which Moses speaks here are references to the respective emanations כבוד and תפארת, which they represent in the very first verse of Genesis. In other words, Moses did not address the phenomena visible to the human eye such as sky and earth, but to the mystical elements they represent, and which are the elements with which the Jewish people entered into a covenant. This is why Moses demanded that they hear the conditions which exist between us. The term דבור refers to Moses speaking to שמים, whereas he used the term אמירה when addressing the mystical aspect of Earth. He wanted to emphasise that דבור represents something originating in a deeper source of the speaker than the thoughts uttered and described as merely אמירה, which do not necessarily originate in his innermost self. [The author writes about why, according to Kabbalah, heaven had to be addressed in direct speech as opposed to earth. I confess I have not followed this. Ed.]
    
    32,2. יערוף כמטר לקחי, “may my instruction drip like rain;” the word יערוף is close in meaning to words such as הזלה and ירידה, the former being used in connection with the descent of dew, i.e. יערף כטל in 33,28. Moses prays that his words should be heard and firmly embedded in the hearts of his listeners, much as rain is embedded in the earth. The meaning of the word לקחי, “my teaching,” may be an allusion to  what Moses himself had “taken,” לקח, from heaven when he received the Torah; this should now perform the same kind of work on his listeners as rain does on the earth upon which it falls. Just as such rain is useful in initiating growth of vegetation, his words should initiate fruitful under-standing of the Torah by the people who hear him.
    The words כשעירים עלי דשא, commonly translated as “like storm winds upon vegetation,” reflect the word רוח, in the sense of רוח סערה, a stormy wind. The word סערה has been changed slightly in that the letter ס has been replaced by the letter ש, not an unusual occurrence. Another example is Daniel 11,40 וישתער עליו, This is also the opinion of Onkelos who translates ברוחי מטרא דנשבין על דתאה, “like blowing rain-winds on the grass.” The rains strengthen the grass. Another way of understanding the word כשעירים is “like fine rain on the grass, enabling the grass to start growing.” The word רביבים (second half of our verse) would then refer to heavy rains which is good for a less sensitive kind of grass, i.e. עשב. If we follow this approach, the letter ש in כשעירים is really similar to the letter צ, such as in the word צעיר, young; the meaning then would be analogous to “young rain.” We find a similar construction in 33,19 ושפוני טמוני חול, where the word שפוני may be understood as צפוני, “something hidden (treasure)”.
    A Midrashic approach:  the meaning of the simile (both) is that just as rain, either kind, promotes growth, life, so Moses wishes that his words will do the same for his listeners Just as dew is something everybody welcomes and rejoices in, so may words of Torah be pleasing to all those who hear them.
    
    32,3. הבו גודל לאלוקינו, “ascribe greatness to our G’d.” Moses addresses these words to both heaven and earth. Alternatively, the words may be addressed to Israel, asking the people to acknowledge the miracles G’d had performed for them.
    
    32,4. הצור תמים פעלו, “the Rock, Whose work is perfect!” According to the plain meaning of the text the term צור applies to G’d and describes strength, toughness, such as the essence of a rock. Just as rocks appear to be the foundation of the earth, so G’d has founded the earth and the description fits Him. At this point, Moses starts speaking to the witnesses and says: “this Master about whom I wish to speak is the Rock, and there is none as strong and enduring as He. Nonetheless, His works are perfect” [although He could get away with being imperfect and no one could challenge Him successfully, He obeys His own rules. Ed.]. David used similar language when praising the Lord in Samuel II 22,31 ה-אל תמים דרכו, “the G’d Whose path is perfect.” He meant that in spite of G’d’s overwhelming power, He deals with His creatures in absolute perfection. We have another verse, in Job 36,22-23 where Elihu mentions that no one ever reproached G’d for His conduct in spite of the great power He represents. He is even very generous in forgiving His creatures.
    Our sages (Megillah 31) state that whenever G’d’s power is mentioned we always find examples of His “modesty,” i.e. of how He restrains Himself in exercising this power. They cite proof of this both from verses in the Torah, the Books of the Prophets, as well as from Scriptures. If David used the expression תמים פעלו, that “His works are perfect,” it is because no other forces of the universe can be perceived as performing their duties in a perfect fashion. Their imperfections consist in that they need divine input in order to perform their tasks at all. They do not originate anything.
    I have heard from my teacher Rabbi Shelomoh Aderet that there is no need to add the words פועלי אמת שפעולתם אמת in the monthly benediction over the new moon, seeing that anyhow any celestial force which needs divine input cannot be perceived as performing what we call פעולתו אמת, “a true function.” Such a force is by definition not אמת, true. [according to Sanhedrin 42 and Rashi there, the words פועלי אמת שפעולתם אמת refer to the moon’s dependable performance. What Rabbi Shelomoh Aderet objected to was the plural form פועלי instead of פועל Ed.] The entire line should refer to only a single force to whom the attribute אמת can be applied, i.e. פועל אמת שפעולתו אמת, an obvious reference to G’d, Who activates the orbit of the moon, and not a reference to the moon per se. [Rather, the fact that the moon needs to renew itself every month as a result of having been reduced in size at the outset is cited by us as part of G’d’s perfection. He was justified in reducing the light of the moon. Ed.] This formula would be parallel to what Moses said here הצור תמים פעלו.
    With these words Moses alluded here to the creation of man, his sin, and his punishment. Seeing that Adam’s sin became the cause why all his offspring has to die at one point or another, Moses saw fit  to choose the day of his death to acknowledge that G’d and all that He does is perfect. He implied that when G’d created man He intended for him to be and remain perfect and to serve Him as do the angels in heaven. The word צור is also related to צר, or צייר. He fashioned all creatures including man. When Moses continues describing “His paths as being justice, loyalty, not stained by iniquity,” all these attributes must be viewed as a contrast to man. Seeing man sinned, he deserved to be punished. G’d Himself remains as He has always been. If anything changed it was the fact that G’d’s favourite creature, man, became corrupt vis-a-vis his Creator, i.e. שחת לו. The singular לו, “to Him,” instead of the word להם, “to them,” makes it plain that Moses describes Adam’s sin against his Maker. Our sages, seizing on the meaning of צייר, “painter” in the word צור, suggested that the verse (Samuel II 2,2) אין צור כאלוקינו, might instead be read as אין צייר כאלוקינו, “there is no ‘painter, artist’ comparable to our G’d.”
    Moses refers to history repeating itself. Whereas Adam had sinned against His Maker, the Jewish people had copied him by making the golden calf, effectively repeating the sin Adam their ancestor had been guilty of, an act of disobedience amounting to dethroning G’d, or, in the words of our sages, קצץ בנטיעות, “uprooting what had been planted with such care.” (compare author on Genesis 3,6) We know that this was an act of corruption from when He said to Moses שחת עמך, “your people has become corrupt. (Exodus 32,7) G’d applied this term to the sin of the golden calf though not all of the Israelites participated in it, so that the description קצץ בנטיעות would appear to be an exaggeration. The word לא which follows the word לו reminds the people that Adam had transgressed a negative commandment. Continuing with the words בניו מומם is an allusion to Kayin and Hevel who also had become corrupt. [this editor has always felt that unless Hevel had been guilty of a major sin G’d would not have allowed him to become the first victim of murder and to die without having sired children.]
    
    32,5. דור עקש ופתלתל, “a perverse and twisted generation.” Now Moses addresses  his people, calling them by an unflattering description. These words belong together with the words in the next verse הלה' תגמלו זאת, “are you really going to repeat the mistakes of Adam, Kayin and Hevel and act likewise against Hashem?” (the author states that the period sign after the word פתלתל does not present an obstacle to how he reads these two verses). Seeing that Moses had already told the people in 31,29 that he foresaw how they would become corrupt after his death and serve idols after the death of Joshua, he now urgently warns them against pursuing such a path.
    
    32,6. הלה' תגמלו זאת, “is it to Hashem that you plan to repay thus?” This is a reference to their becoming corrupt against their father in heaven who had performed so many deeds of loving kindness for them.
    Another way of explaining the verse commencing with the word הצור, is that seeing that this was the day on which Moses was going to die, it was up to him, as it is up to any mortal at that stage of his life, to acknowledge G’d’s righteousness and justice in letting him die at that point. He therefore said that all of G’d’s ways are perfect; even death did not represent something perverse or twisted, עקש ופתלתל. He is א-ל אמונה, “a G’d of faith, etc.” Moses meant that all those who in this life do not appear to have been dealt with equitably, will find out after the death of their bodies that that there is an accounting, and that any reward which has not been paid in life on terrestrial earth will be paid then. We have many verses on this subject, to quote but one from Samuel I 26,23: “and the Lord will requite every man for his right conduct and loyalty” (David speaking to King Shaul). Other verses on this subject are found in (Psalms 89,38, et al). The words following, i.e. ואין עול, mean that G’d will not let the sinners get away with their iniquities, even if this was not noticeable while these people were alive on earth. They too will be dealt with after their bodies have died.
    The words following this, i.e. צדיק וישר הוא, “He is righteous and straightforward,” mean that He manifests righteousness in the world to come, the world after resurrection of the bodies, and He is straightforward in the עולם הבא, the world of disembodied souls awaiting the resurrection.
    With these words Moses alluded to a total of four worlds [in terms of time rather than in terms of space, the author discussed this at length on pages 2749-2752 Ed.] They are: 1) this present terrestrial world of bodies and soul. 2) the world of disembodied souls. 3) the era when souls and bodies are reunited. 4) the period after that. You, the reader, are already aware that all of these four worlds are alluded to in a single verse in Proverbs 6,22: בהתהלכך תנחה אותך, בשכבך תשמר עליך, והקיצות היא תשיחך. “When you walk it will guide you; when you lie down it will protect you; when you are awake it will talk to you.” The first three words refer to the present terrestrial world; the next three words refer to the world of the souls; the word “when you awake,” refers to the period after the resurrection, whereas the final words היא תשיחך “she will talk to you,” refer to the fourth world.
    Our verse also contains references to these four different worlds  which the soul of the righteous will experience. According to the above-mentioned interpretation it is extremely appropriate that we have the custom to recite this verse (הצור תמים) in the prayer known as צדוק הדין at funerals, or even when we visit the cemeteries. If the father of all prophets saw fit to recite this verse on the day of his own death, it is certainly in place for us to do so also.
    Another reason why Moses may have chosen to refer to G’d as צור on that occasion may have been his own sin when he accused the Jewish people of almost stoning him to death, and  when G’d commanded him (Exodus 17,6) “here I will stand before you by the rock in Chorev; you shall strike the צור and water will emerge, etc.” It had not been Moses’ practice, throughout the Torah, to make reference to this name of G’d which conveys an image of aggressiveness and overlordship; Moses had always preferred to invoke the names of G’d which reflect on His attribute of Mercy. There were only two exceptions to this; the first time in the שירה, when he described the attribute י-ה as עזי (Exodus 15,2) when he spoke of this manifestation of G’d against the Egyptians, and the second time when he spoke about the ongoing battle G’d wages against Amalek where Moses said כי יד על כס י-ה מלחמה לה' בעמלק (Exodus 17,16).
    When Moses now mentioned the attribute צור, he did so as he wanted to praise G’d with the same word as he had once sinned against Him. This would correspond to what the sages said in Shemot Rabbah 5,23 that the reason why Moses commenced the song of thanksgiving after the crossing of the Sea of Reeds with the word אז, was to atone for a previous occasion when he had used the word אז, criticising G’d for having worsened the fate of the Jewish people from the time he, Moses, had been appointed as their leader (Exodus 5,23). 
    If you will analyse this verse still further you will find in it an allusion to the seven disciplines (emanations) of wisdom. The words תמים פעלו refer to the emanation חסד; the words כי כל דרכיו משפט refer to the emanation גבורה; the words א-ל אמונה refer to the emanation אמת, the “centre” of the diagram of emanations. The words ואין עול refer to the emanation נצח; an emanation we know from Samuel I 15,29 וגם נצח ישראל לא ישקר ולא ינחם; the word  צדיק refers to the emanation יסוד, seeing the צדיק has been described as the foundation of the universe (its raison d’etre.)  The word וישר refers to the emanation מלכות. Moses added the word הוא in order to show that the previous attributes are all to be considered as part of a whole.
   שחת לו לא בניו מומם,  Nachmanides writes on this that the words are to be understood as “its corruption reflects upon itself, not upon G’d; because of their blemish they are no longer His children.” The word מום, blemish, describes and defines this corruption. It is a similar construction to Leviticus 22,25 כי משחתם בהם מום בם, “for their corruption is in them, a blemish is in them.” The reason the Torah here refers to the people of Israel as לא בניו, “not His sons,” is precisely because in times when G’d feels favourably disposed towards them they are described as בניו, “His sons.” Seeing that their “father” is צדיק וישר, how can the people of Israel be described a His sons, seeing they are perverse and twisted? Hence the only description which fits them is “לא בניו.” This interpretation is correct.
    However, seeing the word לא has the tone-sign tipcha, i.e. it belongs to the words preceding it, so that the words בניו מומם belong together but not to the preceding word לא, it is possible to offer the following interpretation. The words שחת לו לא belong together and mean that the reason the Israelites have become corrupted is because they themselves rebelled against the word of the Lord. We find something similar in Isaiah 42,24: ולא אבו בדרכיו הלוך, “and they did not want to walk in His ways.” Whenever Moses wanted to guide them along a certain path, the straightforward path, the true path, they did not want to and responded by saying לא נעשה, “we are not going to do this.” In other words, their corruption revealed itself in their constant use of the word לא, “no.” Seeing that previously they had been called G’d’s children, (Deut. 14,1) בנים אתם לה' אלוקיכם, “You are children to the Lord your G’d,” they have to be described as “not His children” when they act rebelliously. This refusal to accept G’d’s (Moses’s) leadership is a major blemish, one which deserves to be characterised as עקש ופתלתל, perverseness and being twisted.
   הלה' תגמלו זאת עם נבל, “do you thus requite the Lord, o tiresome people?” the word נבל is reminiscent of what Yitro said in Exodus 18,18 that Moses would become weary.” The people considered having accepted the Torah as something which made them weary. Onkelos also translated the word in this sense when he writes on Exodus 18,18 מילאה תלאי, “you will become very weary.” In our verse, Onkelos translates “they are a people who, though they received the Torah, did not wisen up.” [According to Rabbi Chavell, the meaning of Onkelos in Yitro is that the people, while welcoming the Torah, merely became tired studying it so intensely, so that Moses did not criticise Israel with these words but complimented them. He  calls it the correct interpretation].
    Nachmanides writes that נבל is the description of someone who is ungrateful for favours received, whereas someone who performs kind deeds without recompense is called a נדיב, donor. He quotes Isaiah 32,5 לא יקרא עוד לנבל נדיב as proof that a נבל is an ingrate, the opposite of a נדיב, seeing he repays kindness not only with indifference but with evil. This is the reason why Avigail in her conversation with David refers to her own husband (Samuel 25,2) Naval Hacarmeli as: “as his name so is he,” i.e. repaying kindness with evil. David had done him great favours protecting his property only to be repaid with insolence. This is also what G’d had in mind when He instructed Job’s companions (Job 42,8) to offer sacrifices as atonement for the way they had treated Job. He said: לבלתי עשות עמכם נבלה, “not to treat you vilely; Job was going to pray on their behalf though they had accused him of a variety of wrongdoing. The companions, in defending G’d’s treatment of Job, had described him as deserving the afflictions he had endured. Thus far Nachmanides.
    
   הלוא הוא אביך, “is He then not your father, etc.?” Moses means that G’d made Israel His possession, bringing them out of nothing into something. Every יש, is by definition the property of the one who brought it into existence. This is also the meaning of Proverbs 8,22: ה' קנני ראשית דרכו, “the Lord acquired me at the beginning of His way.” Similarly, G’d is referred to as owning heaven and earth, seeing He created them (Genesis 14,19).
    In Bereshit Rabbah 43,5 the word קנך is understood in its normal meaning, i.e. an acquisition from someone else. The Midrash answers the question from whom G’d could have acquired heaven and earth by saying: ”from the raw material they are constructed from.” I have referred to this in Genesis 14,19.
    G’d is called “our father,” as He created the soul which He blew into Adam in order to make him come alive. Just as the physical father deserves this appellation vis-a-vis the body which he sires, (seeing his sperm is the first input) so G’d is described as the true and eternal father, who has provided the original input for all life. David also referred to G’d as his father when he said (Psalms 27,10) “for my father and my mother have abandoned me, only the Lord is taking me in.” Also the prophet Isaiah speaks of G’d as father when he said (Isaiah 63,16) “surely You are our Father: though Avraham regard us not, and Israel recognise us not, You, O Lord, are our Father from of old, Your name is ‘Our Redeemer.’” You should appreciate that the word ה-ליה-וה is written as two words, i.e. the first letter ה has the vowel patach and the letter ל which follows has a silent sheva instead of a semi vowel, i.e. sheva na, as in לישראל. The reason is that it is humanly impossible to pronounce two successive sheva na. This is why the sages decided to allow the sheva under the letter ל to remain silent so as to enable us to pronounce the sheva na under the letter י. [for those for whom it is allowed to pronounce the tetragram. Ed.] Otherwise, part of the Holy Name of G’d would be “concealed” (if it is incapable of being enunciated). The word is totally strange, there is no parallel for it in the whole Bible. It is also impossible to put the vowel chirik under the letter ל as we do in the word ליהודה, because then too one dot of the correctly spelled and vocalised tetragram would be missing, or “hidden.”
    You should further realise that this letter ה which is written separately is written in larger script and is one of 22 such letters in the Torah which are written in larger script. (each letter of the א-ב appears once in larger script in the Torah, compare details in the Encyclopedia Talmudit, 1,191)
    A kabbalistic approach: it is possible to view this letter as alluding to the specially small letter ה in Genesis 2,4. Perhaps  Moses wrote the letter ה here large, at the end of the Torah, as opposed to when he wrote it “small” at the beginning, in order to remind us that this is the letter (last letter of the tetragram) with which the Lord created the terrestrial universe. The extra large letter ה at the end of the Torah is an allusion to the extra small letter ה near the beginning (Genesis 2,4), to show that the large letter ה at the end provided the extra power needed for the small letter ה to create the universe with. The large letter ה in our verse is symbolic of the repentance of the souls; in other words the ultimate repentance by man made the creation of the universe a wothwhile project for the Lord.
    It is an accepted concept that when the Jewish people are full of merits they thereby reinforce the power of the Shechinah, whereas when they accumulate demerits, this power wanes somewhat. Moses asks the people by using the preface ה-לה', “are you going to be responsible by your deeds for reducing the power of the Shechinah, for making G’d feel that He wasted His time in creating man?” [freely translated. Ed.] The word זאת describes the attribute of G’d which would “suffer” through the iniquities committed by a people who are perverse, etc. This is why Moses added: “If only they would have drawn on the source of the attribute חכמה, they would have understood this and prevented it from coming about.” They would then have strengthened the attribute זאת instead of weakening it. The whole verse 29 refers to the fact that if the people had displayed the wisdom and intelligence generally attributed to them, they would have contributed to more knowledge all around as a result of which G’d’s image and attribute זאת would have been greatly enhanced. They would have considered the consequences of failing to do so.
    The line הלא הוא אביך קנך is read by the Kabbalists as if the word קנך had been vocalised “kinecha,” your nest.” The first small letter ה in the Torah we referred to is understood to refer to G’d as the “nest” of the universe, performing a function similar to that which the birds’ nests perform for their inhabitants. It is perceived as the foundation of the existence of the birds; where there is no nest, birds cannot develop. Some of these considerations are reflected in the commandment of שלוח הקן, the sending away of the mother bird before emptying her nest of its young. The last letter ה in this verse, i.e. הוא עשך, is a parallel construction to הוא עשנו ולו אנחנו, “He has made us and we are His” (Psalms 100,3).
    The word ויכוננך, “He has established you firmly,” means that G’d has constructed Israel in such a way that it may be rehabilitated.
    A Midrashic approach based on Sifri Haazinu; the word וכוננך means: “a roll which contains everything, priests, Levites, Israelites.” It is a people which produces its own scholars, scientists, scribes, etc. It does not have to rely on outsiders, Gentiles. This is the meaning of Zecharyah 10,4: “from them shall come cornerstones, tent pegs, bows of combat, and every captain shall arise from them.” [the prophet speaks of the self-sufficiency of the Kingdom of Yehudah] Pharaoh had not found anyone amongst all his wise men who could interpret his dream satisfactorily, but he had to turn to Joseph. Nevuchadnezzar did not find an interpreter among all the wise men of Babylon and had to turn to the Jew, Daniel.
    
    32,7. זכור ימות עולם, “Remember the days of yore;” Moses asks the people to remember all the good G’d had done for the Jewish people ever since the creation; i.e. בהנחל עליון גוים, “when the Supreme One gave as inheritance to the nations, etc.” 
   בינו שנות דור ודור, “understand the years of generation after generation.” They should understand what occurred ever since the Shechinah made its home within them. This is reflected in ימצאהו בארץ מדבר, “when He found it (the people) in a land of desolation.” The word יצב in יצב גבולות עמים, is to be understood as an infinitive (see Ibn Ezra) similar in meaning to the word להציב. We find the word דבר, i.e. dabber, also used as an infinitive in לא ידעתי דבר (Jeremiah 1,8). The meaning of the full verse then is: “when G’d assigned to the various nations lands as their respective inheritance, and when He separated their languages, as described about the descendants of Noach in Genesis chapter 11, etc.” You will find that in that chapter 70 descendants of Noach are listed. These are the founders of the 70 nations the sages always speak of. You will reflect on the fact that when your patriarch Yaakov descended to Egypt his clan comprised 70 members born to him or his children. G’d did not select for His own inheritance more than these 70 people whom He set apart to become His people. This is the meaning of the words כי חלק ה' עמו, “for Hashem’s portion is His people” (verse 9).
    Some commentators explain the words גבולות עמים which we translated as “the nations’ boundaries” to mean instead: “the diagonal lines assigned to the world,” i.e. the division of the globe into 12 areas governed by different constellations. The words: “for His people are G’d’s share,” would then refer to the fact that the fate of the Jewish people is not governed by such constellations, but that G’d personally decides on the fates of individual Jews. This verse then would be the clearest proof that the fates of the Jewish people are not subject to the influences of the stars but are decided by higher forces. No other nation has achieved such a status, as is spelled out by David in Psalms 147,20: “He did not do so for any other nation.”
    
    32,10. ימצאהו בארץ מדבר, “He found him (Israel) in a desolate land.” I believe that the reason Moses said: “in a desolate land,” i.e. ארץ מדבר instead of simply: מדבר, is that the clouds representing the attribute כבוד joined the people at the time they entered the desert, מדבר. The meaning of the words בארץ מדבר then is: “in a land adjoining a land, i.e. cultivated, inhabited areas.” You will find something similar in the Torah’s description of the Jewish people’s departure from Egypt, when the Torah writes (Exodus 3,20-21) “they journeyed from Sukkot and they encamped in Eytam, at the edge of the desert, בקצה המדבר. The Torah adds: “and the Lord would walk with them both by day and by night.” The meaning of the words ימצאהו then is twofold: it can mean “He found them,” i.e. the word is derived from מצא, or it can mean “supplied, “ i.e. ספק.“ Onkelos appears to have understood it as meaning the latter when he translated ספיק צרכיהון בארעא מדברא, “He supplied their needs in a desert-like country.” Onkelos means that the attribute כבוד found the Jewish people when they were about to enter a desert-like country and proceeded to supply their needs.
   ובתוהו ילל ישמון, “in desolation, a howling wilderness.” Moses recalls that when the people reached this point in their journey, far from civilisation, the matzot (dough) which they had slung over their shoulders when they left Egypt (Exodus 12,39) were exhausted.
   יסובבנהו, “He circled it.” He surrounded the Jewish people with the clouds of glory. According to Onkelos who translates as אשרינון סחור לשכנתיה, the meaning is: “He surrounded them with flags from four sides.” The verse then explains that the Jewish camps in Sinai were like a circle with the Shechinah among them; this is also the meaning of Song of Songs 7,1: כמחולות המחנים, “with the camps encircling.” The author speaks of two camps, i.e. the camp of the Israelites and that of the angels. The latter had descended from their celestial regions with the Shechinah (Bamidbar Rabbah 2,2). This is also alluded to in Taanit 31 that at some time in the future G’d will arrange for a circle for the righteous in Gan Eden and His attribute כבוד will be amongst them.
   יבוננהו, “He granted insights to it,” He enabled them to understand things by means of the Torah.
   יצרנהו, “He preserved it;” He protected them against the attack by Amalek and attacks from the other nations.
   כאישון עינו. “as the pupil of His eye.” The pupil of the eye is known in classical Hebrew as אישון. The reason is that it contains within it something which resembles a human being, איש. The word, or rather the ending ון, suggests something small, just as the word שבתון in the expression שבת שבתון suggests a diminution of the Sabbath, something akin to but not quite like the Sabbath. Whereas the word שבת describes the principal parts of the Sabbath, the word שבתון describes an addition to the Sabbath, something secondary and therefore something “smaller.” We find a similar construction in אמנון, אמנינון  in Samuel II 13,20 where it describes Amnon being put down, being degraded as a brother, seeing he had not acted as a brother should (compare Kimchi). 
    
    32,11. כנשר יעיר קנו, “Like an eagle arousing its nest;”  Moses compares  G’d’s attribute כבוד to the eagle, the king of the birds. Similarly, the attribute כבוד is perceived as the “king” of all the disembodied spirits. Just as the eagle takes its young, carrying them on top of its wings, guiding them to various places, so G’d alone, guides the Jewish people (in the desert). He did not employ the help or assistance of any other deity. We have a similar verse in Psalms 73,25: “Whom else do I have in heaven except You?” Assaph means that we rely neither on angels nor any other celestial forces but only on G’d directly. He goes on saying: “having You I want no one on earth.” Furthermore, elaborating on the comparison with the eagle, “just a the eagle renews itself from time to time, so Israel does renew itself from time to time.” The author cites Isaiah 40,31 יעלו אבר כנשרים as meaning that the eagle produces new wings from time to time. He quotes Psalms 103,5 as confirmation of the verse in Isaiah.
    
    32,13. ירכיבהו על במתי ארץ, “He makes it ride on the heights of the earth.” This is a simile describing Israel as having received control of a choice piece of real estate on earth, a central part of the civilised world, a land “higher” than all other countries. [If the earth is considered as a globe and Jerusalem its centre, instead of the equator or longitude 180 degrees, then this is literally true. Ed.] (the author bases himself on Sifri 316). The thrust of these verses is that in spite of the advantages conferred on the Jewish people in every sphere, they trampled it and thereby kicked out (at G’d). The meaning of the words כליות חטה in verse 14 is “the fat part, choicest part,” of the wheat kernels. The reason Moses uses the comparison with kidneys, כליות, is because the wheat kernels resemble the shape of the kidney. According to Taanit 23, in the days of Shimon ben Shetach there was such prosperity in Israel that the wheat kernels were as large as oxen. [our text has “as large as kidneys.” Ed.]
    
    32,14. ודם ענב תשתה חמר, “and you would drink the blood of its grapes as if it were aged wine.” Moses refers to the juice in the grapes as “blood,” seeing that its red colour is similar to the colour of blood. Another reason, mystical, if you will, is that grapes were the indirect cause of death in the world according to the view that the fruit of the tree of knowledge were grapes. (Bereshit Rabbah 19,8)
    The word ענב refers to the seeds inside the grape. The reason Moses speaks about grapes in the singular instead of the customary ענבים, plural, is that he wanted to alert us to the vast amount of wine, blessing for the country, which develops from such tiny beginnings as the seeds in the grapes. When the grapes hang together in a cluster they are called אשכול by the Torah, whereas in Talmudic parlance such a cluster is known as פרכיל. We find the expression פרכיל ענבים in Sukkah 10, i.e. clusters from which grapes are suspended. The trunk from which such clusters of grapes are hanging is called גפן, a grapevine, when the cluster is still attached to it, whereas when the branch to which the clusters are attached has been severed from the trunk it is called זמורה. This is borne out by Numbers 13,23 ויכרתו משם זמורה ואשכול ענבים, “they (the spies) cut from there a branch, full of clusters of grapes.” The verse in Numbers describes the excellence and quantity of the produce of the land of Canaan at that time. The Torah there adds the word אחד, to tell us that each of the spies took a different specimen from the fruit of the land. One took a cluster of grapes, another pomegranates, still another a fig.
    
    32,15. וישמן ישורון ויבעט, “Israel became fat and kicked.” Up until this time the Jewish people had never been called Yeshurun. It is possible that Moses did not use the name in order to flatter them, but, on the contrary, in order to point out how a people who were once considered entitled to such a compliment had forfeited their claim to that name. The name derives from אשורנו, a vision the prophet Bileam refers to as having had, i.e. the ability to behold supernatural phenomena (Numbers 14,17). The Jewish people had seen such phenomena, i.e. the attribute of כבוד at the time they experienced their spiritual high during the revelation at Mount Sinai. This is why Moses employs this term immediately after having described the Mount Sinai experience of the Jewish people with the words יסובבנהו יבוננהו in verse 10. Seeing that the Torah described the attribute Israel focused at that time as “and the appearance of the glory of G’d was similar to consuming fire at the top of the mountain,” (Exodus 24,17) it is clear that the people at the time had a visual experience. Later on, during his blessings of the people in 33,4 Moses again refers to this term saying ויהי בישורון מלך, “the Lord became King amongst the people known as “Yeshurun.” When Moses concludes his blessings of the people in Deut. 33,26 he again refers to the Jewish people as Yeshurun, saying אין כא-ל ישורון, “there is none like the G’d of Yeshurun.” He meant that the very experience the people had had at Sinai should have convinced them that there is no power in the world that can equal their G’d.
    All this is really part of this song which is a collection of criticism, rebuke, during which Moses argues with the people concerning their conduct in the future. He foretells them that they would become sinful and rebel against the Lord, becoming forgetful of all the kind deeds G’d had performed for them. This is why on this day, the last day of his life, he mentions the description Yeshurun three times to underline how terrible it is when a people who attained such spiritual stature as they would experience a spiritual decline.
    The prophet Isaiah paraphrases Moses when he said in Isaiah 1,4 הוי גוי חוטא עם כבד עון, “woe, a sinful people, a nation laden with iniquity!” Our sages comment on this that when Isaiah used the term גוי he referred to the people who had distinguished themselves as being referred to as ,ומי גוי גדול, “and who is such a great nation?” How could such a nation become sinful? Furthermore, this was the nation which had been described as עם קדוש, “a consecrated people,” in Deut. 14,2. How could such a people have fallen so much that it fits the description “laden with iniquity?” The Jewish people had been described as “children are you to the Lord your G’d” in Deut. 14,1, and as “seed blessed by the Lord” (Isaiah 61,9).
   ויטוש אלו-ה עשהו וינבל צור ישועתו, “it deserted G’d its Maker, and was contemptuous of the Rock of its salvation.” The verse alludes to the two attributes of G’d which orchestrated the Exodus. The reason Moses did not say א-ל but אלו-ה was to include both the emanation תפארת and כבוד. This is why he added the letters ו and ה. This idea is reflected also in Job 35,10 איה אלוה עושי . The words וצור ישעותו mean that by means of the attribute צור, the deliverance of the Jewish people at the Sea of Reeds was orchestrated.
    
    32,15.  יקניאוהו בזרים, “they kindled His jealousy by means of alien (gods).” By turning to idols, the Jewish people aroused G’d’s attribute of “the jealous G’d.” They angered this very attribute which had delivered them at the Sea. A reference to the sin of the golden calf and possibly to the affair at Shittim.
    
    32,17. יזבחו לשדים לא אלו-ה, “they would slaughter to demons, non-deities.” These possess no power at all; (unlike celestial constellations). אלוהים לא ידעום, “gods which they did not even know of as such.” These so-called deities were not even on a par with angels, disembodied spirits which had been created prior to the 6 days of creation, or on the second day of the creation, or on the fifth day (compare author on Genesis 1,4) חדשים מקרוב באו, “new ones, recently arrived!” Creatures which are more recent than man. A reference to the mortality of demons equaling the mortality of man. לא שערום אבותיכם, “beings which were unable to inspire fear in your fathers.” 
    Another meaning of the line, “new ones, recently arrived.” The line is a reference to the theology in question, i.e. something the Jews had learned recently, such as when they were in Egypt. The Egyptians were already familiar with that cult.
    Another possible approach to these words: There are basically three categories of idolatry. (compare author on Yitro 20,3) One of them is the believing in certain philosophies, even if one does not worship something physical. We have been warned against such idolatry by the first words of the second Command- ment: לא יהיה לך אלוהים אחרים. The second category of idolatry is the worship of reproductions in a cast form or other three-dimensional form, of celestial phenomena, the assumption being that one thereby wants to “catch” the power of these phenomena and put them to work on one’s behalf. The Torah warns against this with the words: “do not make for yourselves, etc.” (Exodus 20,4) The third category of idolatry consists of serving demons, something we have been warned against by the words אשר במים מתחת לארץ, “which are in the water beneath the earth” (Exodus 20,4). These are the demons that dwell in the תהום, “the empty space” mentioned in Genesis 1,1. This is why, at this point, Moses warns against serving these demons, saying we must not slaughter for them seeing they do not possess any power, not even that attributed to the celestial phenomena commonly known as horoscopes. Moses adds the apparently gratuitous words: אלוהים אשר לא ידעום, to emphasise that not only are these phenomena not deities, not equipped with any powers, but they have never even been acknowledged by idolaters a having any power. They are phenomena of such recent origin that they were not even perceived as threatening by their forefathers. The forefathers Moses referred to were Terach and Nachor, Avraham’s father and grandfather, who did worship hewn images of celestial phenomena. Even they were not so foolish as to imagine that cults involving demons could be of any use.
    
    32,19. מכעס בניו ובנותיו, “by the anger of His sons and daughters.” This was an allusion to the first Temple when both men and women practiced idolatry as we know from Jeremiah 44,9: “have you forgotten the wicked acts of your forefathers, of the kings of Yehudah and their wives?” We have another verse relating to his subject in Ezekiel 8,14: “next He brought me to the entrance of the north-gate of the House of the Lord and there sat the women bewailing Tammuz.” (a Babylonian god). This is why our verse lists “his sons and His daughters,” separately.
    
    32,20. ויאמר אסתירה פני מהם, “He said: ‘I will hide My face from them.’” I have already mentioned in Genesis 1,3 that the term אמירה, i.e. ויאמר, when applied to G’d reflects a benevolent kind of utterance or thought [when it was not uttered in someone’s hearing such as at the time when there were no creatures as yet who could hear the utterance. Ed.]. We may understand the words אסתירה פני as אסתיר ה', “I will hide the attribute ה which is “My face.” 
   בנים לא אמון בם, “children who have no sense of loyalty within them.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word אמון here is an adjective raised to the level of a noun. The verse then would mean that amongst these “children” there is not a single loyal person, a person of faith.
    A Midrashic approach: These children do not respond with Amen.” This is reflected in the absence of the letter ו which we would have expected if only the plain meaning were correct. [the failure to pronounce Amen after the blessing of the prophets is a serious offense. Ed.] Our sages in Berachot 58 derive from this verse that  a person who responds by saying Amen to a blessing in which the Lord’s name is mentioned has performed a greater mitzvah than the one who recited the actual benediction.
    A kabbalistic approach: they are sons who have no one who teaches them and trains them (in the right path).The divine force which is known as פנים, “G’d’s face,” is the one that teaches and trains His children. Seeing that the Jewish “children” referred to are the Jews in exile from whom G’d “hid” this “face,” they have no one to train them in true Jewish values, to teach them the living Torah. The אומן Moses speaks about is symbolised by the final letter ה in the tetragram. This is what the words אסתיר-ה פני מהם refer to.
    
    32,21. הם קנאוני בלא א-ל, “They have aroused My jealousy by means of a non-deity, etc.” Seeing that they chose to exchange Me for something which has no power to save anyone,  (compare Ezekiel 8,3 that the סמל הקנאה המקנה, it is the image of jealousy which provokes jealousy. Seeing that G’d is a jealous G’d, such symbols provoke His latent jealousy.)
   ואני אקניאם בלא-עם, “so I will (retaliate) by provoking them by a non-people.” [a group of human beings claiming to be a nation and having the rights of a nation although they do not share the ingredients which make a people into a nation. Compare the Palestinians in our days. Ed.]
    Moses referred to the Jews being exiled by the Babylonians (compare Isaiah 23,13 who ridicules the Babylonians’ claim to nationhood, seeing the Assyrians had annihilated that people.)
   בגוי נבל אכעיסם,  “I will make them angry by means of a vile nation.” This is an allusion to the exile under the Edomites (Romans). The reason the Torah refers in such demeaning terms to the Edomites is because the founders of this nation denied the genetic bond which existed between their common ancestor Yitzchok. Instead of assisting his kin, that nation watched gloatingly when the first Temple was being destroyed. (Ovadiah 11) You will also find that Assaph referred to Edom as נבל, vile, in psalm 74,18 where we read: ”be mindful of how the enemy blasphemes the Lord, how base people revile the Lord;” he continues in verse 22 of the same psalm: “rise O G’d, champion Your cause; be mindful that You are blasphemed by base men all day long.” In verse 19 of that psalm the author writes: “do not deliver Your dove to the wild beast; do not ignore forever the band of Your lowly ones.” All of this is meant to make plain that the base people, עם נבל, he referred to was the חיה הרביעת, the “fourth beast” in Daniel’s vision, a reference to the kingdom of Edom. (Our author elaborated on this in connection with Bileam’s prophecies Numbers 24,28). (compare also Psalms 68,31 where the “beast of the marsh” is a reference to Edom)
    
    32,24. מזי רעב, “burned by famine.” The expression is used in this sense in Daniel 3,19 where it refers to stoking a furnace i.e. למזא לאתונא. The idea appears to be that on account of the pangs of hunger, one’s natural warmth is burning up healthy tissue seeing it does not have food to burn up. As a result these people will be consumed by raging fever.
   וקטב מרירי, “and bitter destruction (death);” according to Ibn Ezra this refers to some kind of poisoned air which kills people. This appears to occur mostly at midday. Examples are: Job 3,5: “may it be struck by the pall of the day.” This is also the meaning of Psalms 91,6  ומקטב ישוד צהרים, “and from the scourge that rages at noon.” A description of the plague, pestilence. Moses speaks of four different judgments, afflictions. which can be summarised as רעב, דבר, חיה, חרב, famine, pestilence, wild beasts, and death by the sword., 
    
    32,26. אמרתי אפאיהם, “I had said: ‘I will consign them to the most remote corner.’” “I will scatter them to the ends of the globe.”
    According to Nachmanides, the words mean that G’d says: “I had originally wanted that they remain scattered to the corners of the globe forever so that their memory will be blotted out among mankind.”
    32,27. לולי כעס אויב אגור, “if I had not been afraid of the enemy’s provocation.” This is an allusion to the exile of the Ten Tribes  who were exiled to the region of the river Gozan, (Kings II 17,6) the river referred to by our sages as Sabatyon. (according to Sanhedrin 65 Sambatyon) The word נוזן is related to ויגז שלוים, Numbers 11,31 “it (the wind) swept quail.” We also encounter the a similar word in Psalms 71,6 כי אתה גוזי, “for You were my support.” The people standing on the far side of that river are effectively removed from human society (no one can cross the river). The river is called Sabatyon because it stops flowing on the Sabbath. In the language of the people in that region the word סבט is equivalent to our word שבת. In Arabic too, the Sabbath is called סבט. It is a custom among those people to append the ending יון to many words, hence the name סבטיון. Nachmanides furnishes examples of other words with that ending.
    Even though, at this stage, the Torah speaks here in riddles, allusions,  and in a very abbreviated form, we can find illuminating comments by our sages on the subject scattered throughout the Talmud and Midrashim. For instance, in Bereshit Rabbah 73,6 Rabbi Yehudah son of Rabbi Seymon says that the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin were not exiled to the same areas as were the Ten Tribes who had been exiled long before beyond the river Sabatyon, whereas the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin were scattered all over the globe. In Midrash Shir Hashirim Zutta 1,16  the words אף ערשנו רעננה are understood by the Midrash as an allusion to these Ten Tribes who were exiled beyond the river Sabatyon. The Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 10,8 writes that there were three exiles of the Israelites (the northern kingdom, I presume, Ed.]; 1) beyond the river Sabatyon, 2) the exile somewhere close to Antiochya; 3) an exile which was preceded by a cloud descending and hiding the people being exiled. Just as the Ten Tribes (actually 7) were exiled in three stages and to three locations, the two and a half Tribes on the East Bank of the Jordan who were the first to be exiled also were exiled in three stages. The source from which we derive all this is Ezekiel 23,31: בדרך אחותך הלכת ונתתי כוסה בידך, “seeing you walked the same path as your sister, therefore I placed her cup in your hand.” Just as the exile was divided into three episodes and locations, so the eventual return to the Holy land will follow a similar pattern The sages base this on Isaiah 49,9: “tell the prisoners ‘get going;’”  this (part of) the verse applies to the exiles from beyond the river Sabatyon. The second half of the verse in Isaiah which reads: “to the ones who were exiled in darkness,” applies to the people exiled beyond the Sabatyon. The next section of the verse i.e. the words: “show yourselves!” refers to the exiles who had been mysteriously swallowed by the cloud; The final words of that verse, i.e. “they shall pasture along the roads,” apply to the group of exiles who had been taken to somewhere near Antiochya.
    In the Tossephta of Sanhedrin (chapter 13) we have been taught in the name of Rabbi that the Ten Tribes will enjoy a share in the world to come. He bases himself on Isaiah 27,13: “it will be on that day (the day described in verse 12) that a great shofar will be sounded and the strayed who are in the land of Assyria and the expelled in the land of Egypt shall come and worship the Lord on the holy mount, in Jerusalem.” The peoples mentioned are the ones we know as the “Ten Tribes.” According to Sifra Bechukotai 8 the reference is to the people described in Leviticus 26,38. Rabbi Akiva says that the reference is to the Ten Tribes who have been exiled to the land of the Medes.
    
    32,27. לולא כעס אויב אגור, “If I were not concerned with provoking the anger of the enemy, etc.” The Hebrew words are to be understood as: לולא שאני מפחד מכעס אויב as explained by Ibn Ezra, as G’d saying that He is conscious of His need to battle the enemies of the Jews who draw the wrong conclusions of history, [such as that the G’d of the Jews has lost His power. Ed]. The word אגור is the same as Deut. 1,17 where Moses told the judges לא תגורו מפני איש: ”do not be afraid of any man.” The meaning of the words פעל כל זאת refers to the שפטים, the judgments, i.e. that the enemy of the Jewish people would not credit G’d with having orchestrated these judgments on His people as a punishment for them. 
    
    32,28. כי גוי אובד, “for a nation bereft, etc.” a reference to the Gentile nations [as a group, Ed.].
    32,29. לו חכמו, “if only they had displayed wisdom (the Jewish people)
   ישכילו זאת, “they would have appreciated with their intelligence that G’d had orchestrated all these afflictions as retaliation for their iniquities.” Furthermore, if they would have used their intelligence they would have realised that at the time when one of the enemy put a thousand of the Israelites to flight this too had only been possible through G’d’s doing. Unless their “Rock” had sold them out and had delivered them into the hands of the pagans this could never have happened.
    
    32,31. כי לא כצורנו צורם, “for our “Rock” is not like their “rock.” The “rock” Moses speaks of is that of the “nations bereft of counsel” whom he previously characterised as “our enemies.” They should have realised all this, i.e. that they were not qualified to be our judges. Alternatively, the words ואויבינו פלילים may mean that “when our enemies are criminals, they think that our rock is not like their rock,” i.e. that He is inferior to their rock instead of superior to their rock. This would be a desecration of the Lord’s name.
    
    32,32. כי מגפן סדום גפנם ומשדמות עמורה, “for their vine is from the vine of Sodom and Gomorrah;” There is some repetition here, seeing that the meaning of the word שדמות is the same as גפן, “vine.” The word occurs in this sense in Isaiah 16,8: כי שדמות חשבון אומלל גפן שבמה, “for the vines of Cheshbon are withered and the vines of Sibmah.” The word also occurs in this sense in Chabakuk 3,17 ושדמות לא עשה אוכל, “and there is nothing edible on the vine.” Moses speaks of the nations whose roots are evil and bitter, so that one cannot expect the fruit to be sweet. Also the wine can only be “like the anger of dragons.”(verse 33).
    32,34. הלא הוא כמוס עמדי, “have I not carefully stored it away?” Their wine is stored away under My care until they will drink it. Sooner or later they themselves will have to drink their own poisonous wine. G’d is storing up His eventual vengeance against the people who have abused Israel. The construction is similar to Psalms 91,8: “you will witness the punishment of the wicked with your eyes.” [a reference to the words in verse 35 לי נקם ושלם, i.e. verses 34 and 35 are one unit. Ed.] לעת תמוט רגלם “at the time when their foot shall slip.” When the measure of their sins is full. The word שלם here is used by Moses in the same vein as G’d used it when explaining to Avraham in Genesis 15,16 that the Emorite people could not be driven out of the land of Canaan until its measure of guilt was full, שלם. 
    It is also possible to explain these verses as follows: the words הלא הוא כמוס עמדי, refer to the word אחריתם, “their end” in verse 29, i.e. the eventual end of Israel’s enemies has been a carefully preserved storage in the hands of the Lord. We find a similar construction in Daniel who had asked; (Daniel 12,8) מה אחרית אלה, “what is going to be the end of these (dire predictions)?” G’d had answered him that the timing of the redemption, and therefore the timing of the retribution against the enemies of our people, was a well guarded secret with Him until the time when it would occur (Daniel 12,9). In fact, this would occur at a time which seems most unlikely at the time, a time when these nations appear to rule the world. The word למו at the end of verse 35 contains an allusion to the time of the redemption (seeing the three letters in that word are the acronym of למועד מועדים וחצי, the time described as the time of the redemption in Daniel 12,7). At that time ידין ה' עמו, “the Lord will judge His people.” May the Lord hasten the time when this will occur as He said when He spoke about circumcising our hearts (30,6).
    
    32,36. כי ידין ה' עמו, “for the Lord will judge His people.” He will exact retribution from the wicked when Israel will observe that all their (own) power had waned and that they are either prisoners, עצורים, or forsaken in captivity, when they are almost completely lost, i.e. ואפס עצור ועזוב, “their power has shrunk to zero.”
    32,37. ואמר אי אלוהימו, “and when he (the enemy) will say (sarcastically) where is their god?” We know that Titus after crossing the dividing curtain in  the Temple found the Holy of Holies empty, exclaimed in this fashion, astounded that there was no image. (compare Gittin 56) This is also what the prophet Micah 7,10 referred to when he said: “when my enemy sees it, she will be covered with shame. She who taunts me with ‘where is He, the Lord your G’d?’”
    
    32,38. אשר חלב זבחמו יאכלו, “the ones who should have consumed the fat parts of their offerings.” This is part of the taunt of Israel’s enemies at the time of their political low point. The  plural יאכלו is a reference to the ‘gods’ of Israel by its enemies, and reflects their inability to comprehend that Israel believes in a single G’d, not in a variety of competing powers in the universe. They are taunting us by suggesting that these “gods” of ours should arise and help us. When the enemy continues with יהי עליכם סתרה, “may it be for you a protection,” instead of saying יהיו in the plural i.e. “let them be a protection” [as would have been appropriate in light of what we just explained]. The nations keeping Israel captive jeer, saying: “if indeed the god whom you believe in is only one, let Him hide you from all the persecutions which you are suffering and which you are about to endure still.”
    Alternatively, we can understand these words as referring to G’d saying: “where is this god of the pagans to whom they offered all these sacrifices and libations of wine? This is the way Rashi understands the line. This is the basis for our sages in Avodah Zarah 29 deriving that יין נסך, wine of the pagans (normally used as a sacrificial offering to their gods), is prohibited not only to drink but to derive any benefit from. The fact that the Torah mentions this wine right next to the sacrifices of animals, זבחמו, establishes this halachic linkage between the two.
    
    32,39. ראו עתה כי אני אני הוא, “see now, that I, I am He.” The word אני, as well as the words אתה or הוא, describe a presence, an existence of the subject. They are both nouns [as opposed to pronouns. Ed.] just as in Sukkah  48: אני והו הושיעה נא. I have already explained that verse in Exodus 15,2 when discussing the words זה א-לי ואנוהו.
    Moses is at the point where he sums up what he has been saying in this song. The function of these nouns (names) here is to express love and foretell that those who have been scattered will once again be gathered in and united [describing Himself in the first person as well as in the third person is G’d’s way of hinting at the fact that what had been scattered can be fused together again. Ed.] 
    Subsequently, G’d continues with: “I kill, but I also revive.” This is an allusion to the resurrection which will follow the redemption after a relatively brief interval. He then continues, quoting the Lord, with: “I am the One Who lives forever.” (verse 40). This is an allusion to the world of the future which will follow the era of the life of the resurrected bodies. This is in accordance with the view expressed in Sanhedrin 90 that the dead who will be resurrected at the time of the resurrection will not die again. (see lengthy treatment of the subject on Deut. 30,15). These people will be transferred to a celestial region with body and soul intact, where they will continue a life which knows no death. Concerning this life, our sages always say that “people destined for it have been ‘invited’ to the world of the future.” This is the ultimate purpose of the whole system of reward and punishment, and concerning this experience even the prophet Isaiah 64,3 already said that it is beyond the powers of any prophet to describe, as none has been privileged to have been shown a vision of it. It is something reserved exclusively for G’d to show to the people so honoured.
    To give us an even stronger hint of the concealed nature of what life in that region will be like, the word לעלם, “forever,” has been spelled without the letter ו. Our sages compare this to the first vision of G’d Moses experienced in Exodus 3,15 where G’d also used this word when He said זה שמי לעלם, “this is My Name forever.” There too our sages point to he absence of the letter ו, i.e. at the concealed elements of such a future. Whereas up until now, Moses had been speaking, at this juncture, G’d resumes speaking. Hearing the promise of a redemption from G’d directly is more reassuring than hearing it through the words of an intermediary. It convinces the listeners that the ingathering will be orchestrated by G’d Himself, not through one of His agents. If and when this occurs, all the nations will sing the praises of His people (verse 43).
    
    32,40. כי אשא אל שמים ידי, “For I shall raise My hand to heaven, etc.;” the promise of the redemption of the future is here being confirmed and reinforced with an oath, seeing that the gesture of raising one’s hand towards heaven is typical of someone swearing an oath. We find another example of this in Daniel 12,7 where the promise of the redemption in the future is also accompanied by this gesture. David also used this formula in Psalms 10,12 when he said: “rise, O Lord, raise Your hand.” Not only the promise of the redemption of the future is accompanied by an oath, but even the promise of the redemption from Egypt was accompanied by an oath, seeing that G’d referred to this in retrospect by saying “נשאתי את ידי,“ “I had raised My hand” (Exodus 6,18). [The author quotes more examples which I will skip. Ed.]
    Nachmanides, under the heading דרך האמת, offers the following contribution: seeing that at the time of the exile of the Jewish people G’d had cast down the glory of Israel from heaven (compare Lamentations 2,1), He now had to mention that He would pick it up with His hand and restore it to the celestial regions once the time of goodwill towards the people of Israel returns. This is the “hand” known as the יד הגדולה which battles on behalf of the Jewish people. This is the meaning of: “I said by My eternal life I revive My strong hand when I sharpen My flashing sword. I will seize it in order to wreak judgment on those who oppose Me and Israel. That will be the time when My name will be whole and My throne will be whole” (Tanchuma Ki Tetze 11). Thus far the words of Nachmanides.
    
    32,41. אם שנותי, “When I will whet My flashing blade;” the use of the past tense here when we would have expected a future tense, seeing G’d speaks about what will be, is typical of prophetic pronouncements. The meaning of the construction is that “if I whet the blade of My sword in the heaven and take hold of judgment on earth.” These words parallel those of the prophet (Isaiah 34,5: “for My sword shall be dripping (with blood) in the heaven, lo, it shall come down upon Edom.” 
    A Midrashic approach: “If I were to whet My sword, with a flashing blade, says the Lord, I would destroy the world;” What can I do to prevent this (rhetorical question)? My hand must grasp judgment.” So far the words of the Midrash. You know already that whenever the “sword” of G’d is mentioned that this is a reference to His attribute of Justice. Examples are Isaiah 66,16: “with His sword against all flesh,” or Psalms 2,21: “save my life from the sword,” and similar verses in which the word חרב is featured. A man is supposed to constantly be conscious of the impending attack by the attribute of Justice. We have a full verse in Job 19,29 where the author  cries out: “”be in fear of the sword, for your iniquity is worthy of the sword. Know there is a judgment.” The thrust of the verse is to remind people that what transpires in this universe is not accidental or coincidental, but is part of a master plan.” I have already commented on Genesis 3,24 where the flashing blade of the sword guarding the entrance to Gan Eden is mentioned, as well as on Deut. 7,24, that G’d’s sword is extremely sharp, has 16 blades. When the Torah speaks here of חרבי followed by ותאחז, this is an allusion to the 16-sided blade of G’d’s sword by which the wicked will be judged, and which even the righteous have reason to be afraid of; however, (under the appropriate circumstances) this sword is entrusted to the righteous. This is the meaning of the שיר חדש, the new song which will be sung by them in the future, as we know from Psalms 149,6: “with paeans to G’d in their throats and many-bladed swords in their hands.“ The sages amend the word בידם, “in their hands,“ to be read as בי-ה as referring to 16 blades. [the number 15 i.e. י-ה, may refer to the additional number of blades. Ed.]
    This song of Moses is a great source of comfort regarding the redemption of the future and the destruction of the idolaters and the avenging of Israel from its enemies, as well as concerning the atonement of Israel’s iniquities. Perhaps this is even reflected in the acrostic of the respective first letters of different sections of this song, i.e. the letters ה-ז-י-ו--ל-ד, having been so divided by Ezra who arranged the reading into these sections (see beginning of verses 1-7-13-19-29-40). He had foreseen with holy spirit that by reading this portion in the appropriate stanzas there would be an additional ray of hope and an appeal to the people to engage in penitence whenever these verses are read in public, generation after generation. (compare Rosh Hashanah 31) The message of the acrostic is that the radiation of the brilliance of the Shechinah will be restored to us as in former days.  
   אשיב נקם לצרי, “I shall return vengeance upon My enemies.” In other words, I will retaliate against them for what they have done to Israel. G’d calls the adversaries of Israel: “My enemies,” whereas earlier, in verse 27, Moses called them פן ינכרו צרימו, “lest its tormentors would misinterpret.” The suffix “its” in that verse referred to Israel. The message of our verse is that anyone who is the tormentor of Israel thereby makes himself into an enemy of the Lord. You will find a similar construction during the song Moses composed after crossing the Sea of Reeds, where in Exodus 15,7 he speaks of G’d as “You will destroy those who rise against You, קמיך,” where we would have expected Moses to say קמי, “the ones who rose against me.” Moses wanted to make the point, however, that anyone attacking the Jewish people is at one and the same time attacking the G’d of the Jews. This concept is reflected in Psalms 83,3-4 where David says: “for Your enemies rage, Your foes assert themselves. The plot craftily against Your people, take counsel against Your hidden ones.” David equates the people who attack Israel with those who rage against the Lord. He refers to the Jewish people as צפונך, “the ones hidden by You,” seeing that the Lord hides them, protects them. Actually, the meaning of the word here is close to the meaning of והייתם לי סגולה, “You will be for Me something treasured.” One has a tendency of hiding one’s treasures. One does not entrust its care to agents, to subordinates.
    
    32,43. הרנינו גוים עמו, “O nations, sing the praises of His people!” When the Jewish people are loyal to their traditions, to the Torah, then the nations of the world sing their praises. They admire the fact that even when exiled, the Jewish people hold fast to their beliefs and do not try to assimilate themselves (compare Rashi). Alternatively, the word הרנינו is derived from רנה in the sense of “proclamation,” i.e. the nations everywhere will proclaim about this people that the Lord has avenged their blood. The word would be used here in the same manner as in Kings I 22,36  ויעבור הרנה, “a shout went through (the camp).”
   כי דם עבדיו יקום, “for He will avenge the blood of His people.” Moses prophesied in these verses about the troubles which would befall the Jewish people during our exile and all the bloodshed that the people would become  victims of at the hands of their host nations. They would lose their money through violence, both physical and through discriminatory legislation. These events have been specifically forecast by Ovadiah 10 as being perpetrated by Yaakov’s brother Esau (the Edomites) when he wrote: “for the outrage (violence perpetrated) to your brother Yaakov, disgrace shall engulf you and you shall perish forever.” In anticipation of this retribution, Moses says “He will avenge the blood of His people.”
   וכפר אדמתו עמו, “and He will appease His land and His people.” According to both Onkelos, Ibn Ezra, and Rashi, the words אדמתו עמו are to be understood as אדמתו ועמו, “His land and His people.”
    The Midrash (Sifri on our verse) understands the words as if the Torah had written וכפר אדמתו על עמו, “its land will be atonement for its people.” According to Ketuvot 111 the meaning is that if a Jew is buried in the land of Israel, his sins will be transferred to the soil, i.e. the land of Israel will act as a Mikveh, a ritual bath, cleansing him from his impurities. The wording there is “that being buried in the land of Israel is equivalent to being buried beneath the Holy Altar.” This is an extension of the verse “You shall build an altar of earth for me” (Exodus 20,24). This is also understood to be the meaning of the sages’ comment that the reason G’d created Adam out of earth was that the place which would serve as the means of his atonement was his origin. [by making him out of earth, G’d facilitated his eventual atonement when he would return to earth. Ed.] This is the advantage of ארץ ישראל, that it is the palace of the King (G’d) and therefore is also known as ארץ ה', (Joshua 22,19). It is also known as נחלת ה', “the Lord’s heritage.” Anything outside the boundaries of the land of Israel is always referred to as something “outside, external.” The Scriptures refer to such countries as חוצות, (compare Proverbs 8,26 where the word ארץ and חוצות appear side by side to make this distinction and is even called אהלי רשע “tents of the wicked,” in Psalms 84,11). 
    In the parlance of our sages in Gittin 8, any land outside the land of Israel is referred to as ארץ העמים. To make the distinction crystal clear, the sages decreed ritual impurity on any produce imported from these countries and even its airspace was considered as ritually impure, so that by having traversed it one needs to purify oneself. The only exception to this ruling was Syria because it adjoins the land of Israel. I have already mentioned this in connection with 31,16 אלוהי נכר הארץ.
   וכפר אדמתו עמו; this means that the Jewish people will purify their land (Ibn Ezra). The word וכפר therefore has to be understood in the sense of וטהר, “and it purifies.” The word also appears in that sense in Ezekiel 39,16 וחטאת אותו וכפרתהו. Ezekiel speaks specifically of וטהרו הארץ, “they (the Israelites) will cleanse the earth” ‎(of these bodies of the slain pagans who were killed during the final confrontation with Gog and Magog preceding the messianic age).
   ואין אלוהים עמדי, “and there is no other deity with Me.” (verse 39).  G’d says this versus the pagans who had taunted the Israelites to ask their deities to help them. Seeing the nations had spoken of deities in the plural, G’d had to emphasise the uniqueness of His being in the singular, having no assistants or junior partners. When G’d said: “I kill and I revive,” He specifically referred to the Jews whom He had killed, (allowed to be killed) pointing out that He would revive them. [since that is so, even their “death” was not a regular death. Ed.] Our sages in Sanhedrin 91 claim that here we have incontrovertible proof from the Torah that there will be a resurrection. They said further that just as when the Torah speaks about G’d being a Healer, this is demonstrated by someone who had first been afflicted with disease or injury, so describing Himself as someone who brings to life also implies that the person brought to life had first died.
    This is made plain in Samuel I, 2,6 where Chanah speaks about G’d being ממית ומחיה, מוריד שאול ויעל, “killing and reviving,”’ consigning to the grave (nether regions), and to raise up again.
    The reason that the sages felt called upon to spell out that the Torah speaks about one and the same person being killed and revived, is that from the words מחצתי ואני ארפא, “I have struck with injury and I will heal,” (32,38) the impression could have been formed that G’d speaks about two different individuals; the sages wanted to make clear that this is not the case. Seeing that G’d employs the past tense in that verse, it is clear that He speaks about the same person He had first struck down being healed again. 
    There are many people who are wondering why such an important concept as that of the resurrection has not been spelled out in the written Torah in detail. Seeing that the Torah has spelled out in detail many less important concepts, sometimes repeating them several times, the failure to spell out the concept of resurrection of the dead is considered especially puzzling. The fact is that Torah addresses first and foremost terrestrial matters of concern to us. When you recall the Torah’s report of the creation you will note that the description of the creation of light on the first day was condensed to a minimum, seeing that this light was not significant in terrestrial terms. When the Torah returns to that subject on the fourth day of creation, it goes into greater detail seeing that this light, the sun’s and the moon’s, is of concern to our life on earth. Similarly, even on the third day, the Torah explained details about the coming into existence of vegetation as it grows in areas of our human habitat. David follows a similar pattern when he describes the original light as merely עוטה אור כשלמה, “something G’d draped over His universe, much like a mantle” (Psalms 104,2). He also gives short shrift to the מים העליונים, “the waters in the celestial regions,” contenting himself with writing המקרה מים עליותיו, “Who sets the rafters of His lofts in the waters,” (Psalms 104,3) whereas he becomes far more specific when discussing the waters in our globe. Compare  verse 6 in the same psalm: “You made the deep cover it as a garment, the waters stood above the mountains, They fled Your blast; You set bounds they must not pass so that they never again cover the earth.” The עליות which David speaks of are the  universes we call outer space, whereas the psalmist elaborates on waters which exist in our terrestrial universe. Hence, in verse 6 of that same psalm, David was so much more specific.
     There are numeous more verses of that nature. All the targets described by Moses in the Torah are primarily of interest to our physical existence on earth. These targets man can attest to, i.e. see if G’d’s promises were fulfilled provided he (the people) acted in accordance with the Torah’s laws, or if the nation fell victim to the dire threats if they did not. When people realise that these targets have been met and realised, they will be more likely to accept on faith promises which by their very nature cannot be proven while they are one earth. For the reasons mentioned, the Torah understandably was very brief in its allusions to matters whose fulfillment lies beyond our present life on earth. The life of disembodied souls in the celestial regions while awaiting the resurrection, has similarly been alluded to only in the vaguest manner. The average reader may not even notice these allusions whereas the elite may notice their significance. The truth is that the written Torah was given to and for the multitude who do not concern themselves overly with abstract matters, matters of interest primarily to the intellect rather than to the senses.
    If you will take an analytical look at the words, or rather the letters in the words (verse 39) סתרה ראו עתה כי, you will find that the respective final letters in these four words spelled backwards spell out the tetragram. We have stated repeatedly that whenever this name appears backwards, it is an allusion to the attribute of Justice also contained in that name. In this instance, it is a hint of the retribution in store for the Gentile nations at the time of the redemption. Immediately after this allusion (verse 41), Moses refers directly to ותאחז במשפט ידי אשיב נקם לצרי , “I shall sharpen My flashing sword and My hand grasps judgment. I shall wreak vengeance upon My enemies.”
    You will find a total of 18 sequences in the written Torah in which the tetragram has been spelled either forward or backward either in the last letters of the words or the first letters of the words of a sequence of four words, such as the ones we showed you in verse 39. Seeing that our verse (39) is the last of these 18 examples, I have used the opportunity to list all of them and to elaborate a little about them.
    The following is the sequence in which these 18 groups of four words each appear in the Torah; I am listing first four examples in which the first letters of the respective words read forward spell the tetragram 1) (Genesis 1,31) יום הששי ויכולו השמים. 2) (Genesis 38,24-25) יהודה הוציאוה ותשרף היא. 3) )Exodus 4,14) ידבר הוא וגם המה. 4) (Deut. 11,2) ידו החזקה וזרועו הנטויה. These are the four examples in which the letters of the tetragram appear in the proper sequence, i.e. right to left and as the first letters in each of the words. The next 4 examples refer to the last letters of the four words respectively, but they too are read from right to left. They are: 5) Genesis 19,13) .פנ'י ה-' וישלחה-ו ה-'. 6) (Ex. 3,13) ל-י מ-ה שמ-ו מ-ה. 7) (Deut. 24,8) נק-י יהי-ה לבית-ו שנ-ה. 8* מ-י יעל-ה לנ-ו השמימ-ה, (Deut. 30,12). The next 10 examples all feature the sequence of the letters of the tetragram from left to right, i.e. backward. (sometimes these letters are at the beginning of the words in question, sometimes at the end, such as in our example in the verse above). In all these examples the allusion is to the attribute of Justice. You can figure these out for yourselves by looking at: 9) Genesis 11,9 ו-משם ה-פיצם י'-ה;ה-ארץ it is clear from the context that the attribute of Justice had been poised to strike at all these people at that time. The same is true of 10) (Genesis 44, 3-4) ה-מה ו-חמוריהם ה-ם י-צאו. The Torah already alludes to the impending crisis when the goblet will be found in Binyamin’s sack.  [I am only pointing to the verses now without elaborating. Ed.] Exodus 4,15; Exodus 4,14; Exodus 4,3; Exodus 16,7; Exodus 26, 21-22; Numbers 1,51 (compare commentary  by author). Numbers 5,18 (compare commentary by author). Numbers 14,24-25 (compare commentary by author). Numbers 14,43. Finally, there is our verse here completing the ten occasions when he Torah provides allusions that the attribute of Justice, as an appendix of the tetragram, was invoked by G’d. By way of contrast, the eight examples we quoted first, in which the respective letters of the tetragram appear in their usual order, i.e. from right to left, are indications that the subject matter is the attribute of Mercy. Seeing that between them we have a total of 18 such 4-word sequences, the easy way to remember this is by reference to the short line חי ה'.
    32,44. הוא והושע בן נון, “he (Calev) and Joshua son of Nun.” At this point the Torah refers to Joshua by his original name Hoshea; we know that Moses had changed his name from Hoshea to Joshua before he went out on the mission with the spies (Numbers 13,16). The moral lesson we learn from this is that although Moses had changed Joshua’s name, i.e. added a letter to it to show his eminence, and although he had already been appointed as Moses’ successor, this promotion did not go to his head, did not make him arrogant, but he was content to function as השע בן נון. 
    32,46. שימו לבבכם לכל הדברים אשר אנכי מעיד בכם היום, “apply your hearts to all the words that I testify against you this day;” this is not part of the testimony but is simply a form of warning, just as was Exodus 19,21 when G’d told Moses: רד העד בעם, “descend and warn the people.” We have a similar occurrence of the verb העד as “warning” in Exodus 19,23 כי אתה העדות בנו, “for You have warned us.” In this verse Moses warns the people that everyone should pay careful attention to the words of the Torah; this is why he speaks of לבבכם instead of לבכם. He urges people to serve the Lord with both parts of our hearts, the good urge as well as the evil urge, יצר הרע. This is why the sages said in Kidushin 30, quoting G’d: “I did create an evil urge, but I also created the Torah as its antidote.”
    
    32,47. כי לא דבר רק הוא מכם, “for it is not an empty thing for you;” according to the plain meaning of the text this means that G’d did not command the laws of the Torah as a wasteful exercise; It is also possible to understand these words to mean as if they belonged together with the words כי הוא חייכם, “for it is a lifeline for you;” Moses means that even the commandments which we, in our ignorance, consider as wasteful, irrelevant, are a lifeline for us not only in this life but also as a conduit to the world to come.
    A Midrashic approach: the placing of the word מכם at the end of this phrase suggests that if we find the words of Torah, empty, devoid of meaning and content, then this is due to מכם, “your emptiness;” it is not that the words of Torah are “empty.” You have simply not attained the intellectual level at which you can appreciate the words of the Torah.
    
    32,49. אל הר העברים הזה הר נבו, “to this mount of Avarim, known as Har Nevo.” The reason this mountain was known as הר העברים was because it was open in two directions, both in the direction of Kadesh and the direction of Hor Hahar (i.e. in the direction of where both the brothers Moses and Aaron were buried.) I explained this already in connection with Numbers 20,28.
   אשר על פני יריחו, “which is facing Jericho.” We find the word ירחו spelled with the vowel tzeyre in the Torah without the letter י,  whereas in the Book of Joshua  it is spelled with the letter י as יריחו. Perhaps the reason for this discrepancy is that the word ירחו when spelled with the vowel tzeyre and without the letter י is derived from ירח, moon, suggesting that Moses’ level of prophecy was of a higher calibre than that of Joshua who had access only to the emanation מלכות (the tenth, i.e. lowest emanation, hence the letter י) Moses, on the other hand, had access to the emanations כבוד and תפארת, [the word ירח is a כנוי for the Shechinah, according to the Remak. [Rabbi Moshe Cordovero. The combined lower 6 emanations are known as ירחים . Ed.] Whenever the town of Jericho is mentioned in connection with other prophets (in the Books of Prophets) it is always spelled the same as in the Book of Joshua. The author speculates on the word ריח, “odor, fragrance” and the additional letter ו, meaning that Joshua’s prophetic inspiration was “drawn” from the letter י representing the lowest (10th) emanation which itself derives its inspiration from the higher emanations, i.e. the ones symbolised by the letter ו.
    
    32,50. ומות בהר, “and die on the mountain.” According to Ibn Ezra, the word ומות is an instruction to Moses to prepare himself for death by burying himself.
    It is also possible to explain the word as meaning that G’d is saying that “I decree that you will die forthwith,” seeing control over death is not given to mortals. This is the reason that in Hebrew you do not have a form of the imperative which would describe an instruction to someone to die. The Hebrew tongue (לשון הקודש) does not provide for imperatives concerning matters which man is incapable of carrying out immediately. Examples of this are both dying and sleeping. You cannot order a person to immediately go to sleep, seeing it is something not under his control. Similarly, you cannot order him to die forthwith, as this too is not under his control. Our verse is an exception, seeing that G’d is speaking, and He can decree immediate death.
    
    32,51. על אשר מעלתם בי....על אשר לא קדשתם אותי, “because you have trespassed against Me....seeing that you did not sanctify Me.” Moses’ sin was that at the rock, concerning which the Torah (G’d) had already said in Numbers 20,24: “because you rebelled against My command.” In this instance, G’d speaks of Moses’ failure to sanctify Him. The word אותי here is derived from אות, “miracle.” This is the reason it has been spelled with the letter ו. [otherwise, seeing it would be derived from את plus a pronoun-ending, the letter ו would not be justified. Ed.] 
    
    32,52. כי מנגד תראה את הארץ, “for you shall see the land from a distance.” G’d did not describe the land as “the land of Canaan,” as He had done earlier in verse 49. The reason is that the expression את הארץ includes both the land of Israel and the regions beyond death to which Moses would presently be transferred. Both the terrestrial Jerusalem and the celestial Jerusalem are included in the words את הארץ. Not only this, but the very word תראה includes both seeing with the physical eye and seeing with the mental eye. G’d enabled Moses to see the whole land with his mental eye, i.e. to appreciate fully what he saw with his physical eyes. The word כנגד may mean that Moses would see the land he saw was “in contrast to” the land of Canaan. This is the reason G’d had to elaborate once more by saying: “which I will give to the Children of Israel.” It was not enough for G’d to say: “but you shall not enter there.” G’d wanted to make plain that the only land Moses would not enter was the terrestrial ארץ ישראל; he would certainly enter the ארץ החיים.
    In Parshat Pinchas there is also mention of two distinct visions; when G’d says in Numbers 27,12: “and see the land which I will give to the Children of Israel.” In verse 13, immediately afterwards, G’d adds: “you will see it and be gathered in to your people.” The second vision refers to the celestial counterpart of the land of Israel. I explained all this in that context. This land is one allocated to the righteous. It is the land to which David aspired when he said (Psalms 116,9) אתהלך לפני ה' בארצות החיים, “let me walk in the presence of the Lord in the lands of THE life.” King Chizkiyah also referred to this land when he said in Isaiah 38,11: “I had said that I would not see G’d, G’d in the land of the living.” When we say in our Amidah prayer on New Year’s Day and on Yom Kippur זכרנו לחיים, “remember us for life,” as well as “inscribe us for life,” the reference is to the life here on earth concerning where we acquire the entitlement to a life of the soul of which David had said אתהלך לפני ה' בארצות החיים. David meant that he wanted to prove his worth by his conduct on terrestrial earth so as to qualify for the ארץ החיים, the land of “the Life” i.e. the celestial regions. [the author bases this on the plural of ארצות החיים, instead of ארץ החיים. Ed.] This is the life which all of Israel is invited to partake in as our sages said in Sanhedrin 90: “all of the people of Israel are entitled to a basic share in the world to come, seeing that Isaiah 60,21 prophesied: ‘and Your people who are all righteous shall inherit eternal life, i.e. ארץ.’” The same prophet said in Isaiah 57,13: “but those who trust in Me shall inherit the land and possess My sacred mount.”
    
    
   וזאת  הברכה
    
    
   תנו לה מפרי ידיה ויהללוה בשערים מעשיה, “Acknowledge her for the fruit of her hands, and let her accomplishments praise her in her gates” (Proverbs 31,31). Solomon commenced the concluding chapter of Proverbs with the words אשת חיל מי ימצא, “who can find a woman of valour?” According to the plain meaning of the text he spoke about an intelligent woman, eager and competent to discharge the duties of her household, working hard both by day and by night; this is the meaning of Proverbs 31,18: “even when her affairs thrive her lamp does not go out at night.” This woman is known far and wide for the good she does for the poor, sustaining them with the work of her own hands. This is the meaning of 31,20: “she extends her hand to the poor, and reaches out her hand to the needy.” This whole chapter teaches us both moral/ethical lessons as well as lessons in good manners. A man is to look for this kind of a woman when he wants to get married as she is the mainstay of his home to be. Together with her he can look forward to building his family. Solomon wanted to enumerate all the virtues of such a woman in alphabetical order in order to demonstrate that a woman who possesses all these virtues also symbolises the entire Torah. Her presence is her husband’s best preparation to achieve success in his Torah study and mitzvah performance, much as the body is the preparation for the soul to attain its objectives. 
    This is what the sages alluded to  when they said (concerning a man finding a woman) “if he has merit, she will prove an invaluable helpmate” (Yevamot 63). Addressing the same subject, Solomon said: (Proverbs 18,22) “He who found a wife has found a good thing; he will obtain favour from the Lord,” seeing the Torah had said it is not good for man to remain solitary (Genesis 2,18) Solomon, when discussing marriage, said that a woman does not deserve to be praised on account of her physical beauty, graceful mannerism. Solomon said (Proverbs 31,30) “grace is deceptive, beauty is vain, a G’d-fearing woman is the woman who is truly praiseworthy.” This is also why he concludes by saying: “acknowledge her for the fruit of her hands and let her accomplishments praise her in the gates.” It is appropriate that she be praised for what she does, not for the attributes she was endowed with at birth [something for which one should praise the Lord, not her. Ed.] We find that Abigail was the prototype for such a woman whose good virtues employed at the right time and in the right place, saved her husband and her entire household from being killed by David and his men. David himself acknowledged this when he said to her (Samuel I 25,33): ”blessed be your prudence, and blessed be you yourself for restraining me from seeking redress in blood by my own hands.“
    A Midrashic approach: the words: תנו לה מפרי ידיה, “acknowledge her for the fruit of her hands,” refer to the opening words of the chapter “who can find a woman of valour?” The Midrash understands the whole chapter as a parable describing Torah and wisdom, something very elusive, almost impossible to attain fully. Solomon proceeds to enumerate the advantages of Torah and wisdom in order to encourage people to immerse themselves in both Torah and wisdom. He commences by saying that בטח בה לב בעלה, “the heart of someone who has mastered this discipline has absolute confidence in it.” This is why he adds ושלל לא יחסר, “such a person will never be short of ‘loot.’” It is a well known fact that people who constantly engage in the pursuit of wisdom do not experience the lack of anything. 
    The poor and destitute whom Solomon refers to in verse 20 are the students, who have thus far only accumulated a minimum of wisdom, not having expended sufficient effort yet to acquire it in larger doses; this is why Solomon says to people at large: “give her (wisdom) from the fruit of her hands.” Solomon encourages the people at large to treat wisdom with respect seeing it produces such good fruit, i.e. honour and glory for those who have acquired it. The fruit which are the result of the acquisition of wisdom are the good deeds man performs, as a result of which he qualifies for eternal life in the celestial spheres. Concerning this, Solomon himself wrote in Proverbs 11,30: “the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life.” He referred to the Torah being the entrance card to the tree of life, i.e. eternal life. The Torah already stated concerning the tree of life that if Adam were to eat from it “he would live forever” (Genesis 3,22).
    A kabbalistic approach: when Solomon concludes the Book with the words תנו לה מפרי ידיה, “let her enjoy the fruit of her hands,” he refers to the virtue he had commenced with, i.e. “who can find a woman of valour?” Solomon wanted to seal his Book with the virtue which is the “seal” of the בנין, the structure comprised by the various emanations, its seal being the emanation חכמה [the simile with which he described the woman of valour. Ed.]. Seeing that the Jewish people had heard the Torah out of the fire and the prophet Chabakuk 3,10 referred to this experience saying נתן תהום קולו, “the deep gave forth loud roars” [see the whole verse, Ed.], Solomon arranged the praises of the Torah/wisdom in the order of the 22 letters of the aleph bet. The meaning of the concluding verse: “give to her of the fruit of her hands,” is a call to bestow a blessing on the emanation חכמה, also known as Torah. The whole idea is similar to what the sages said in Avot 3,7 תן לו משלו שאתה ושלך שלו, “give to Him part of what is His, for you yourself and all that is yours are really His.” The words ויהללוה בשערים מעשיה, “and let her accomplishments praise her in the gates,” are a reference to what the blessing consists of. David also used the words ברכה and הלול, in the same verse (Psalms 104,35) when he said ברכי נפשי את ה' הללוי-ה, “let my soul bless the Lord, Hallelujah.” Even though every human being is himself the beneficiary of G’d’s blessing, G’d nonetheless desires blessing uttered by human beings. He specifically commanded this when He said (Deut. 8,10) “you shall bless the Lord your G’d.” Isaiah tells us that “for whoever blesses himself in the land shall bless himself by the true (אמן) G’d.” (Isaiah 65,16) You should pay heed to the saying of the sages (Sotah 38) “he (the priest) who utters a blessing will in turn be blessed.” The reason is that by blessing the people in the name of the Lord, he (the priest) has included Everybody i.e. G’d, in his blessing. It is well known that the whole idea of bestowing a blessing is to contribute to the continued existence of the universe. This is why G’d bestowed blessings immediately after He had created certain phenomena, especially living creatures which are very fragile as compared to inert phenomena. [this is why we find already in Genesis 1,20 when the first living creatures were produced by the waters, that G’d felt compelled to bestow a blessing on them.  Perhaps the absence of such a blessing for the vegetation on the third day is the reason we have non-fruit-bearing trees. Ed.] The reason that the whole Torah commences with the letter ב instead of the letter א for instance, is that it wanted to begin with an allusion to blessing. G’d blessed Adam, i.e. the human species (Genesis 1,28); He blessed Noach and his children (Genesis 9,1, the remnants of the human species). Only with the advent of Avraham (described by our author as ראש האמונה, “the father-figure of all true faith”) did G’d transfer the ability to bless to him and his descendants as we know from Genesis 12,2. Instead of telling Avraham that he would be blessed, ברוך, He told him that he himself would originate blessings, i.e. והיה ברכה, “become (a source of) blessing.” Ever since, the righteous have become the “sources” of blessings (or distributors directing blessings). This was how Yitzchok viewed himself when he said: “let me bless you in the presence of the Lord before my death.” He meant that if he did not transfer the power to bless given to him, it would die with him as he was conscious of the responsibility entailed by this power to bestow blessing (compare Genesis 27,7).
    At this point, Moses makes use of this power, just as had Yaakov before his death (Genesis 49,28). The remarkable thing (from a kabbalistic point of view) is the use as an introduction of the word זאת on both occasions. This is also why the sages said that Moses continued where Yaakov had left off (Devarim Rabbah 11,1, Yaakov concluded withוזאת  and  Moses began with וזאת.)
    
    33,1. וזאת הברכה אשר ברך משה איש האלו-הים את בני ישראל לפני מותו, “And this is the blessing with which Moses blessed the Children of Israel before his death.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses arranged, prepared, this entire blessing and bestowed it on the respective tribes on the day of his death, seeing it is customary for the righteous to bestow such blessings on the day they die.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Vezot Haberachah 1: the letter ו at the beginning of the word וזאת means that Moses added something over and above the blessing which had been bestowed on the people by Bileam. Bileam should really have bestowed seven blessings on the people corresponding to each of the seven altars he had built at the time. However, if you will check you will find that Bileam only uttered three blessing instead of seven (We know this from Balak who remonstrated with him saying: “here you have blessed them three times (Numbers 24,10). In view of this, G’d said to him: “you wicked and niggardly person; seeing that you are too jealous to bestow the proper number of blessings on these people, I will appoint Moses, who is more generous than you to complete the blessings these people are entitled to. This is the meaning of Proverbs 22,9: “the generous one is blessed (יבורך); do not read the word as יבורך but as יברך, “he will bestow blessing.” The person whom Solomon refers to in this verse is none other than Moses. He was anxious to bless Israel, and he completed the four blessings Bileam had withheld from the people. The first one of those four is found in Exodus 39,43: “Moses saw the entire work, and behold!-they had done it all as Hashem had commanded, so had they done; and Moses blessed them.” The second occasion Moses blessed the people is in Leviticus 9,23: ”Moses and Aaron came to the Tent of Meeting; they came out and blessed the people and the attribute of כבוד appeared to the entire nation.” The third time Moses blessed the people was in Deut. 1,11: “May Hashem, the G’d of your fathers continue to increase you one thousand-fold and bless you as He has said to you.” The fourth occasion when Moses blessed the people begins in our portion with the words: “and this is the blessing, etc.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words: “and this is the blessing,” are a reference to the תרומה, the gift, the Torah, and the covenant, all of which have been introduced with the word זאת on different occasions. (compare Exodus 25,3; Deuteronomy 33,1; Isaiah 59,21). This is why Moses commenced his blessings at the point where our patriarch Yaakov had left off. I already elaborated on this in connection with Genesis 49,28.
   איש האלו-הים, “a man of G‘d.” According to the plain meaning of the text a man who was great as he was endowed with the power of prophecy by G’d. G’d had appeared to him [in his waking hours, already on the first occasion He communicated with Moses at the burning bush with His attribute of the tetragram Exodus 3,2-4,17 where he was told that he would be an אלו-הים to Pharaoh. Ed.].
    A Midrashic approach based on Midrash Tehillim 90,1: the word means: “a judge.” This is based on Deut. 33,21 צדקת ה' עשה ומשפטיו עם ישראל, “he carried out the righteousness of Hashem and His justice with Israel.” [I do not understand how this applies to Moses, seeing it is said of the tribe of Gad. Ed.] Moses’ personality reflected the sages’ definition of יקוב הדין את ההר, “let the attribute of Justice bore a hole in the mountain.” [he strove for absolute perfection. Ed.] Rabbi Yehudah, son of Seymon said: “why was Moses described as איש האלו-הים? When a man (husband) is confronted by certain vows made by his wife he has the option of annulling them or letting them remain valid. This is what the Torah says in Numbers 30,14: אישה יקימנה ואישה יפרנה, “her husband may either confirm it or her husband may cancel it.” Similarly, Moses was in a position in his dealings with G’d to say to Him קומה ה', “let the Lord arise,” or שובה ה', let the Lord desist.” (compare Numbers 10,35). Thus far that Midrash. You need to analyse what the author of this Midrash had in mind. In view of the fact that the prophetic powers of Moses were emanated from the force of the power of Mercy, which is elsewhere described as an active force, an instigator, self-propelled, the Torah compared Moses to the role of the activist, the initiator, whereas the attribute of Justice is described as both initiating and responding as the situation may require. Moses was also compared to that attribute, seeing that the glue which sticks to something is described by the material it sticks to. This is why the Torah here calls him איש האלוהים. [instead of איש ה'. The Torah differentiates between Moses the man, and Moses’ prophecy. The former had an affinity to the attribute of Justice, the latter was an outgrowth of the attribute of Mercy. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: the reason he is called איש האלו-הים is because it is the Torah’s nature to associate the word איש, with the attribute אלו-הים. You will not encounter the word איש ה' anywhere in the Torah. On the other hand, the word עבד is frequently associated with the attribute of Mercy, i.e. עבד ה'. Moses himself (as well as Joshua) is described as עבד ה' in Joshua 1,1 and numerous other verses..
   לפני מותו, “before his death.” the Torah means: “close to the time when he died.” According to Devarim Rabbah 11,5 the words mean that when an angel came to take away his soul, Moses stopped him and got up and first blessed the people. The words then are to be understood as “before the angel who had come to take his soul could carry out his mission.”
    
    33,2. ה' מסיני בא, “The Lord had come from Sinai.” The Torah really should have written בסיני, “at Sinai,” instead of “from Sinai.” Similarly, instead of writing משעיר, we would have expected the Torah to write בשעיר, “at Se-ir,” and בהר פארן, instead of מהר פארן. Most of the commentators simply say that the letter מ here is taking the place of the letter ב. I do not think it is that simple. Rather, I think that if the Torah had written בסיני, this would have sounded as if a certain place had been assigned to G’d. Seeing that G’d is known as the מקומו של העולם, “assigning space to the universe,” and not vice versa, the wrong impression about G’d’s omnipresence would have been conveyed. (compare Bereshit Rabbah 68,10) In Psalms 68,18 David speaks of אד-ני בם סיני בקודש, “the Lord is among them as in Sinai in holiness.” David was careful to avoid saying קודש בסיני, which would have meant “holy at Sinai.” He reversed the wording to avoid giving the impression that it is possible to assign a certain place (only) to G’d. This is why here Moses had to write מסיני בא. This means that the beginning of the revelation the attribute of כבוד originated at Mount Sinai. He goes on to describe how this revelation expanded to other areas and included other people’s consciousness.  Originally, it had emanated its rays towards Israel from afar i.e. from Se-ir. At that time Israel had been a long way from Sinai. It had gradually been perceived as closer, i.e. near Mount Paran. This was the area from which Moses had sent the spies (Numbers 13,3). [in terms of space, not time, Ed.] From Mount Paran this attribute of כבוד moved to Sinai; from there it was finally revealed to the Jewish people. The reason Moses did not describe all these steps in chronological order was that he wanted to demonstrate that the purpose of all these moves by the attribute of כבוד was the revelation at Mount Sinai to the Jewish people.
    Actually, the prophetess Devorah explained all this in Judges 5,4-5 when she said in her song of thanksgiving: “O Lord, when You came forth from Se-ir, advanced from the country of Edom; the earth trembled....before the Lord, Him of Sinai, before the Lord, G’d of Israel.” It is noteworthy that in connection with the distant Se-ir Moses used the term זרח, “shone,” i.e. the term used for the sun’s rays when it just rose over the horizon, whereas in connection with Paran Moses used the verb הופיע, which denotes that its visibility was far more pronounced. As the attribute of כבוד came ever closer to Sinai, its rays and brilliance intensified. By the time Moses speaks of the attribute of כבוד getting to Sinai, he uses the expression בא, i.e. it had arrived at its destination. This was the mountain which G’d had selected for this attribute to come to rest on. (compare Psalms 68,17.) Thence, it became visible for the eyes of all the Jewish people.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Vezot Haberachah 4: the words “He shone forth from Se-ir,” mean that G’d first offered the Torah to the descendants of Esau who refused it. He then offered it to the various other descendants of Avraham, all of whom declined. Finally, He offered it to the Israelites who accepted. The fact that only Esau and Ishmael are singled out for mention simply means that even they who were Avraham’s descendants did not want the Torah. Other nations, not genetically related to Avraham, most certainly did not show any interest in it either. Our sages in Avodah Zarah 2 state specifically that G’d offered the Torah to all the nations and peoples of all tongues but that they all declined.
   מימינו אש דת למו, “from His right, fire turned into law became theirs.” We must imagine the word היה as following the word מימינו. While G’d was displaying celestial fire, He made the Israelites hear the words of the Ten Commandments. The reference “from His right,” does not refer to the angels but to G’d’s essence. It is as if the Torah had spoken about אש ודת, “fire and (religious) law.”
    A kabbalistic approach: G’d used His right side (attribute) to make the people hear the words of the Ten Commandments (as if) emanating from the fire (compare Deut. 5,19). This describes the spiritual niveau of the Jewish people at that time. However, Moses, whose spiritual niveau was higher, heard the voice of G’d from His right  without the need for fire to form a screen. Perhaps the two words אשדת are spelled as one word, as an allusion to what happened at the time. This is the Torah’s way of describing the affinity of the law to the fiery experience when it was revealed. The Torah already described in  Deut, 4,15: “the day on which the Lord your G’d spoke to you out of the fire.” I have referred to all this already on Exodus 20,1. Jeremiah 6,29 uses the fusion of two words into one to describe the affinity of one to the other when he said נחר מפוח מאשתם עופרת, “the bellows puff, the lead is consumed by the fire.” According to our tradition the word מאשתם is written as a single word.
    
    33,3. אף חבב עמים, “Also (You) love the peoples (tribes of the Israelites).” Apart from having given to the Jewish people His law out of the fire, G’d displayed additional signs of His love for this nation, such as calling them סגולה, “precious.” (Exodus 19,5). The Aramaic translation of סגולה is חביבין, “beloved” i.e. the word Moses uses here. G’d meant that He was fonder of the Israelites than of all the other nations. On the other hand, it is possible that Moses meant that G’d’s fondness of His people was manifest in His applying the title “nation” to each of its tribes. (compare Rashi). He bases this on Deut. 33,19 עמים הר יקראו, “the tribes will assemble at the Mount.” 
    It is also possible to interpret  that what Moses meant was that even at a time when the Torah speaks of the people derogatively, calling them simply: העם, this does not mean that G’d is no longer fond of them. We have several examples of the term העם, being used in an unflattering manner; Numbers 25,1, ויחל העם, “the people debased itself;” or Numbers 21,5: וידבר העם באלו-קים, “the people spoke out against G’d.” Or, Exodus 32,1 ויקהל העם, “the people assembled” (in preparation of demanding a new leader). In each of these instances the word העם points at their being at a moral/spiritual low. Even if Moses, perhaps, did not relate to the people with fondness at such times, G’d did not stop being fond of them. 
    Still another way of understanding the words אף חובב עמים is that the word אף here means “anger” as it does on numerous occasions. The message is that even when G’d has reason to be angry at the people, He still also relates to them with fondness. The reason that this is so is that they are His people, עמים שלו.
   כל קדושיו בידך, “all its holy ones were in Your hand.” A reference to the Levites (Ibn Ezra). They took their lives into their hands, i.e. they placed their lives in Your hands, when they executed the Israelites who had actively worshipped the golden calf. 
   והם תכו ברגלך, ”and they planted themselves at Your feet.” They always feel drawn to the site of the Holy Ark which symbolises Your Presence, which they perceive as הדום רגלך, “the footstool for Your feet.” The word תכו is the same as הכו, the letter ת being a substitute for the letter ה. This letter is used interchangeably in a similar manner in Kohelet 8,,12 where the words עושה רע מאת should normally have been עושה רע מאה, “doing evil one hundred times.” Or in Psalms 132,4 we find the words אם אתן שנת לעיני “if I will allow my eyes to sleep,” when we would have expected the psalmist to write אם אתן שנה לעיני. [The author quotes more such examples. Ed.] We sometimes find the ת replacing the letter ה, whereas on other occasions the letter ה replaces the letter ת. In the phrase (verse 11) commencing with ישימו קטורה, “they shall prepare incense,” etc., the letter ה, I believe, is also a substitute for the letter ת in the word קטורת, incense. I believe this is a rule in grammar, seeing that the letter ה normally symbolises the feminine gender, such as in אמרה, שמרה, קראה,, as well as in all the other verbs; the letter ת seeing that it is the final and last letter in the aleph bet, also symbolises something feminine, passive. This is the reason it was made the last letter. The letter ה at the end of the third person of the verb is also reminiscent of the last letter of the tetragram. The letter ת is used in many forms of the verb in the third person feminine future. In other words, the function of the letter ת and the letter ה frequently overlap, so that we need not be surprised to see them used as alternate spelling for each other.
   ישא מדברותיך, “it bears (willingly) Your pronouncements.” This is a reference to the Levites carrying the Holy Ark containing G’d’s pronouncements, the Tablets with the Ten Commandments. (Ibn Ezra). Alternatively, [especially because of the switch to the singular, i.e. the individual, Ed.] each one of them gladly acts as the bearer of G’d’s instructions teaching them to his fellow Israelites. This would be similar to verse 10 where Moses praises the Levites for being the teachers of Torah.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word תכו in תכו לרגלך, is derived from  הכה, to hit, to strike. They are as if struck at the footstool of G’d, carrying the Ark and the Tablets inside them. According to the Midrash the carrying with one’s body of spiritually heavy loads, such as the Levites’ carrying the Holy Ark containing the Ten commandments and the Torah scroll, is debilitating and took its toll of the people doing this. This is why their number of adult males comprised fewer than half of that of the smallest other tribe. (Bamidbar Rabbah 5,1) [perhaps this is why they had to retire from active duty at the age of 50. Ed.] The words ישא מדברותיך is an allusion to the fact that each individual Levite was considered by G’d as the instrument of “carrying (like a flag)” the words of the Lord. The people, so to speak, heard the words of the Torah from the mouths of the Levites as if they had emerged from the Holy Ark. [similar to the concept of מתוך האש, which we discussed earlier. Ed.]
    
    33,4. תורה צוה לנו משה, “Moses commanded us the Torah;” according to the plain meaning of the text  this is a continuation of the previous instruction to the Levites that each one of them has the burden of instructing all the Israelites that the commandments he performs are based on a tradition going back all the way to Moses. The Torah had become an inheritance for them seeing they are what is called the “congregation of Yaakov.” The reason he mentions “Yaakov” instead of saying מורשה קהלת ישראל, is to exclude the Ishmaelites and Edomites, both of whom though descendants of Avraham or even Avraham and Yitzchak, are not descendants of Yaakov, the other descendants of Avraham having declined to accept it. Torah is an heritage only for the descendants of Yaakov, being one of the four gifts from G’d given exclusively to the Jewish people. (the other three are: prophecy, the land of Israel, and resurrection of the bodies at some point in the future).
    It is possible to understand the word מורשה as referring to the land of Israel so that the meaning of the whole verse is: “due to the merit of Torah which Moses commanded us, we inherited the land of Israel of which it is written: ‘I give it to you as an inheritance I am the Lord’” (Exodus 6,8). The land becomes the inheritance of the community of Yaakov as a result of these people observing its commandments. If we were to transgress its commandments we would be exiled and be deprived of it.
    The word מורשה, as distinct from ירושה, refers to something which is continuously to be passed on as an heritage to future generations.[as distinct from a normal heritage which the owner could give away during his lifetime without passing it on to his heirs. Ed.]
    We find the expression מוריש ומעשיר “G’d makes poor (as opposed to ‘bestows as inheritance’) and enriches” (apparently simultaneously) something that appears very contradictory, in Samuel I 2,7 in Chanah’s prayer. This is not the only word in the Torah which appears to have opposite meanings on occasion. One such example is Numbers 4,13 ודשנו את המזבח, which at first glance could either mean: “and they will clean the altar” (from the remains of pre previous offerings), or it could mean that the priests were to provide the altar with fat, i.e. the fattest, best animals. Everything depends on the intention. When the community of Yaakov relates positively to the Torah, the land of Israel will “behave” positively toward the Jewish people, they will enjoy it as a bountiful inheritance. If the Jewish people disdain the Torah, the land of Israel will disdain the Jewish people. [The dual meaning of דשן when applied to G’d’s Altar, can have similar allegorical meaning. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (Makkot 23-24): the numerical value of the letters in the word תורה add up to 611, i.e. the number of commandments taught and commanded the Jewish people by means of their leader Moses. The other two commandments, i.e. the first two commandments in the Decalogue, the people had heard directly from the mouth of G’d at Mount Sinai. The expression מורשה קהלת יעקב is understood as including all those who have become part of the Jewish people, קהלה, through conversion. Our sages (Yuma 72) state further that there are “three crowns,” the crown of Torah (not hereditary), the crown of the priesthood, exclusive to descendants of Aaron, and the crown of the kingship, inherited only by descendants of King David. The “crown” of Torah must be perceived as if lying neglected in an out of the way corner, something which can be picked up by anyone desirous of acquiring it.
    Another Midrashic approach understands the Torah’s choice of the word מורשה instead of ירושה, as a hint that it could also be read as מאורשה, “betrothed,” i.e. that the purpose of giving us the Torah was to make us the Lord’s “betrothed.”
    A kabbalistic approach: we must understand the words מורשה קהלת יעקב as if the spelling had been  מאורשה קהלת יעקב, seeing that Torah is also known as רחל in terms of kabbalistic parlance. A departure (absence) of the Shechinah from the Jewish people is described by Jeremiah 31,14 as “Rachel weeping for her children, refusing to be comforted for her absent children.” At a time when G’d considers the Jewish people in a state of grace Rachel is described as “the wife of Yaakov” (Genesis 46,19).
    
    33,5. ויהי בישורון מלך, “He became King in Yeshurun.”  [continuing the author’s approach based on the “plain meaning”, Ed.] every Levite would be expected to declare that there was a king in Israel, i.e. none other than the Lord Himself. The concept is that the presence of the Shechinah over the Jewish camp was a manifestation of the presence of the king. The reason the expression Yeshurun has been used here is that it reflects a visual experience, i.e. the experience of the Israelites at Mount Sinai. At that time they had been enabled to have a visual experience of the attribute of כבוד. This was where all the heads of the tribes had assembled together with all the tribes in order to accept G’d as their King. [compare Deut. 32,8 where the author explained the word ישורון, as the same as אשורנו in Numbers 24,17 where Bileam uses is to describe his visionary powers. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach  (Pessikta Zutrata) The “king” referred to in the line ויהי בישורון מלך, is Moses, seeing that people had heard the entire Torah (legislation) from his mouth. The Torah means that the manner in which all the people including their tribal heads assembled around him, gave Moses the stature of king. This was not the first time that Moses had acted as lawgiver. It had occurred in Deut. 31,9 already when he had given the Torah to the priests, the Levites, carriers of the Holy Ark. We also find Moses ordering all the people to appear in his presence in Deut. 31,28
    Another way of understanding our verse is that the “king” described here is G’d Himself. The Torah describes that G’d became king only when all the tribal heads assembled. We find something similar described in Psalms 47,8-10 where David refers to G’d’s position as “king” in connection with the leaders of mankind indicating that they accept Him as such. In the case of the Jewish people: “when the leaders of the people volunteered to rally around Him.” We have another similar description of G’d becoming king in Amos 9,6. [The prophet portrays that G’d cannot build His chambers in heaven until an assembly of His loyal people have laid the foundation for this on earth. Ed.] The common denominator in all these verses is that G’d does not impose Himself as “king,” but waits until His creatures manifest their desire for Him to be their king. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the word ויהי בישורון מלך, is an allusion to the emanation מלכות, which is the one emanation which has absorbed input from all the other emanations “above” it. This is the background to the commentary on the verse in Amos 9,6 הבונה בשמים מעלותיו ואגודתו על ארץ יסדה, “Who builds (commences the structure) in the heaven and gathers it all together when it reaches earth;” [my translation, Ed.] in other words, you may perceive of G’d’s “structure” described by the prophet as if it consisted of a palace built on a number of ships, in sections. As long as the ships supporting different parts of this palace are securely tied together the palace is not in any danger of crumbling; 
the structure which the prophet describes as the universe, G’d’s palace, i.e. heaven, is secure only as long as Israel provides its sound foundation on earth. This can only be when the Israelites themselves form a firm union one with the other, אגודתו. In the absence of the proper אגודה, “union, brotherliness,” of the Jewish people on earth, His throne in the celestial spheres may be viewed as somehow defective, insecure. The word מעלתו, though spelled in the singular, i.e. “His celestial region,” is to be read as if it had been spelled מעלותיו (pl.) i.e. “His celestial regions.” This is an allusion to the ten emanations. The letter י in the way we read the word alludes to the highest [in our diagrams lowest, Ed.]. emanation, the one which includes input from all the others. This indicates that this verse in Amos makes G’d’s throne’s completeness conditional on the condition of the Jewish people on earth, especially their brotherliness, their ability to establish a single אגודה, union.
    You should remain aware that the word ויהי in our verse teaches that this king is the Lord G’d. Furthermore, in the word ויהי you find three of the permutations of the holy name of G’d, the tetragram, when you perceive of that name as capable of 4 permutations. The four permutations would be יהו'ה, יה'ו, י'ה, י, the last three being capable of construction from the word ויהי. The sequence would correspond to the fruit used as part of the 4 species on Sukkot; [we use a progressively smaller number of each of these species, i.e. 3 Hadassim, 2 Aravot, I Lulav in the אגודה, i.e. the three species which form part of the bunch. Ed.] Seeing the word ויהי is emanated from the tetragram, this indicates that the tenth emanation belongs to G’d. The meaning of the word מלך in our verse may be similar to  what David had in mind when he said in psalm 145,1 ארוממך אלוה-י המלך, “let me extol You, my G’d and king.” It may also correspond to the way the word is used in Numbers 23,21  ה' אלוה-יו עמו ותרועת מלך בו, “the Lord their G’d is with them and their king’s acclaim in their midst.” Solomon may have used the word in a similar sense when he said in Kohelet 5,8 מלך לשדה נעבד, “even a king is indebted to the soil.” The expression מלך is used in that sense (also by Solomon) in Song of Songs 7,6 when he said מלך אסור ברהטים, “a king is held captive by (nazarite) tresses.” The common denominator of the verses we have mentioned is that even a king is subject to restrictions. When G’d is described as king, this does not necessarily mean His total independence, but His dependence on His subjects in a certain way. [all of this is part of what our sages call His ענוותנותו, “His self-imposed humility.” Ed.] Similarly, the verse ה’ צבאות הוא מלך הכבוד סלה, “the Lord of Hosts, He is the king of the attribute כבוד.” [If I understand the author correctly, the latter expression, i.e. king of an attribute, even that of כבוד, is less encompassing than the title represented by the tetragram. All of this shows that G’d imposes restrictions upon Himself. The reason that the psalmist added the word סלה was so that we should not err and think that when G’d manifests Himself as an attribute, כנוי, that this represents His essence. Ed.]
    
    33,6. יחי ראובן, “may Reuven live!” According to the plain meaning of the text this is a prayer that Reuven should enjoy long life and not die prior to the time set at the time of his birth seeing it is impossible that he should live forever. [the “he” refers to the tribe. Ed.] 
   ויהי מתיו מספר, “and may his numbered ones be part of the whole nation.” The word ואל in the first half of this verse must also be understood as applying to this second half, i.e. “and may his numbers never cease.” We find a similar construction in Proverbs 30,3 ולא למדתי חכמה ודעת קדושים אדע, where the meaning is not: “and I did not learn wisdom and I will have knowledge of holy ones,” but the meaning is (as if the word לא had been repeated) “and I have not learned wisdom and (therefore) I do not have knowledge of holy ones.” Yet another example of such a construction is found Psalms 9,19 כי לא לנצח ישכח אביון תקות ענוים תאבד לעד. If one were not to read the word לא, “not,” as also applying to the second half of the verse, not only would the second half of the verse contradict the first half, but the meaning of the whole verse would be: “for not always will the destitute be forgotten, the hope of the poor will be lost for ever.” Clearly, this is not the psalmist’s meaning, but he means: “neither the destitute will be forgotten forever, nor the poor.” [The author quotes a few more such examples. Ed.]
    The order in which Moses enumerates the tribes in his blessing follows the sequence in which they received their inheritance. Seeing that the founder of the tribe of Reuven was Yaakov’s oldest, his tribe is also described  as the firstborn seeing he is mentioned first.
    Moses mentioned Yehudah next, seeing this was the tribe who received its inheritance first on the West Bank of the Jordan. The next tribe receiving a blessing was the tribe of Levi because this tribe was encamped around Jerusalem, right next to the tribe of Yehudah. Next was Binyamin whose tribal territory adjoined that of Yehudah; also because the Temple area was shared by both tribes. The tribe of Joseph came next so as not to downgrade Joseph even further, seeing his younger brother Binyamin had already received his blessing. This was followed by a blessing for Zevulun, a tribe who distinguished himself by answering Barak’s call to arms in the days of Devorah. Not only that, but it was due to his financial support that his brother Issachar could devote himself to Torah study without having to worry about where his livelihood would come from. 
    Having completed his blessings for the tribes who were offspring of Yaakov’s senior wives Leah and Rachel, Moses now turned to bless the tribe of Gad seeing he shared a flag with one of the tribes born by Leah, i.e. the tribes of Reuven and Shimon (Numbers 2,10-14). Next came Dan, who was himself in charge of one of the camps; next came Naftali who was senior to Asher.
    It is possible to explain the words יחי ראובן ואל ימות as applying to this tribe’s success in war, i.e. that they should not only be successful but also not incur any casualties. The words ויהי מתיו מספר would be an allusion to the distant future when the Romans would condemn 10 sages to death by torture for their forefathers having sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites at the time. Moses hinted that at that time his blessing would not be effective, and members of that tribe would be included in that decree (though Reuven their ancestor had actually saved Joseph from death). We find that the word מספר has a mystical dimension; Isaiah 10,19 speaks of so few trees of a forest remaining that even a young child can record its מספר, “its number.” Rashi quotes Sanhedrin 95, according to which the prophet refers to the letter י meaning “ten” as being so small that even a very young child can write it. Moses would then hint that whereas Reuven’s conduct vis a vis Bilhah had been forgiven to the extent that none of his descendants would die prematurely on that account, the pardon was not so absolute, and that is why at the time the Romans decreed the death of the ten sages the number was 10 instead of 9, seeing that neither he nor Binyamin had had a share in it.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word יחי in the line  refers to life in the hereafter. The words ואל ימות refer to what would happen to Reuven as part of the system of the transmigration of souls, in order to spare him having to die a second time. This is the meaning of Onkelos’ translation of the words ואל ימות, i.e. יחי ראובן לחיי עלמא ומותא תנינא לא ימות. Onkelos revealed to us here that there is a transmigration of souls when the souls of people who committed certain sins reappear in another body to rehabilitate themselves by a second circuit of physical life on earth. This occurs after they had already once received their reward or punishment in the hereafter after having died, (separated from the body which housed them originally).
    This is a concept which is not hard to understand when one considers that the cycles of Shemittah years are something which repeat themselves time and again. A soul returns to a new habitat on earth after having received its initial judgment for how it performed on earth the first time around. [the “shemittah” cycles the author refers to are not the seven year cycles on terrestrial earth we are familiar with, but the cycles of seven times 7,000 years each of which contains as the last one thousand years a period of metamorphosis for the universe, At the end of the 49,000 years an absolutely perfect terrestrial universe will emerge. The author has referred to this in detail repeatedly, the first time on Genesis 2,3 on the words אשר ברא אלו-הים לעשות. Ed.]
    According to many views expressed by our sages, this metamorphosis is what is known as תחיית המתים, commonly translated as “resurrection of the dead (bodies).” [The authorities who interpret the concept in the manner we just described base themselves primarily on Isaiah 22,14. They find support for this in the way Targum Yonathan renders that verse in Isaiah. Ed.]
    In the Talmud Taanit 2 there is a debate concerning whether rain should already be mentioned in our Amidah prayer on the first day of Sukkot or whether one should wait until the last day of that festival. One of the arguments in favour of the former view is the fact that we mention the resurrection of the dead every day of the year in that prayer, although surely, the time for this event to occur is not daily? It is suggested that an event which could conceivably occur at any time qualifies for such mention in our daily prayers. At any rate, according to a view in the Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 8,7 the verse in Isaiah refers to the second death of the persons referred to (who deny that there is life after death). Their punishment will be that they will not participate in the ultimate resurrection. 
    At any rate, considering both the comments of Onkelos in our verse and those of Targum Yonathan in Isaiah, it appears that the words of Moses about the tribe of Reuven are a prayer that they should live long enough so as not to need a second round of physical life on earth to rehabilitate themselves. [I wonder whether all this is in view of the tribe of Reuven and the other one and a half tribes on the East Bank of the Jordan having being the first ones to be exiled and being lost to the קהלת יעקב, Ed.]
     You will find that David has some very specific comments on the subject of resurrection, transformation of souls, the hereafter, etc. Compare Psalms 103, 3-5: “He forgives all your sins, heals all your diseases. He redeems your life from the Pit, crowns you with steadfast love and compassion. He satisfies you with good things (jewelry?) in the prime of life, so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.” David mentions a number of experiences which occur after the initial death of the body. Forgiveness of sins; healing of diseases in the second round, a redemption from the grave. All this proves that something happens after death. Subsequently, David describes the goodness the people who have been resurrected will be surrounded with by G’d. The word תעטרני, “You will crown me,” appears to speak of an abstract experience in the disembodied life in the hereafter where one experiences the radiation of G’d’s brilliance, זיו השכינה in the parlance of our sages. This is followed by renewed youth, i.e. life in a body on terrestrial earth. 
    It is significant that the five stages of existence dealt with by David in the three verses we quoted from psalm 103, all end with the letter י, i.e. עוניכי, תחלואיכי, חייכי, המעטרכי, נעוריכי, “your guilt, your disease, your life, your crown, your youth.” These letters י are not part of the nouns in question and have been added by David to allude to certain concepts involved here. They refer to the five names (levels) by which the soul is known. They are נפש,  רוח, נשמה, יחידה, חיה. [I have listed them in ascending order. Ed.] 
    
    33,7. וזאת ליהודה, “and this for Yehudah;” according to the plain meaning of the text we have to insert the word ברכה, “is the blessing” after the word וזאת “this.” He needed the blessing especially since it was this tribe who always was in the forefront in any military encounter between Israel and its enemies. This is why Moses assured Yehudah that G’d has heard his voice, i.e. his prayer for assistance.
   ידיו רב לו, “his (own) hands will fight on his behalf;” he will not even need help from the other tribes. According to Rashi, Reuven and Yehudah are paired as both of them had been guilty of sins and both made public confessions. Makkot 11, referring to Yehudah having been guilty of the (conditional) oath in Genesis 44,32, where he guaranteed the safe return of Binyamin. This was something beyond his power as it needed the agreement of other parties over whom Yehudah had no control, making him guilty of uttering a vain oath. His punishment was that during all the 40 years that the Israelites were in the desert the bones in his coffin kept rolling around. Moses reasoned that the confession of Yehudah (concerning his mistake of sleeping with his daughter-in-law Tamar and almost burning her to death) was what triggered Reuven’s confession concerning his misconduct with Bilhah and that therefore he should be credited with this merit so that his bones could find rest. [Tossaphot state that although Yehudah’s sleeping with Tamar had occurred after Reuven’s misconduct so that “how did his confession affect Reuven?” They answer that up until Yehudah’s public confession that Tamar was more just than he, Reuven had not confessed publicly, only privately. The letter ו which precedes the word זאת, conceptually links Reuven’s conduct and Moses’ blessing for him to that of Yehudah. Ed.]
    Even though Yehudah’s bones had now come to rest, this still did not represent total forgiveness, i.e. he did not have the strength to ascend to heaven unaided, by his own strength. The reason was that the banishment he had accepted for himself in that oath we referred to covered both this life and the life in the world to come, in his own words: כל הימים, ”for all times.” This is why Moses added the words ואל עמו תביאנו, “and return him to his people.” Reuven’s public confession cleared his brothers from the suspicion that one of them might have been the one who tampered with the bed of Bilhah.
    A kabbalistic approach: When Moses said the words וזאת ליהודה, he addressed the emanation מלכות which is the emanation from which the hereditary dynasty of Yehudah draws its divine input. It is this emanation which gives the kings of Yehudah the power to wage war successfully. Interestingly, David, a king descended from Yehudah, refers to the same emanation as זאת, when he proclaimed in Psalms 27,3: אם תקום עלי מלחמה בזאת אני בוטח, “if war overtakes me, I put my faith in זאת, the emanation from which my forefather Yehudah drew his strength.” 
     The emanation מלכות, sometimes referred to as זאת, is featured repeatedly in the life of David, such as in Psalms 99,4: ועוז מלך משפט אהב, or in Psalms 72,1: משפטיך למלך תן. This is the reason that David was successful in all his many wars. This is also why he never fails to give thanks to the Lord Who was the source of his success. The whole formula למנצח מזמור לדוד, is evidence that David attributed his success to the מנצח, “The One Who grants victory.” Just because the kings of Yehudah enjoyed the assistance of the attribute/emanation מלכות, it was doubly important for David to acknowledge that ultimately success is rooted in the Original Cause, in Hashem. Seeing that David’s career involved spilling much blood, he was not chosen as the tool to build the Holy Temple which symbolises peace (Chronicles I 22,8). It was left to his son Solomon, a man of peace, someone who practiced the attribute of צדקה, to build the Temple. This is the meaning of Psalms 72,1 וצדקתך לבן מלך, “and Your clemency to the king’s son.” [David speaking about the status of his son Solomon, contrasting his own dominant characteristic of משפט, with that of his son, i.e. the characteristic צדקה, Ed.]
    
    33,8. וללוי אמר, “and concerning Levi, he said:” The preposition ל in the word וללוי must be understood as בעבור, “for the sake of;” Moses is addressing G’d in this verse. He adds the words לאיש חסידך, “for Your pious one,” referring to his brother Aaron. He continues with אשר נסיתו במסה, “whom You have tested at Massah,” referring either to the incident at the waters of strife which was the only time Aaron had ever failed. Alternatively, Moses referred to the location Massah formerly known as Refidim [it is not clear to me how Aaron was involved there. Ed.]
   תריבהו על מי מריבה, “You strove with him at the waters of מריבה; “a reference to the sin involving the striking of the rock instead of speaking to it. This was the only sin Aaron had ever been guilty of. Moses did not mention Aaron’s involvement in the sin of the golden calf, seeing Aaron’s intentions at that time had been 100% honourable. If Moses had entertained the slightest doubt about Aaron’s sincerity at that time, he surely would have mentioned it now in order to ask forgiveness for that sin.
    The fact that Moses uncharacteristically mentioned the תומים here before the אורים, needs analysis. The Torah always mentions the אורים ahead of the תומים. The reason is that they represent the principal names of Hashem. The reason Moses reversed the sequence here is to make plain that they are mutually interdependent, that the אורים, though preceding the תומים, are a totally ineffectual tool for communicating with Hashem unless they are accompanied by the תומים. I have explained this in greater detail in my commentary on Exodus 28,30. This is also the opinion of Nachmanides. They are perceived as representing a certain level of Holy Spirit; any High Priest who wore these folded over parchments inside the folds of His breastplate was equipped with this level of Holy Spirit while wearing same. This is what prompted Onkelos to translate the words תומיך ואוריך לאיש חסידך, as ,תומיא ואוריא אלבשת לגבר דאשתכח חסידא, “I dressed a man who is pious in Your Urim and Tumim.” The matter is similar to what we read in Chronicles I 12,19: “and a spirit ‘dressed’ (seized) Amashai.”
    There are four distinct levels of prophecy. Bat Kol, Urim vetumim, ruach hakodesh, and full-fledged prophecy. They are listed here in ascending order, but all of them are derivatives of the emanation tzedek; this is the meaning of Job 29,14: ”I clothed myself in righteousness and it robed me; Justice was my cloak and turban.”
    Let me explain something about the differences between the four levels of prophetic power I have listed. There is a mystical element to the phenomenon known as בת קול which accounts for the name בת קול as opposed to the masculine בן קול. Similarly, there is a mystical reason why the Talmud speaks frequently of בנה אב to describe an exegetical method more familiarly known to us by a masculine expression, i.e. בנין אב (in the Baraitha de Rabbi Yishmael which we recite in our daily morning prayers). Why, for instance, do they not call it בנה אם? Similarly, the expression יש אם למקרא or יש אם למסורה is strange, seeing we might have expected the expression יש אב למסורה or  יש אב למקרא to convey that there is a valid tradition justifying a certain way of reading or writing a word in the written Torah. All of these expressions have been formulated by our sages with extreme care and reveal a deep insight into the different levels of divine inspiration which they reflect. (Rabbi Chavell, in his notes, quotes a certain Rabbi Ezra bar Shlomoh (a kabbalist from Gerona, hometown of Nachmanides, author of commentary on aggadot in Talmud, disciple of Rabbi Yitzchak the blind (also Gerona) who found that the only five times the Talmud uses the masculine expression בנין אב is when it refers to a direct verse from the written Torah, i.e. a more direct link to the divine origin of such an exegetical tool.) 
    Actually, every single verse in the written Torah is in the nature of something directly revealed, and the sages could have been expected to refer to it in the masculine form every time, i .e. בנין אב, or בנה אב, but certainly not as אם למקרא, or אם למסורה. The fact is that matters handed down to us by the oral tradition, i.e. תורה ש-בעל פה, the sages usually preface with the word אם, in order to make the distinction of the origin of the tradition. If we keep these principles in mind, we can understand that the expression בת קול was used, seeing that the listener received his instructions via what the Torah itself describes as only a קול and not from the mouth of G’d. Compare Deut. 28,1 which states clearly and unambiguously והיה אם שמוע תשמע בקול ה' אלוקיך, “it will be when you will surely heed the voice of the Lord your G’d.” Also in Numbers 7,89 the Torah speaks of Moses hearing the voice speaking with him from above the lid of the Ark.” It is appropriate to call that “voice” בת, “daughter” [like the subsidiary companies in Israel are called חברת בת, literally: “daughter companies.” Ed.], seeing that the instruction was heard through an intermediary. The author describes as yet another reason why the sages called this relatively low key form of divine communication בת קול, their perception of it as an illustration of the “throne” of G’d which is perceived as broad at the top, tapering off towards the bottom. He claims that אש, fire, is similarly perceived as broad at the top and narrow at the base. The term בת קול therefore reflects something which originates at the throne of G’d rather than in His Essence. This type of communication from celestial regions was a fairly commonplace one even during the period of the sages of the Talmud (Eyruvin 12, et al). Moreover, the pious people during the second Temple experienced this kind of communication from celestial sources after there were no more prophets and the High Priest did not have the breastplate with the Urim vetumim embedded in them to facilitate direct communication with G’d. This latter form of communication from celestial sources was one rung higher than the Bat Kol. The form of this communication was representative of what is termed אספקלריא שאינה מאירה, “an unclear vision,” which characterised the type of prophetic visions experienced by most prophets in varying degrees. We had explained already in connection with Numbers 12,6 that the Urim vetumim  were a device confirming the truth of the communication received, (compare author on Exodus 28,30). The word אורים itself suggests spiritual enlightenment. The function of the אורים was to visually make the High Priest aware of the letters representing the divine communication, whereas the function of theתומים  was to enable him to arrange the letters in question in the appropriate order, to avoid misunderstanding the message. 
    The third level of divine communication is commonly known as רוח הקודש, which is equivalent to or an outgrowth of the tenth emanation. The author appears to feel that a person is able to attain this level of spirituality if he applies to himself Deut. 23,10 ונשמרת מכל דבר רע, “to guard yourself against anything evil.” This level of divine inspiration appears as if it was self-generated by the recipient, who was granted insights without hearing any outside voice or seeing any vision as do prophets. People who experience this level of spirituality are apt to make statements regarding future events without appearing in the least captive to outside communicators. They neither dream the message nor go into a trance or anything like that. It is simply that what they say is perceived as inspired from a higher source. The person uttering such messages has no idea of where they originated from. 
    The fourth level of prophetic insights is prophecy uttered by an acknowledged man of G’d, someone who, while doing so, completely divests himself of his normal personality, becomes merely an instrument of G’d communing exclusively by means of his disembodied intellect with the source from whom he receives his message/instructions. Once he has divested himself of his bodily functions so that they do not represent an impediment to his receiving clear and undistorted messages from a celestial origin, this may occur either in a dream or even during his waking hours. There is no point in elaborating on this at this point as I have already done so in a book called חשן משפט. [the book does not seem to have survived. Ed.]
    On the other hand, Nachmanides appears to feel that the level we know as רוח הקודש is superior to the level known as נבואה, prophecy. According to his view, the levels starting from the highest to the lowest are: רוח הקודש, נבואה, אורים ותומים, בת קול. According to his view the level of spirituality we call Ruach Hakodesh, “Holy Spirit,” is derived form very lofty spiritual regions such as have been described in Exodus 35,31 (concerning Betzalel) וימלא אותו רוח אלוקים בחכמה, “He filled him with divine spirit, with wisdom, etc.” You will also find in the Sefer Yetzirah 1,9 that חכמה is referred to as רוח אלוקים חיים ברוך ומבורך, that the name of G’d is both  דבור קול, רוח i.e. that all these manifestations of G’d’s name are called רוח הקודש as they are all disembodied, incapable of being perceived visually. At any rate, the author of the Sefer Yetzirah describes חכמה as רוח אלוקים חיים, “spirit of the Living G’d,” and lists it as first and foremost in a list of spiritual attainments.
    The foundation of prophecy, נבואה, is anchored in the tetragram; Urim and Tumim, the level of spirituality ascribed to true Torah scholars, rank below the spiritual level of prophecy, but above that of Bat Kol, seeing that the Bat Kol has its origin not in the tetragram but in the Shechinah (attribute kavod). All the various spiritual attainments by man (of a lower level than Bat Kol) are also traced back to the Shechinah. At any rate, seeing that the phenomenon of Bat Kol is rated so low, it is clear why the sages stipulated אין משגיחין לבת קול, “that pronouncements from heaven reaching us via the phenomenon of Bat Kol have no binding force halachically” (Baba Metzia 59). [when opposed to rulings based on other forms of exegesis. Ed.] Such pronounce-ments cannot countermand halachic rulings based on נבואה, prophecy, for instance, either. The reason we are in the habit of referring to נבואה also as רוח הקודש is that this is the celestial source of all spiritual attainments which devolve from it. [the term רוח הקודש, then is used loosely as a collective term for all that is divinely inspired.]
   לאיש חסידך, every High Priest from the tribe of Levi is given the title חסיד, ‘the devout one.’ The reason for this is that it is the function of the High Priest to draw down to his people the heavenly attribute of חסד, (loving kindness). This is why the priests bless the people in order to channel this attribute and its beneficial effects to as many of his people as possible. The blessing is pronounced by invoking the tetragram, the holy name not allowed for others to pronounce. The blessing originates in the tenth emanation, and this is why the Torah prefaces the formula of the words of the blessing with the word כה which is the attribute of Justice, as we know from Exodus where Moses tells Pharaoh in the name of G’d הנה לא שמעת עד כה, “here you have not listened until כה,” i.e. from now on the attribute of Justice will be invoked against you. (Exodus 7,16) [This announcement had been the prelude to the first of the Ten Plagues. Ed.] Moses followed this (verse 17) by telling Pharaoh בזאת תדע, “through the attribute זאת you will know, etc.,” i.e. clear proof that both כה and זאת are כנויים, [similes for the attribute of Justice, most commonly appearing as elo-him. Ed.] At any rate, Moses refers to the fact that the whole world is blessed by means of the Priest, hence Psalms 145,10 וחסידך יברכוכה, “and Your devout ones shall bless You.” Instead of reading this as one word, David may mean that the word is to be read as יברכו כה, “will bless the attribute of Justice.”
    
    33,9. האומר לאביו ולאמו לא ראיתיו, “who says of his father and his mother : ‘I have no regard for them.’” Moses speaks of the tribe of Levi as a whole here, just as at the time of the sin of the golden calf he had simply called out: “whoever is for Hashem, to me!” (Exodus 32,26) In response to that call all the members of the tribe of Levi responded with alacrity. (same verse) Moses had then instructed them to execute all those who had actively worshipped the golden calf, and not to spare even family members if there were such who were guilty. Just as in that instance, although Moses mentioned ‘his son and brother,” this was not menat literally, so here too the words ‘his father and mother,” are not meant literally, as there never had been a father or mother of a Levite who had been guilty of that sin so that their son could have demonstrated that he was prepared even to kill father or mother in response to that call. If even a single Levite had been guilty of worshipping the golden calf, how could the Torah have testified that “the entire tribe of Levi assembled around Moses in response to his call?” The meaning of the words: “father, mother, brother, etc.,” in the verses mentioned referred to such relations who were not from the tribe of Levi. If a Levite had married a woman from the tribe of, say, Zevulun, and the son of that woman found his maternal grandfather worshipping the golden calf, then her son would have had the duty to execute his grandfather seeing he was not a Levite and was guilty of execution. In other words, Moses referred to a possible grandfather, calling him “father,” something not  unusual in those days. [the Torah constantly calls the ancestors ‘your fathers’, not your grandfathers or your great-grandfathers.”
   כי שמרו  אמרתך, “for they have carefully observed Your words;” a reference to the second of the Ten Commandments: ‘you shall not have any other gods.’ 
   ובריתך ינצורו, “and Your covenant they have preserved.” This is a reference to the covenant of circumcision. We have a tradition according to which the Israelites did not circumcise their male children while in the desert, whereas the tribe of Levi did perform this commandment also in the desert (Sifri Behaalotcha 67). Even though Moses speaks here of the tribe of Levi in general, there is also a specific allusion to the prophet Samuel (a Levite himself) concerning whom Moses said that he did not see his father or his mother seeing that as soon as he had been weaned, his mother took him to the Tabernacle and entrusted him to the High Priest Eli to raise and train in the service of the Lord. The words: “and he did not recognise his brothers nor knew his sons,” also apply to the prophet Samuel; the idea is that he sired children for the service of the Lord rather than in order for them to be his personal convenience [as many fathers considered their children then. Ed.]
    
    33,11. ברך ה' חילו, “O Lord  bless his resources;” this is a reference to the heave-offerings, tithes, firstborn male domesti-cated animals, and the first ripe fruit, which made up the livelihood of the priests and Levites. ופועל ידיו תרצה, “and the work of his hands shall find Your favour;” this refers to the sacrificial offerings, a portion of which was for consumption by the priests. מחץ מתנים קמיו, “smash the loins of his foes; as if the Torah had written: “smash his foes in the loins.” מן יקומון, “so that they cannot rise.” Prevent them from even rising against them.
    
    33,12. לבנימין אמר, “to Binyamin he said:” according to the plain meaning of the text the preposition ל here must be understood as בעבור, “for the sake of, on behalf of;” Moses means that seeing Binyamin is a favourite of the Lord, He will make His residence (Temple) in the territory of that tribe. The tribe will dwell in security, trusting the Lord, the Lord His G’d dwelling between his shoulders.
   חופף עליו, “it hovers over him;” a reference to G’d’s attribute of כבוד, i.e. the Shechinah which rested over Jerusalem, most of which was situated in the territory of Binyamin. The reason Moses speaks of the Shechinah hovering between the shoulders of Binyamin instead of “over his head,” is because the floor of the courtyard to the Temple the עזרה did not literally stand on the top of the mountain but about 23 cubits below the summit, near the level of a well called Eytam (Yuma 31). It had been David’s intention to build it there as explained in the Talmud Zevachim 54. Moses refers to the Temple here as “shoulder,” and so did Joshua his disciple in Joshua 16,5. The reason Joshua added the word “Jebusite” there is to hint that David purchased the site from Arona the Jebusite (Samuel II 24,24).
    Some (Ibn Ezra) explain the words: “between his shoulders” as describing the fact that the Temple stood in the middle of the tribal territory of Binyamin.
    A Midrashic approach: our verse contains allusions to three Temples. (compare Zevachim 118) The words ישכון לבטח, “will dwell safely,” refer to the first Temple, Solomon’s. This is why in the Book of Chronicles the attribute כבוד is specifically mentioned as filling the inside of that Temple (Chronicles II 7,1). The words “He (the attribute כבוד ) hovers over it all day long,” refer to the second Temple; the word ”hover” denotes a less regular presence  than does the word ישכון used by Moses as describing the situation during the first Temple. Finally, the words: “and He dwells between his shoulders,” are a reference to the third Temple when the full extent of the Shechinah will return to the Holy of Holies. This is what our sages explained in Sifri on our verse.
    The reason all these allusions are contained in the blessing for Binyamin is that it was this tribe which served as host for the Divine presence. We have a tradition that the body of the original Binyamin was never attacked by worms. There are seven people  concerning whom we have a tradition that their bodies were not attacked by worms. They are: Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, Moses, Aaron, Miriam and Binyamin the son of Yaakov.(compare Baba Batra 17) Of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov the Torah said specifically that G’d blessed them in all respects, i.e. בכל, מכל, כל respectively. Of Moses and Aaron the Torah writes that they died על פי ה',  If they died “by a kiss” as our sages describe their mode of dying, it is reasonable that G’d would not allow the worms to attack their remains. Although the Torah, for obvious reasons, does not describe Miriam’s death as similar to that of her brothers, our sages feel certain that her death was similar. As to Binyamin’s death, the very description of him as ידיד ה', “beloved of the Lord,” surely suggests a similar treatment of his body by the Lord. Some sages say that David’s body too was not attacked by worms. They base this on Psalms 16,9 (“also my flesh will dwell securely”). I have heard a support for this theory from Exodus 16,24 describing that the manna which fell on Fridays did not turn putrid and was not attacked by worms, contrary to the manna which fell on other days and was saved overnight. The word הבאיש, normally understood as “turned putrid,” could be read with the first two letters as an acrostic so that it would be ה'ב איש, meaning “7 men” (were not attacked by worms), etc. This would serve as Scriptural support for the view of Rabbi Eleazar that Miriam was also one of the people whose flesh was not attacked by worms. (to make up the number ה'ב=7) The word בו in that same verse in Exodus, having a numerical value of 8, would serve as support for the view that the flesh of an eighth’ person was immune to worms, i.e. the flesh of David.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words: לבנימין אמר ידיד ה' ישכון refer to the attribute כבוד having made this statement. As a result of that attribute dwelling among the tribe of Binyamin, the latter felt secure, i.e. לבטח, being confident that he was under the protection of G’d, the Essence. The whole matter is similar to what we read in Exodus 14,31: וירא ישראל את היד הגדולה ויאמינו בה', “as soon as Israel saw the ‘great’ hand, they believed in the Lord.” This is also the reason that the prophet Nathan named David’s second son from Bat Sheva ידיד-יה (Samuel II 12,25) [“beloved one of G’d,” to show publicly that no stigma was attached to the union of David and Bat Sheva now. Ed.] According to the Sefer Habahir item 65, G’d said to Solomon: “seeing you bear My name, I will allow you to be the one to build the Temple for Me.” This is the meaning of Kings I 5,26: “and the Lord had given [I believe the key is the word נתן instead of ויתן, which would have meant that this wisdom had been granted to Solomon only at that point. Ed.] wisdom to Solomon, as He said to him.” We do not have a verse (at that junction) where G’d is on record as granting wisdom to Solomon. However, in Kings I 3,28 we have this verse: “when all of Israel heard the decision of the king (about the two women who each claimed that the baby was hers) they stood in awe of the king; for they saw that he possessed divine wisdom to execute justice.” Thus far the Sefer Habahir. [the author of that book also refers to the sages who said that every time the word שלמה appears in Song of Songs we must treat it as one of the holy names of G’d.
    From all the foregoing we learn that among all the tribes there was none who was as blessed as Binyamin in that the Shechinah dwelled among him permanently in a more concentrated form than among any of the other tribes. Clearly, he possessed greater merit than the other tribes. Perhaps this is also the reason why this tribe was singled out to be mentioned separately, i.e. Moses begins his blessing with the word לבנימין, instead of ולבנימין, which would have emphasised what he had in common with the tribes mentioned first. (only Reuven, who was mentioned first, did not have the letter ו  meaning “and” introducing him). Perhaps, just as the etrog occupies a special position among the four species, not being tied up together with the other three species, the absence of the letter ו when introducing the blessing for the tribe of Binyamin may convey similar considerations. The absence of the letter ו (where we really would have expected it) may be a hint that Binyamin is to be perceived as part of the בנין, “the structure” comprised of the ten sefirot, creative forces, leading to the terrestrial universe.
    
    33,13. מבורכת ה' ארצו ממגד שמים מטל, “his (Joseph’s) land is especially blessed by the Lord, with the heavenly bounty of dew.” Moses refers to rain as מגד שמים (Ibn Ezra) reflecting a statement by the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 4,3 that the waters in the celestial regions were suspended (kept in place) only by a word of G’d. What are the “fruit” of these waters? The rain waters. This is also in line with what David said in Psalms 104,1: “You irrigate the mountains from Your lofts, from the ‘fruit’ of Your work the earth is sated.” The “heavens” are considered G’d’s “works.” We have another verse making a similar point in Psalms 8,4: “When I behold Your heavens, the “work” of Your fingers.” The psalmist calls the rain “the fruit of His works.” Similarly, here; Moses refers to this as מגד. By adding the word ומטל, Moses blesses Joseph with both dew and rainfall.
   ומתהום רובצת תחת, “and from the deep waters crouching below.” This is a reference to the waters on terrestrial earth, i.e. Moses blessed Joseph in that both the waters from above and from below should be beneficial for his land. You may perceive the relationship between the upper waters and the lower waters as analogous to the relationship between light and darkness; hence the choice of the word תהום, by Moses, a word which meant “darkness” already in the second verse of the Torah. The reason the word טל was left to the end, was to place it next to the word תהום, seeing dew descends at night when it is dark.
    
    33,14. וממגד תבואת שמש, “and from the bounty of the sun’s crop.” It is well known that the sun is closely associated with the element fire. The closer we get to the sun or vice versa, the hotter it gets. The feeling of being cold is generally associated with the distance from the sun. The heat of the sun causes crops and fruit to ripen. The moon, by contrast, is associated with the element water. Proof is the fact that it exerts influence on the oceans (beaches) determining the tides. Absence of the moon in the sky, or gradual disappearance of it, results in the waters of the sea and some rivers receding. The power of both sun and moon to affect the ripening of crops on earth is called by Moses מגד. The verse tells us that the territory of Joseph will experience the beneficial effects on its harvests of both sun and moon. The moon is perceived as מגרשת הפירות, brings the fruit of the tree to separating. [I prefer Hirsch, who sees in the word ירחים an allusion to the number of months animals are pregnant, i.e. the fruit of the womb is produced after a certain number of “moons,” Ed.]
    
    33,15. ומראש הררי קדם, “and from the tops of ancient mountains.” Seeing that fruit growing in the mountains are perceived as superior to those growing in the valley, Moses blesses the fruit of the mountainous regions in the territory of Joseph. [According to the Talmud, the best fruit came from Ginosaur on the shores of Lake Kineret, certainly not a mountainous region but 200 meters below sea-level. Ed.]
    
    33,16. וממגד ארץ, “and from the bounty of the earth.” Having first mentioned the fruit growing in the mountains, Moses now mentions the fruit growing in the plains. By adding the word ומלואה, “and its fullness,” he refers to other benefits to be derived from that earth such as silver and gold and other ores to be mined there. The whole land is blessed by the Lord Who resides in the סנה, the burning bush, the site of Moses’ first encounter with Hashem.
    A Midrashic approach, [based on Torah Shleymah Bereshit 3,17 note #124] The Midrash asks why the land of the tribe of Joseph was blessed more than that of any other tribe? The answer given relates to the cursing of the earth as a result of Adam’s sin in Gan Eden. The soil which Adam subsequently had to work in the sweat of his brow was cursed because he had listened to the urging of his wife to also eat from the fruit of the tree of knowledge. Joseph, on the other hand, had withstood the urgings of the wife of his master Potiphar to enjoy the “fruit” she had to offer. Therefore, his descendants, in commemoration of the merit accumulated by their ancestor, do not have to work the soil so hard to make it give up its produce as have the other tribes whose founding fathers do not have this merit going for them.
   תבואתה לראש יוסף, “may it come to rest (the blessing) on the head of Joseph.” The word תבואתה is a strange word; it is composed of the two words באתה and תבא. Moses is trying to hint here that just as Joseph went into exile into Egypt long before the remainder of his brothers, so when the redemption will come he, (his tribe) will also enjoy that experience before the other tribes will. These are the 45 years discrepancy mentioned between the 1290 years and the 1335 years which Daniel speaks of in Daniel  12,11-12. There is a time lapse between the ingathering of the exiles referred to as נדחים, “outcasts,” and those referred to as נפוצים, “scattered.” (compare Deut. 30,2-3)
    
    33,17. בכור שורו הדר לו, “like a firstling ox in his majesty;” seeing Moses had already spoken of grain harvests, Moses compares the tribe of Joseph to an ox. [used in ploughing, the first stage in working a field. Ed.] We find this simile used in the same sense in Proverbs 14,4: ורב-תבואות בכח שור, “bountiful harvests are due to the strength of the ox.” The reason that Moses applies the term “firstborn” to Joseph is because he was the firstborn of his mother Rachel.
   וקרני ראם קרניו, “and his horns are like the horns of the Re-em.”  A reference to the tens of thousands of the members of Ephrayim and Menashe respectively.
    A kabbalistic approach: in saying בכור שורו הדר לו, Moses attributes two principal attributes, virtues,  to Joseph. They are the emanations (attributes) נצח and הוד, the former on the right side of the diagram of the emanations, the latter on the left side. The word הדר symbolises the emanation נצח, whereas the word שור alludes to the emanation הוד. You know that these were the emanations which responded to David’s prayer; compare Psalms 22,22 ומקרני רמים עניתני, “rescue (answer) me from the horns of wild oxen.” [I do not understand how our author squares this with his oft-repeated warning that in prayer one must only address the tetragram, no subordinate attributes. Ed.] Two tribes emerged from Joseph one of whom represented fertility, i.e. אפרים, whereas the second מנשה represents שכחה, forgetting. The latter name is associated with דין, judgment.
    
    33,18. שמח זבולון בצאתך, “Rejoice Zevulun in your journeys;” a reference to going out into war (Ibn Ezra). Even though his brother Issachar was senior to him, Moses mentions Zevulun first when according these blessings seeing that it would be he who enabled Issachar to engage in intensive Torah study. Yaakov (Genesis 49,13) had also blessed him before he blessed his older brother Issachar, as he foresaw that in the future Zevulun would be the financial backer of Issachar’s Torah study. Without such financial backing, Issachar could not have devoted himself to Torah study as he did. The joy Zevulun is promised here is his reward in the world to come in recognition of his share in Issachar’s Torah. Even though, as Ibn Ezra has stated, the plain meaning of the word בצאתך refers to going out to battle, one may also understand it as: “when you leave this life on earth.” Moses blesses Zevulun with the joy which will await him in the world to come. The reason all of this joy is (apparently) reserved for Zevulun, is that he is the mainstay of Torah knowledge through his support of those who engage in its study.
    Basing themselves on our verse, the sages (Pesachim 53) have formulated the saying: “anyone who gives merchandise (on credit) to a Torah scholar to trade with will be rewarded for this in the Torah academy in the world to come, seeing Solomon has said in  Kohelet 7,12: ‘for to be in the shelter of wisdom is to be also in the shelter of money;’ and the advantage of intelligence is that wisdom preserves the life of him who possesses it.” You will note that Moses’ blessing here contains two distinct subject matters. 1) He addresses Zevulun before he addresses his older brother Issachar. 2) He makes the blessing for Issachar part of the blessing bestowed on Zevulun. 3) The blessing for Zevulun is longer than that for the other tribes. He said concerning Zevulun that: “he will be nourished by the riches of the sea and by treasures concealed in the sand (of the beaches). At the same time, Moses was very brief in his blessing for Issachar, saying only: “Issachar in your tents.” No other tribe received such a briefly worded blessing. Seeing that Issachar was the tribe excelling in Torah study, we would have expected Moses to devote more words of recognition for that tribe. We know that Issachar excelled in Torah wisdom from Chronicles I 12,32 where the author Ezra explains the reason why that tribe dispatched only 200 members to attend the crowning ceremonies of King David, by adding that the 200 men in question were יודעי בינה לעתים, “men who understood the needs of the times,” (or were so schooled in Torah that each one could predict when the year would have to be adjusted in order not to conflict with the solar seasons).
    The fact is that in spite of the relative brevity of Moses’ blessing, the words “in your tents” (pl) contained all the blessings it is possible to bestow on someone. Moses meant  the “tent” in the celestial regions, as well as the “tent” in the terrestrial regions. He extended his blessing to Issachar in both worlds. The joy that Moses referred to in the terrestrial regions has been described by David in Psalms 19,9 as פקודי ה' ישרים משמחי לב, “the ordinances of the Lord are just and fair and provide joy for the heart” (of the people studying them). He also blessed Issachar as being happy in the tent of the celestial region, a region where joy is perfect and complete. Our sages in Ketuvot 8 described this celestial region as one in which שהשמחה במעונו, “the true home of joy is in His heaven called מעון.” In that region reward is double what it is elsewhere. Perhaps the double letter ש in the name of יששכר, already indicates that his reward would be divided into two parts. One part of the reward would be given to him who studies the Torah, the other to those who sustain those who study Torah.
    33,19. שם יזבחו זבחי צדק, “there they will slaughter offerings of righteousness.” Moses means that all the people coming to Mount Moriah then will do so in order to offer their thanks to the Lord for His having granted them so much wealth..
    A kabbalistic approach: Moses related the sacrificial offerings to righteousness, i.e. צדק, as this is the emanation which is perceived as the initial one (מלכות) which “receives” offerings in the first instance. The letter ה at the end of the word המזבחה, (Leviticus 1,9) alludes to this emanation; I have already remarked on this in my comments on that verse. The path of the offerings proceeds “upwards” from the emanation צדק until it reaches the highest regions.
   ושפוני טמוני חול, “and by the treasures concealed in the sand.” Moses blessed Zevulun and Issachar with generous amounts of material wealth. They would possess so much wealth that they would be forced to bury some of it in the sand to protect it against thieves. (Ibn Ezra) The word ושפוני is as if the Torah had written it with the letter צ at the beginning, i.e. וצפוני, “and hidden.” The repeated wording, i.e. both שפוני and טמוני, is similar to the expression אדמת עפר in Daniel 12,2; Onkelos appears to understand it as the sand itself indicating that treasures are buried beneath it.
    
    33,21. וירא ראשית לו, “He saw the first (portion) claiming it for himself.” According to the plain meaning of the text the tribe of Gad requested the lands of Sichon and Og which were the first part of the land of Canaan to be conquered. 
    The words: “for that is where the lawgiver’s plot (grave) is hidden,” refer to Moses’ grave. The word מחוקק, usually translated as “lawgiver,” may mean “an outstanding person,” such as in Judges 5,9 in Devorah’s song where she speaks of לבי לחוקקי ישראל, “my heart goes out to the rulers of Israel.” [I suppose the author considers the term “lawgiver” inappropriate once the Torah had been given. Ed.] The reason Moses speaks of ספון, “hidden,” is an allusion to the fact that the exact site of his grave would remain concealed forever. The word is used in such a sense in Jeremiah 22,14 as well as in Chagai 1,4 where it means “roofed,” “covered.” Moses probably also did not want to use the word קבור, “buried,” as this has a ring of finality about it, whereas he considered his grave as a temporary parking place for his body pending the resurrection. He realised that the decree that he had to be buried outside the borders of Eretz Yisrael proper was in order to facilitate the resurrection of the generation of Israelites who had died outside the boundaries of the land of Israel under his leadership and whose resurrection would be due only to his personal merit (Tanchuma Chukat,10).
   ויתא ראשי עם, “he came at the head of the nation;” a reference to the two and a half tribes who formed the vanguard of the army of conquest under the leadership of Joshua.
   צדקת ה' עשה, “he carried out G’d’s judgments;” by honouring his verbal undertakings to Moses the tribe of Gad carried out G’d’s judgment. He (and the tribe of Reuven and half the tribe of Menasheh) had vowed not to return home until all the tribes had received their heritage.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bereshit Rabbah 1,6: The words וירא ראשית לו, are an allusion to the tradition that the universe was created due to the merit of Moses who has been described as ראשית in our verse here.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words וירא ראשית לו in our verse may be understood as part of the previous line speaking about G’d expanding the territory of Gad. [the reference is to expansion of intellectual horizons. Ed.] The whole verse commencing with ברוך מרחיב גד may thus be understood as וירא מרחיב גד ראשית לו, “the One Who expands (the territory of) Gad saw that the one called ראשית was His.” The message is: “when the Lord looked at the emanation חכמה, which is the topmost of the operative emanations, in order to begin creating the universe [ראשית and חכמה are thus equated. Ed.], He foresaw that the burial plot of the one called  מחוקק(Moses) was hidden in the portion of land allocated to the tribe of Gad, seeing Moses was so integrally part of the emanation ראשית. [clearly the word ראשית here must be understood on two levels, both in terms of time and in terms of wisdom. Ed.] He (G’d) decided then to radiate the attributes known as ראשי עם from there. In order to better understand this, refer to Psalms 24,7:שאו שערים ראשיכם , where the word ראש, ראשית, is used in a similar meaning. [the word ראשיכם clearly is a concept only, seeing gates do not have heads. Solomon (the author of that psalm who found that he could not bring the Holy Ark into the newly constructed Temple) prayed for an expansion of his perceptive powers. Ed.] 
    The words צדקת ה' עשה ומשפטיו עם ישראל refer to the emanations תפארת and כבוד which emanate from there. This is all very clear (author’s words). [It is not clear to me at all, but I suspect that the message is that seeing all abstract mystical concepts must have a place on earth from which they are made accessible to man, the author tells us that seeing Moses, who represented the emanation wisdom in the most near perfect level attainable by human beings would be buried there, i.e. would be “at home” there, it is natural that ‘lower” attributes, emanations, such as תפארת and כבוד, may become accessible through him who had attained the level of a higher emanation  i.e. חכמה. Ed.]
    The meaning of the Midrash as well as its mystical dimension, i.e. that Moses=ראשית, is based on the fact that he was the only prophet whose prophetic powers were such that he received what our sages call אספקלריא מאירה, “a clear, unblurred vision.” This type of prophetic vision is also known as ראשית, the “beginning, the top,” seeing that this was the highest level of wisdom Moses had attained. Anyone who prophesies does so from the level of emanation he personally has attained. However, prophesying ”from,” i.e. “out of” an emanation, does not mean that the prophet has “mastered” the essence of this emanation. This explains why Moses asked for additional perceptive powers when he said to G’d (Exodus 33,18) הראני נא את כבודך, “please show me Your attribute כבוד.” This request went unanswered. The reason the Torah does refer to him as מחוקק is because his prophecy was always in the name of the tetragram, G’d’s essence. All the 248 positive commandments were legislated by G’d in His capacity as Hashem. The numerical value of the letters מחקק =248. The total number of negative commandments is 365, a number reminiscent of G’d’s attribute א-ד-נ-י (which is really 65). The opening letters of  Daniel’s prayer (Daniel 9,19) asking forgiveness for trespasses (transgressions of negative commandments) are ש-ס-ה i.e. 365. Each request is prefaced by use of the attribute א-ד-נ-י. The whole verse there reads אדנ-י שמעה, אדנ-י סלחה, אדנ-י הקשיבה, so that each word separately features this attribute and the three ראשי תיבות spell 365.
    I believe that Onkelos may have alluded to this when he translated מחוקק as ספרא רבא, “the great scribe,” seeing the source of his prophecy was the great name of the Lord, Hashem.
    This association of the name Hashem with the word מחוקק is particularly marked in Isaiah 33,22 כי ה' שופטנו, ה' מחוקקנו, ה’ מלכנו, הוא יושיענו. The numerical value of the letters in the word שופטנו=451, which breaks down into 365 (negative command-ments) emanated by the attribute האלוהים =86. 86+365=451. The numerical value of מחוקקנו is 312, composed of 248+the name of Hashem spelled in words instead of letters making 63. By adding the digit 1 representing the word itself we get 248+64=312.
    [There probably is significance in the spelling of מחקק without the letter ו here in the Torah, and the spelling with the letterו  in Isaiah. How else could we have arrived at the allusions represented by the numerical values? Ed.] Even though Rashi understands the word מחוקק in Isaiah as מושל, “ruler,” rather than as “lawgiver,” he himself understands it in as “students, disciples.” in Genesis 49,10. I believe that I am correct in my approach. Targum Yonathan (on the verse in Isaiah) also speaks of מחוקק as “the one who gave us אולפנא, ‘religious law.’” This is correct as the Torah was given under the aegis of G’d’s  Essence, Hashem.
    This may be an appropriate point at which to point out a number of things which are all associated with G’d’s “great” name, such as the Holy Temple, for instance. It is pointedly referred to as גדול, in Kings II 25,9: “He (Nevuchadnezzar) burned down the house of the Lord, the house of the King, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and the whole great House he burned by fire.” The last words clearly elaborate on what he did to the Temple. The priest serving in that Temple has also been referred to as the “great Priest.” The largest river on earth the Euphrates has also been described as “the great river.” (Deut. 1,7) In Deut. 11,7 the work of the Lord is described as מעשה ה' הגדול. When we respond during the recital of the Kaddish, we use the formula אמן יהא שמיה רבא, “Amen, may the great name be blessed.” The Aramaic word רבא is the translation of the word גדול, “great´ in Hebrew. We also speak of שלמא רבא in that same kaddish prayer, referring to the “great peace,” i.e. the peace under the aegis of the great name Hashem. The benediction over wine recited on Sabbath morning is known as קדוש רבא as opposed to that on Friday night. (compare Pessachim 106). [perhaps the great name of Hashem is more appropriate for the day than for the night; the night is usually under the aegis of the attribute of Justice. Ed.] The seventh day of Sukkot is known as הושענא רבא, the “great salvation.” The prayers on that day which feature the willow branch are addressed to Hashem more so than any other day as the day concludes 26 days from the date G’d commenced creating the universe on the 25th of Ellul. 26=the numerical value of the tetragram, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה, hence the appellation “great” is very much appropriate for that date. If you will analyse these examples you will discover that there is a common denominator to the adjective “great” which is associated with these days or with these phenomena.
    
    33,22. דן גור אריה, “Dan is a lion cub.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses compares Dan’s bravery and physical strength to that of a lion, describing how he leaps down from the mountain of Bashan. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the tribe was called Dan, corres-ponding to the attribute of Justice. When the original Dan was born his step-mother Rachel had said that G’d had judged her (Genesis 30,6). The reason Moses compared the tribe of Dan in his blessing to a lion  was that the celestial image of the attribute of Justice is that of a lion cub.
    
    33,23. נפתלי שבע רצון, Naftali, satiated with favour;” according to the plain meaning of the text the reference is to the favour of G’d with which this tribe will be satiated; it is somewhat similar in meaning to the words in verse 16 רצון שוכני סנה, “the goodwill of (the Lord) resident in the burning bush.” He will be full of G’d’s blessing and inherit land in the west and south.
    A kabbalistic approach: Naftali will be satiated with the favour of G’d in His capacity as the attribute זאת, seeing that portion had commenced with the words וזאת הברכה. The words ים ודרום are an allusion to the world to come which is compared to ים and רחבת ים in Job 11,9. The present terrestrial world is compared to דרום, south, as we know from Joshua 15,19 (where Joshua gave such territory to the daughter of Calev, calling it (ארץ הנגב). This is also what is explained in the Sefer Habahir item 9, that the word ירשה is inappropriate as the word for שבט, tribe, is masculine and Moses should have said ירש, or רש. The addition of the letters י at the beginning and ה at the end are indicative of the blessing this territory enjoyed. We may therefore understand the verse as if Moses had written ים ודרום ויה רש, “he inherited west and south plus the blessing of the Lord.” Moses implied that he hoped that as a result of such blessing Naftali would be meticulous in observing G’d’s ways.
    According to my personal understanding of this verse, the allusions in it are both “peace” and “the covenant,” and even the emanations חכמה and בינה are referred to as רש, and this is the meaning of the sequence ים ודרום ויה רש (mentioned in the Sefer Habahir). The fact is that the tribe of Naftali was encamped alongside Dan in the north (Numbers 2,25-29). His flag depicted an eagle (see our comment there on verse 2). This is hinted at in the acrostic נ-ש-ר forming the opening letters of the words נפתלי שבע רצון. [there is therefore ample justification for not taking the words “west and south” at face value. Ed.]
    
    33,24. וטובל בשמן רגליו, “and he dips his foot in oil.” The choice of the word טבל was meant to indicate the abundance and even surfeit of oil (olive oil) in the part of the land allocated to Asher. (Ibn Ezra). This is why Moses said: “his foot,” instead of saying: “his hand.” The simile is similar to the one we find in Genesis 49,11: “he washed his garments in wine.” At that time Yaakov mentioned “laundering” to indicate how abundant the wine in Yehudah’s territory would be if one could afford to use it as water is used in laundering. Both expressions do not have to be understood literally.
    
    33,25. ברזל ונחושת, “iron and copper.” This means that these ores will be found in Asher’s territory. (Ibn Ezra). The verse could also be an allusion that Asher would be the “locksmith” of the land of Israel, i.e. that it would provide secure gates made of copper and iron for its territory to protect it against invaders or thieves trying to steal the oil. The people of Asher would, however, export their oil to other countries. The whole country would be locked by means of these gates. (Nachmanides)
   וכימיך דבאך, “and as your days (of your prime) may be your old age.” Onkelos believes that the word דבאך should really have been דאבך, as in דאבון נפש, “mental distress.” He implies this in his translation of these words as וכימי עולמתך תקפך, “as in the days when you were full of vigour.” The words ימיך refer to youth, years which have been described elsewhere as ימים; whereas the period of old age is generally viewed as a period in which one endures distress of one kind or another, a period which Kohelet described as a period אשר אין לי בהם חפץ, “years which I do not enjoy” (Kohelet 12,1).
    The plain meaning of these words, however, is based on the word דבאך meaning: “your flow,” like זבת שמן “flowing with oil.’ Moses prays that Asher will experience this abundance all the days of his life. The Aramaic of זב is דאיב, and Moses may have used an Aramaic word here. This would not be the only time that Aramaic words have been used in the Torah. One example which comes to mind is Genesis 31,47 יגר שהדותא, which is the translation of גלעד. Other Aramaic words are found in Deut. 33,2, ואתה מרבבות קודש. In the Book of Prophets Isaiah 21,12 we have the words אתא בוקר. The author quotes several more examples from the Book of Prophets as well as form the Scriptures.  He also quotes words of identical meaning in both languages. The Talmud’s editors Ravina and Rav Ashi used both languages at will. The only reason they could do so was that they followed the example of the Torah. The author hints that there is a mystical foundation for all this, i.e. the relationship between the Holy Tongue Hebrew and Aramaic, which he is not at liberty to elaborate on.
    
    33,26.אין כא-ל ישורון , “There is none like G’d, Yeshurun;” after Moses had concluded blessing the tribes individually, he now addresses the whole people reminding them of how fortunate they are in receiving their share on earth by the Creator of the universe directly. He tells them that they will inherit the land of Canaan, something that has been denied him; he also explains aspects of the hereafter to them, as I will explain in greater detail. He seals his words with esoteric matters, and this is why he begins this paragraph reminding the people that there is No One comparable to G’d. Whereas all the other nations have been placed under the guidance of intermediaries, angels, etc., not so the Jewish people. The first time Moses had requested from G’d that this be so was in Exodus 33,16 with the words ונפלינו אני ועמך, “and let me and Your people be distinct.” The reason he calls the Jewish people ישורון at this stage is not because of their character but because they have a “direct line,” (ישר) to G’d, unlike the other nations. This is also why, in extolling the advantages of the Jewish people compared to other nations, he says אשריך ישראל מי כמוך, “Hail to you Israel; who is comparable to you?” (verse 29). They are unlike the other 70 nations. This is why he tells the people that their share of the worldly goods and their status on earth is different from those nations. He commences by describing the G’d of Israel as “riding the heavens,” always available to assist His people ובגאותו רוכב שחקים, “in His majesty (He rides) through the upper regions.” In the last part of this verse the word רוכב is to be added before the word שחקים, otherwise there is a verb missing.
    The concept of G’d “riding” the heavens requires some analysis. According to the plain meaning of the text the verb “riding” depicts simply someone who is in control, much as the mounted police are in control of the mob on foot. It is similar to 32,13: “He makes it (Israel) ride on the heights of the Land,” where “riding” also was a simile for being in a dominant position. Just as the horse performs at the command of its rider, Moses describes the function of the heaven as being to perform at the will of G’d Who rides it. We find this described in Job 39,18: תשחק לסוס ולרכבו, “making fun of both horse and its rider.” (G’d describing that were it not for being deprived of its natural instincts, the ostrich would fly and not leave its eggs exposed to all kinds of danger) The orbits of the celestial bodies must not be ascribed to their own ability and power, but only to the power of G’d Who is the source of their motion.
    In this verse the word שמים refers to the heavenly regions known as ערבות. Our sages in Chagigah 12 deduce this from the verb רוכב used by Moses here in describing G’d’s movements over the heaven and the same verb used in Psalms 68,5 סולו, לרוכב בערבות, “extol the One Who rides in the ערבות.”
    Maimonides writes in Moreh Nevuchim 1,70 “consider the wording of Chagigah 12 where the sages describe the Aravot as high and G’d ‘dwelling’ upon them.” They quote in support the word רוכב from Psalms 68,5. The reason that David used the word רוכב in that psalm rather than the word שוכן is that the latter word would have created the impression that a fixed site had been assigned by him to G’d, something inappropriate seeing He is the site of the universe and not vice versa. At best, using the word שוכן would have made G’d appear no better than some of the other celestial phenomena none of which possess independent powers.
    A kabbalistic approach: when Moses described G’d as רוכב שמים, the word שמים has to be understood as a reference to the various attributes of G’d, whereas the One “riding” them is the Essence, Hashem, the אין סוף. The message Moses wishes to convey is that as long as the Israelites carry out G’d’s commandments, the distance between  G’d the Essence, and G’d in the form of His attributes is minimal, no more so than that of a horse and a rider. If the Israelites do not observe the Torah, however, He will gradually withdraw His Essence to more distant regions, thus distancing Himself from His attributes. This has been expressed in a similar vein by our sages who interpreted Psalms 60,14 where David says באלו-הים נעשה חיל, “with G’d we shall triumph;” i.e. at a time when Israel performs the commandments, whereas צור ילדך תשי, Deut. 32,18: “You weakened the Rock Who brought you forth,” i.e. you weakened G’d’s powers by not observing His commandments.
    
    33,27. מעונה אלו-הי קדם, “you made as your abode the G’d who preceded time.” According to the plain meaning of the text the words mean: “your abode is the G’d from immemorial times.” The meaning is similar to Psalms 91,9: עליון שמת מעונך, “you established the most High as your haven.” The meaning of the word מעון is similar to סכה, “hut,” in the sense of “shelter.” Compare Psalms 76,3 ויהי בשלם סכו ומעונתו בציון, “Salem became His abode, Zion His den.” The difference between מקום and מעון is that the former describes a place beneath the subject, the latter a place above the subject. (Ibn Ezra)
   ומתחת זרועות עולם, “and beneath are the world’s mighty ones.”  This could refer to powerful forces on earth which provide support for the Jewish people, or it could refer to G’d being the זרועות, “the mighty arms,” Who supports both what is beneath Him as well as what is perceived as above the earth. The simile is somewhat like Psalms 104,2 where David describes G’d as establishing the firmament (without supporting pillars) over the whole globe as if it were a carpet. The fact that G’d suspends earth without perceptible supports has also been described in Job 26,7: “He suspends the world (earth) over nothing (emptiness).” All the Lord needs to support the universe is His invisible, abstract force, power. We human beings have to restrain ourselves from voicing the thought: “how is this possible?” We are simply not able to comprehend this. (something which does not it make any less true). The word בלימה in Job 26,7 are two words spelled as one, i.e. בלי מה, “without anything.” Heaven and earth both are supported by an invisible force. This is also what Isaiah quotes G’d as saying to him in Isaiah 46,4: “I have made it and I carry it.” The prophet speaks of G’d saying that He made both heaven and earth and He carries or supports both. Anyone who possesses this kind of strength is certainly able to expel His enemies from His presence (a reference to the second half of our verse here). 
    A kabbalistic approach: The letter ה at the end of the word מעונה (which is usually simply מעון) is a reference to the attribute of Justice. If this were not so, Moses would have said (as he did in Psalms 90,1): ה’ מעון אתה היית לנו, “Lord You have been a refuge for us.” In Psalms Moses uttered a prayer and alluded to Hashem, the attribute of Mercy. Hence he spoke of מעון rather than of מעונה. Here Moses was forced to allude to the attribute of Justice as it is the attribute which will drive out G’d’s (and Israel’s) enemies. The word זרועות is not in the construct form, i.e. “arms of,” or something to that effect. The letter ה at the end of the word  מעונה then is a reference to the first letter ה in the tetragram, not the last. [I confess I cannot follow from here to the end of this paragraph. The author tries to describe that Moses demonstrates how, through observance of G’d’s commandments, an aspect of the attribute of Justice may be converted into becoming an advocate on behalf of the people. The precise steps and how they are reflected in the wording here escape me. Ed.]
    
    33,28. עין יעקב, “the well of Yaakov.” According to the plain meaning of the text “someone who had emerged from the ‘well’ of Yaakov.” (Ibn Ezra). We find a similar expression pertaining to offspring of Yehudah in Isaiah 48,1, where the words וממי יהודה  “and have issued forth from the waters of Yehudah,” also mean that the people the prophet refers to are descended from Yaakov through Yehudah.
    The words אל ארץ דגן, “to a land of grain,” clearly must be understood as “in a land of grain, etc.” We have a similar use of the word אל in Kings I 8,35 where Solomon describes people praying at the Temple as ויתפללו אל המקום הזה, “and they will pray to this place.” Clearly, he did not mean that their prayers should be directed at the “place,” but, to G’d Who is perceived as being at that place.
    If Moses speaks of the inheritance of the land in conjunction with Yaakov (instead of Avraham or Yitzchok), this is to preclude anyone thinking that other descendants of the two senior patriarchs had any claim to that land. This is also why we never find the expression עין אברהם or עין יצחק as it would have included other sons of Avraham, or Esau, a son of Yitzchok. We have pointed out repeatedly that the Jewish people have an exclusive claim to four gifts: prophecy, Torah, the land of Israel, and resurrection of the bodies after an interval. 
    The exclusivity of these gifts to the Jewish people can be attributed directly to quotes from Moses’ own lips. Concerning the gift of prophecy, he said in Deut. 18,15: “a prophet among you, one of your brethren, someone like me, etc.”  He meant: “just as I am a direct descendant of Yaakov, so any future prophet will be a direct descendant of Yaakov.” This verse teaches that prophecy is not to be found except among the Jewish people.
    If you were to counter that we do find Bileam as a prophet among the Gentile nations, the fact is that Bileam was not a prophet at all; he had the occasional communication from G’d, a communication described as מקרה, as we know from the Torah itself which described G’d ‘s communication to him as ויקר instead of as ויקרא, i.e. a happening which was of a totally irregular nature. Even on that occasion, G’d communicated with him only for the sake and honour of the Jewish people. (compare author’s words on Numbers 23,16 and 24,4) Alternatively, the only reason Bileam was granted prophetic powers was to silence the Gentiles’ argument that if G’d had given them prophets they too would have risen to the same moral and ethical levels as had the Jewish people (Bamidbar Rabbah 20,1). 
    The exclusivity of the gift of the Torah to the Jewish people is proved by the verse (Deut. 33,4) “Moses has commanded the Torah to us, an hereditary gift for the community of Yaakov.”
    The exclusivity of the gift of Eretz Yisrael to direct descendants of Yaakov is proved by our verse mentioning עין יעקב אל ארץ דגן ותירוש. History has proved that during the many centuries of the Jewish people being exiled from that land no other nation ever succeeded in making it a land flowing with milk and honey. This is why it was never settled successfully by another nation for any period of time.
    The resurrection of the dead being something reserved for the Jewish people is attested to by the words in our verse אף שמיו יערפו טל, “even its heavens drip with dew.” The word שמיו, “its heavens,” refers to the expression עין יעקב at the beginning of the same verse, meaning that the dew which in the future will be the mechanism awakening the dead to rebirth comes from the part of heaven ערבות, in which the descendants of Yaakov ride in the interval. In other words, the Yeshurun described in verse 26 are the souls of the Jewish people after death awaiting the call to be resurrected. This part of heaven contains the dew which will reunite these souls with their bodies. Other nations do not share this privilege; their souls will not be reunited with their bodies. This is what Daniel 12,2 referred to when he spoke about many awakening from their slumber, the “many” being Jews. The word רבים, chosen by Daniel as the ones who will be resurrected is a word which has been used to describe Jews on other occasions in the Bible, such as in Esther 8,17 ורבים מעמי הארץ מתיהדים, which, according to Sifri Haazinu 306 (end of Deut. 32,2), refers to Jews becoming proper Jews again. According to Rabbi Semoey there, Moses calls the heaven the domain of the soul, whereas he refers to the earth as the domain of the body. He calls on the dew to reunite the two. People who studied and practiced Torah on earth are as if “heavenly,” and the curse that they will die (permanently) as described by David in Psalms 82,7 does not apply to them. Obviously, the people he speaks of can only be the Jewish people. 
    We also find that Isaiah prophesied about the future of the Gentile nations saying that מתים בל יחיו, רפאים בל יקומו, “they are dead, they can never live; shades, they can never rise” (Isaiah 26,14), whereas in verse 19 of the same chapter he writes: ”your dead will live, let corpses arise! Awake and shout for joy, you who dwell in the dust, for your dew is like the dew on fresh growth, you make the land of shades come to life.” The meaning of the two verses is that a revival of the dead will occur only for the Jewish people. You should know that all of the Jewish people will be resurrected physically, however they will then experience a judgment which will determine their future. This is why Daniel 12,2 describes that some “will remain alive indefinitely whereas others will be consigned to everlasting abhorrence.” This is also what the psalmist Assaph referred to in (Psalms 73,20) בעיר צלמות תבזה, “when awake you despise death.” The word בעיר in that verse has its root in ער, awake, and is to be understood as בהעיר, “when in a state of wakefulness.” We encounter similar constructions, such as in Isaiah 23,11 where the word לשמיד is to be understood as if the prophet had written להשמיד, “to destroy.” Targum Yonathan renders the verse in Psalms 73,20 as “like the dream of a person who is awakened from a dream to face a day of judgment when I awaken them from their graves in anger to announce their permanent death.” We have also been taught in a Baraitha (Rosh Hashanah 16) that when the day of judgment arrives there will be three groups of people. One group comprises the totally righteous, one the totally wicked, irredeemable, and one group consists of  the ones who fall in between the other two categories. The first group will be immediately inscribed and sealed in the Book of the righteous and their fate will be sealed so that they can immediately proceed to the hereafter. The second group will be consigned to hell immediately, in accordance with the verse from Daniel which we already quoted. This proves to you that even the totally wicked (Jews) will first be awakened before being consigned to their eventual destination. For the wicked this resurrection of their bodies will actually be a punishment rather than a reward seeing that they will be judged in Gehinom both body and soul in one of the seven levels of that domain.
    Concerning the people who fall between the two extremes of being totally righteous and totally wicked, the Talmud Rosh Hashanah 17 says that they will express their pains during the punishments endured but, if their merits exceed their demerits, they will rise from the pain inflicted upon them and join their brethren in the hereafter reserved for the righteous. The ones whose demerits exceed their accumulated merits, however, will descend into Gehinom for a period of 12 months. At the end of that period their bodies will cease to exist and their souls will be burned, the remains being scattered beneath the soles of the feet of the righteous inhabiting these celestial regions. The fact that the Talmud describes their bodies as “ceasing,” proves that they had descended to Gehinom first both as bodies and souls.
    In order to hint that the resurrection of the bodies is something reserved exclusively for the Jewish people, Moses mentioned “dew,” and immediately afterwards: “hail to you Israel.” Our sages in the Sifri 340, commenting on the words in 34,3 where the Torah describes the extent of the vision granted to Moses, עד הים האחרון, “as far as the western sea” in 34,3, add: that instead of reading these words as עד הים האחרון, we should read them as עד היום האחרון, “until the final day.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Sifri Vezot Haberachah 356: the words עין יעקב mean: “a similar type of blessing to that bestowed by Yaakov.” The essence of Yaakov’s blessing had been that G’d would bring his family back to the land of Israel. (Genesis 48,21).
   אף שמיו יערפו טל, “also its heavens will drip dew.” The simile: “its heavens” (read “his” heavens) refer back to G’d, (א-ל) just as the words ויגרש as well as ויאמר in verse 27 also refer back to that subject at the beginning of verse 26. Alternatively, the simile שמיו, “its heavens,” may refer to Israel, and the construction would be an example of appending something minor to something major. Moses phrased it thus in order to emphasise the great stature of the people of Israel, making the “heavens” subordinate to Israel. A third possibility is that the word שמיו, “its heavens,” refers to the word הארץ, “the earth;” it would not be the first time that the word ארץ appears as masculine. We have several such examples, one of which is Genesis 13,6 ולא נשא אותם הארץ, “the earth could not support them,” where the word נשא is masculine instead of נשאה. Another such example of the word ארץ appearing as masculine is found in Isaiah 9,18 נעתם ארץ instead of נעתן ארץ, “the earth was shaken.” The meaning of our verse then would be: “”the heavens which correspond to the sacred earth will drip dew,” i.e. beneficial dew. The word יערפו would then have the meaning of ירעפו as in Proverbs 3,20: “will drip down.”
    
    33,29. אשריך ישראל מי כמוך, “Hail to you, Israel;” this verse is an explicit promise to the Jewish people concerning life in the hereafter. Seeing that in the previous verse Moses had discussed the destination(s) of the body i.e. what is good for the body, such as the blessings bestowed on earth, abundant crops, conditions of secure tenure of the land, such as a land with ample supplies of grain and wine, a land benefiting from the beneficial dews descending from the skies, and even the promise that should the people ever be exiled, no conquering nation would ever feel at home in their land, now Moses addresses his attention to matters of benefit to the soul. 
    We know about this already from Bileam’s blessing in Numbers 23,9: “they are a nation which dwells in solitary splendour,” הן עם לבדד ישכון; Moses now takes up this theme when he refers to Israel being בדד. (verse 28) He is at pains to point out that the rosy future of the Jewish people comprises more than a secure and worry-free existence in Eretz Yisrael, accompanied by an abundance of material blessings. This is why he introduces the subject by describing a unique feature of the Jewish people, i.e. “hail to you Israel, who is like you?” He means that whereas all the other nations, at best, can look forward to a worry-free life of plenty on terrestrial earth, Israel will experience an additional dimension of life in the celestial spheres. This is the meaning of the words עם נושע בה' תשועת עולמים, “a nation delivered by Hashem Who extends His deliverance into 2 worlds” [עולמים, pl. Ed.]. A true deliverance must include life in the world to come, or it is by definition not a true deliverance. [one may understand the words “true deliverance” as a deliverance from the initial curse that came on upon mankind, i.e. death, when Adam ate from the tree of knowledge. Every “true” deliverance should free one from that. Ed.]
    After having told the people that there would indeed be a reward for keeping the Torah in the world to come, Moses proceeds to offer the Jewish people proof of this in the form of a miracle. He tells the people that G’d Himself would be their shield, that they would be able to boast about G’d being their “sword,” מגן עזרך. This promise includes the attribute of Justice, even. The word מגן, shield, is an allusion to the attribute of Justice, seeing a shield is generally worn on the left, and the attribute of Justice is perceived as on the left side of the diagram of the emanations. David also speaks of G’d being Israel’s shield in Psalms 18,36, when he said: ותתן לי מגן ישעך, “You gave me the shield of Your protection.” He elaborates further in Psalms 84,12, saying: כי שמש ומגן ה' אלו-הים, “for the Lord is both sun and shield.” In that verse David refers to the tetragarm, Hashem, as “sun,” and to the attribute of Justice, אלו-הים, as “shield.” Moses reassures the people that constant military success on earth against all their enemies is proof that they have a future in the very regions from which this success emanates, is orchestrated on their behalf by G’d.
    You may consider it a rule that all the various promises to the people of Israel as a whole, such as at the beginning of the portion Bechukotai, do not concern them themselves merely with the promise of reward in this finite world of ours. They are all similes for the kind of reward awaiting us in celestial regions after the death of our bodies. The success promised by the Torah in our terrestrial world is only to be viewed as proof of the far greater reward in store for us (if we keep the commandments) in a far better world than the terrestrial globe on which we have been born. It is most appropriate that the King of Israel, Moses, on the day when he himself readied himself for entry into that better world, tells his charges that he blessed them in this fashion, that all of them could look forward to that kind of a future.
    
    34,1. ויעל משה, “Moses ascended;” according to the view of Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra, these words and all those that follow have been written by Moses’ disciple Joshua, seeing that after Moses ascended he did not come back, and when should he have written these words and where? Joshua wrote these lines after having been prophetically inspired, seeing that he was not an eye-witness to what is described in these verses. Ibn Ezra views the words ויראהו ה', “the Lord showed him,” as proof that Moses could not have written this, else he would have written ויראני ה', “the Lord showed me.” He also feels it is impossible for Moses to have written, concerning himself, “he was buried there.” Ibn Ezra felt constrained to adopt this approach as he could not accept that Moses describes his own death and burial while still alive.
    However, this is not true; his commentary is not correct. The correct way of viewing these lines is that we must accept the tradition that Moses wrote the entire Torah including the last eight verses at the dictation of G’d. In fact, one may view Moses as someone who copied verbatim a book which had been written long before he ever lived. This is the view of Rabbi Meir in Baba Batra 15 who said: “is it conceivable that the Torah would be complete if even a single letter of it were missing? Was it not Moses himself who commanded the Levites in Deut. 31,26: ‘to take this book of the Torah?’ Did he command them to take an incomplete Torah?” We must adopt the opinion of the sages in the Talmud who hold that Moses wrote these last verses בדמע. [I have never been sure if this means “tearfully,” or “with tears,” i.e. substituting tears for ink. Ed.]
    I do not believe that it is something so extraordinary for us to believe that Moses could write a verse saying: “Moses, the servant of Hashem, died there, and He buried him in the valley, etc.,” seeing he was writing matters which had not happened yet but would surely happen in the future. He had previously written about things which had not happened yet but would happen in the future, when he wrote (Deut. 32,19) “the Lord saw and became exasperated and spurned His sons and daughters, etc.” At that time Moses had predicted events which would not occur until the fall of the Temple. He had also described many other events in the future in the past tense, as if they had already taken place.  This was a style employed by many prophets and is something we should not have too much trouble to understand. (compare Nachmanides on Exodus 15,1 and the use of the future tense there for an event which had just occurred).
    
    34,4. זאת הארץ אשר נשבעתי לאברהם ליצחק וליעקב לאמר: לזדעך אתננה, “this is the land concerning which I have sworn to Avraham, to Yitzchok, and to Yaakov, saying: “to your descendants I shall give it.” In this verse Moses hints that at an appropriate time the Shechinah will return to the land of Israel, the time in question being the one discussed at the end of the Book of Daniel. In Berachot 18 the sages focus on the word לאמור in the verse above; Rabbi Yonathan says there: “how do we know that the dead are in verbal communication with one another?” He answers that we derive this from the word לאמור in the above quoted verse. G’d is reported to have said to Moses: “tell Avraham, Yitzchok, and Yaakov that the oath I swore to them I have fulfilled to their children.” The Talmud therefore concluded that the dead could communicate with one another, otherwise how could Moses tell all this to the patriarchs seeing that all of them were dead? The Talmud further concludes that the dead experience pain on their bodies, proving it from a verse in Job 14,22: “He feels only the pain of his flesh, and his spirit mourns in him.” The Talmud assumed first that the dead experiences only pain inflicted upon himself but not that inflicted upon others; later on, the Talmud concludes that the dead experience even pains inflicted upon others, and that they are not only aware of what goes on in their world but also of what goes on in our world. They deduce all this from our verse, seeing that if they did not know what was going on in our world what good would it do for G’d to tell Moses to tell them what He had done on earth? The Talmud retorts that this latter argument is faulty, for if the patriarchs had known what goes on in our world why did G’d have to instruct Moses to tell them something they knew already? The Talmud answers that G’d wanted that the patriarchs give credit to Moses for having told them, although he had not told them something they had not been aware of.
    
    34,5. וימת שם משה עבד ה', “Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there.” Note that Moses has not been described as a “servant of the Lord” until he died. During his lifetime he was variously described as איש האלו-הים, “the man of G’d,” (Deut. 33,1) etc., only now after he has died is he referred to as “a servant of the Lord.” This latter appellation describes Moses in his full stature and theological attainments. A “servant” is someone who is familiar with the intimate aspects of his master’s life, having access to the privacy of his bedroom, etc., performing duties there of a very intimate and private nature on an ongoing basis. We have been told explicitly in Chulin 7 that the righteous are even greater in death than they have been in life. No human being has ever been given the title “holy,” until after they have died. For instance, the words לקדושים אשר בארץ המה, “the holy ones who are in (under) the earth,” are understood by Midrash Tehillim (Psalms 16,3) as referring to the patriarchs who have already died. The Midrash concludes from that choice of words that even the patriarchs did not qualify for the compliment: “the holy ones,” until after their deaths. The reason for all this is that as long as people have an evil urge there is no guarantee that they will not give in to the temptation offered by that evil urge. This has also prompted the sages responsible for formulating our prayers to have us say in the third of the 18 benedictions of the Amidah prayer: “and holy ones praise You daily, selah.” They refer to the souls of these “holy ones” praising the Lord. This is also what David speaks of in the last of the psalms when he concludes כל הנשמה תהלל י-ה, “when it is all soul, it praises You, praise the Lord.”
    Many people ask the question how it was possible that someone of the stature of Moses who became the instrument of giving the Torah to the people of Israel, died, whereas Elijah and Chanoch, both people of lesser stature, did not die? (compare Genesis 5,24 and Kings II 2,11 respectively) The answer is that Moses sinned at the waters of strife whereas both Chanoch and Elijah had not been guilty of sin at all. Seeing that they did not sin, they never became a part of the human race, אדם, a species to whom sin is an integral part of their existence. This is why these two individuals could enjoy eternal life.
   על פי ה', “at the command of the Lord.” According to the plain meaning of these words Moses died as he had been commanded by G’d to ascend the mountain and to die there (Deut. 32,3). 
    According to a Midrashic approach (Baba Batra 17) the words על פי mean: ”death by kiss (divine).” His soul could transfer directly to the world of disembodied spirits, not having to undergo any prior preparation, spiritual cleansing, etc.
    
    34,6. ויקבר אותו, “he buried him.” The word אותו here is identical with עצמו, i.e. “he buried himself.” You find a similar construction in Ezekiel 10,22 where the Merkavah, the divine entourage, is discussed and we find the words: מראיהם ואותם, which normally would have to be translated as “their appearances and them”, something that does not make sense [as it would simply be a repetition of what had been stated already. Ed.] The meaning therefore must be: “their appearance and their essence.” Moses entered a cave in the valley to which he had been assigned. This is called: “burying himself.”’
    Rabbi Yishmael was in the habit of explaining the three times the word את (i.e. אותו, אותו, אותם) appears in our verse here, in Numbers 6,13, and in Leviticus 22,16). In all three instances the word is used reflexively, the subjects carrying out themselves (on themselves) the activities described, such a Moses burying himself in our verse here.
    A Midrashic approach reflecting the view expressed in Sotah 9: the words ויקבר אותו refer to G’d Himself having buried Moses. The numerical value of the letters in the word בגי, “in the valley,” equal the numerical value in G’d’s attribute י-ה, i.e. 15, a hint that G’d did the burying. When the Torah speaks here about G’d “burying” Moses, this refers not only to Moses but to the righteous generally; we know this from Isaiah 58,8: “your righteousness walks before you and the glory of the Lord will gather you in.”
    You will also find that the word ויקבר is in a construct form to the word Hashem (which precedes it). [as if the meaning were “Hashem buried him.” Ed.] This is based on the principle that words which appear next to one another are subject to exegesis (even if they appear in separate verses).
    We need to understand what is meant by “G’d burying.” It means that the earth at that point opened miraculously to admit the body of Moses and then closed above him again, not leaving any trace. It is possible to add that seeing burial is by definition a form of hiding something, the entire verse may be interpreted in terms of how Moses’ soul was hidden. The words: ויקבר אותו בגי, may then mean that G’d hid Moses’ soul  inside 13 (גי) חופות, “wedding canopies” behind which the righteous experience delight in Gan Eden. We find a similar statement [featuring the number 13. Ed.] concerning Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai who was reported to be seated on top of 13 תכתכי פיזא, “thirteen golden stools.” [the 13 wedding canopies are a simile for someone being given a great deal of honour. Ed.]
    The word מואב in our verse has a numerical value of 49. The meaning of the words בארץ מואב is: “in the land of the living together with the ‘49.’” If this is correct, the defective spelling of the word בגי which, if its meaning were only “in the valley,” should have been spelled as בגיא, is meant to tell something additional. The spelling, which  we already pointed out, is equal to י-ה, i.e. 15. If we take the four letters in the word מואב as 4, and add the 15 from בגי, plus the numerical value of the word מואב, i.e. 49, we get a total of 68, i.e. חיים, suggesting that both Moses’ body and his soul were accorded outstanding honour. While we are on the subject, it is worth noting that the absence of a letter where we would have expected it reveals clues to other mysteries such as the length of time the terrestrial world will endure. In Exodus 20,11 the Torah speaks about G’d having created the word ששת ימים instead of writing בששת ימים as we would have expected. The missing letter ב carries a message, i.e. that this creation was going to endure only for 6,000 “days” [a day in G’d’s reckoning equaling 1,000 years in our calendar. Ed.] 
   מול בית פעור, “opposite Bet-Peor.” According to our sages Tanchuma Ki Tissa 20, Moses had been afraid of certain negative phenomena in the form of מלאכי חבלה, destructive angels, already at the time of the golden calf when he was on Mount Sinai. Banishing these forces could never be more than temporary, and the events at Bal Pe-or, (probably identical with Bet-Pe-or) reflected a failure on his part to counter these forces a second time. Compare what the author wrote on Numbers 17,11 יצא הקצף. Moses, who had not banished the fifth of these negative forces described as חמה, permanently, was buried facing the earthly residence of this force so as to oppose it even in death and thereby to protect his people against this force opening its mouth and accusing Israel of idolatrous conduct. We find that the Men of the Great Assembly are reported to have done something similar when they tried to banish the evil urge, throwing it into a pot of scalding water (euphemisms, of course, compare Talmud Yuma 69). At any rate, according to this Midrashic interpretation, the fact that Moses’ grave was near such an abomination is not to be construed negatively but positively, reflecting Moses’ ongoing concern to protect his people even in death.
   ולא ידע איש את קבורתו, “and no man knew (the exact site of) his grave.” The word מקום which should have preceded the word “his grave,” has been deliberately omitted to indicate that it remains unknown.
    
    34,7. לא כהתה עינו, “his eyesight had not become weaker.” This is actually a reference to the rays of light which the skin of Moses’ forehead emitted, a gift which he had brought with him from Mount Sinai (Exodus 34,29). The word עין here does not mean “eye,” but means the same as in the description of the properties of the manna which the Torah described as “like the sparkling, i.e. עין of ‘bedolach’” in apperance (a gemstone called “crystal” by Rashi in Numbers 11,7). Another instance where the word עין does not mean “eye,” though it appears so at first glance, is found in Ezekiel 1,22 כעין הקרח הנורא. It can hardly mean “as the terrible eye of the ice,” but must mean: “as the sparkle of the awesome ice.”
   ולא נס לחה, “and his vital juices had not departed from him.” A reference to the moisture of the body which prevents it from drying out, from dehydrating. Seeing that it is normal for people over a certain age to appear to dry out and to shrivel, the Torah testifies that Moses’ body had not displayed any signs of aging till the day he died. We find the expression לחה, i.e. לח, “moist, wet," with the added letter ה instead of the pronoun ending ו describing “his” moisture, already mentioned by the Torah when Moses was born where his mother Yocheved is described as ותראהו, “she saw him,” and the Torah inserted the letter ה to indicate that when she looked at him she also perceived the presence of the Shechinah, alluded to by that letter. The extra letter ה here means that this divine element had not left Moses from the day he was born until after the day he died.
    
    34,11. לכל האותות והמופתים, “for all the signs and wonders;” according to the plain meaning of the text he performed all these miracles before the eyes of the people who quarreled with him until they were forced to concede that Moses had been right all along. He performed all these miracles in front of the other Israelites who were all loyal in their belief in Moses’ divine mission. Because Moses performed all these miracles publicly, in front of such a large audience, he became known as the prophet par excellence throughout the world and throughout history. (compare Maimonides in Moreh Nevuchim 2,35). [also Yehudah Halevi in his Kuzari writes in this vein. Ed.] We know that other prophets did not enjoy this type of audience when they performed miracles, as we read in Kings II 8,4 that the king asked Gechazi to tell him about miracles performed by Elisha. In other words, he received the information only second hand. Gechazi, of course, proceeded to tell the king about how Elisha had revived a dead person, etc.” Moses’ prophecy and the miracles he performed were known throughout the civilised world in his time. This is what is meant here by the emphasis on the words: “before Pharaoh, and all his servants, and his whole country.”
    A Midrashic approach: the words לכל האותות והמופתים refer to the Ten Plagues in Egypt, concerning which the Torah said that they struck Pharaoh, all his servants, and all his country.”
    
    34,12. ולכל היד החזקה, “and by all the strong hand;” this is a reference to the splitting of the Sea of Reeds in connection with which the Torah had written (Exodus 14,31) “Israel saw the manifestation of the great hand.”
   וכל המורא הגדול, “and by the great awesome spectacle;” this is a reference to what occurred at Mount Sinai during the revelation. At that time G’d had explained these awesome spectacles as designed to strengthen the people’s awe of G’d and to help them not to trespass against Him. ( Exodus 20,20) Moses enumerates events in chronological order. His miracles had first been aimed at Pharaoh, and subsequently at the Jewish people.
    A kabbalistic approach: the references to יד החזקה and מורא הגדול “which Moses performed,” are similes for the emanations Tiferet and Kavod. These emanations are also reflected in the words of Isaiah 8,13: והוא מוראכם והוא מעריצכם, “and He is the object of your reverence and of your awe “ The words אשר עשה, must be understood as: “he demonstrated,“ [seeing Moses does not make miracles, but G’d does. Ed.] The reason that the Torah here does not write matters in the same order as did Isaiah, i.e. מורא before מעריץ, the parallel of which here would be מוראה before היד החזקה, is due to the respective level of the prophetic powers of the prophet involved. Moses, as opposed to Isaiah, had been privileged to see what are called “clear, unblurred visions.” Thus it was that the Torah wrote of him “לעיני כל ישראל, he demonstrated everything he wanted to convey to the ‘eyes’ of Israel,” to their most superior means of perception, in the clearest possible manner. He was able to convey the meaning of the emanations to the people. [He did not speak to the people in riddles, in euphemisms and in parables, as distinct from other prophets including Isaiah. Ed.] I believe that this is also the meaning of 33,21: צדקת ה' עשה ומשפטיו עם ישראל, “Moses performed righteousness and justice of the Lord with Israel,” [I believe the author means that he could demonstrate how these two attributes blend with one another without conflicting with each other. Ed.]
    You have to appreciate that seeing that both the Torah and the concept of the Jewish people preceded the creation of the universe (Bereshit Rabbah 1,5), the Torah commenced with the word בראשית, and concluded with the word ישראל. This Torah which Moses presented to the entire people of Israel is a true Torah, something which is eternal in its function as a salvation for the Jewish people. In the words of Deut. 6,24 וטוב לנו כל הימים, “it is good for us for all the days (which this universe endures).” It commenced with the letter ב and ends with the letter ל which represent between them the 32 paths of wisdom contained in the Torah. If you read these two letters from back to front, you have the allusion to the fact that sooner or later the world as we know is subject to unraveling, to returning to the state it was in at its beginning. The word לב, heart, is what we get when reading the last letter of the Torah first followed by the first letter of the Torah. “Heart” is symbolic of רצון, “will.” The will of G’d is the key to the continued existence of any phenomenon. The last letter in the Torah, the letter ל, is the tallest of the letters in the aleph bet, and it points in the direction of the root of the highest tree, the one from which all existence which we are witness to emanates, and which will also be the one causing it to terminate when the Creator so desires. The psalmist David had something like this in mind when he commenced the hymn לה' הארץ ומלואה, with the letter ל. (Psalms 24,1) This is the domain from which all intelligent beings receive their first insights, perceptions. This is also the path by means of which existence as we know it will come to an end, in the words of the prophet Samuel ותשובתם הרמתה. [an allusion to the frustration of the prophet Samuel at the failure of the appointment of Shaul as king and as potential eradicator of the anti-G’d Amalek. I believe all the allusions to metamorphosis of this universe and the ones preceding it are expressions of their failure to achieve the potential the Creator had hoped for. Ed.]
 
