the fact is that this very repetition of Terach’s name means that he lives on as he had done Teshuvah before he died thus securing for himself a place in the hereafter.
    A rational/scientific approach to our verse: seeing that a prophet would become frightened when he heard his name called for the first time, and as a result of his confusion he would misunderstand the divine message which was to follow, his name is called a second time in order to give him time to collect his thoughts. After the second mention of his name he would receive the message G’d wanted him to receive.
    A kabbalistic approach: the reason that both here and in other instances the name of the addressee was repeated was to indicate that both the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy had concurred that the prophet should be addressed in the manner to follow. As a matter of fact there are only four instances in the Bible of G’d repeating someone’s name when He called him. (Genesis 22,11, 46,2 Exodus 3,4 and Samuel I 3,10).
    
    3,5. של נעליך, “remove your shoes.” According to the plain meaning of the text the angel warned Moses to remove his shoes on account of the holiness of the site. This was to serve as a warning not to be disrespectful, i.e. nonchalant, when he would be addressed by the שכינה, “G’d’s Presence” (compare Berachot 54). We find something similar in Exodus 23,12 where G’d tells Moses to be on his guard in the presence of the angel as G’d’s name was within him.
    A rational approach to our verse: the term של נעליך is not to be confused with the term חלוץ נעליך. Whereas the latter means: ”take off your shoes,” similar to the expression שלוף נעליך, in Ruth 4,7 “taking off a sandal,” or to Deut. 25,9, “she will strip off his shoe,” the word של is related to שלילה, something negative and means that there was no need for Moses to wear shoes in such a place. He was warned to strip off what the shoe represented, i.e. material concerns. The act of removing his shoes was a mental preparation to ready him to become G’d’s vessel, His prophet. The lesson was that just as a man can take off his shoe at will, so he can divest himself of material concerns and concentrate on spiritual concerns. Instead of remaining attached to the עור, the leather of his shoe, he should become attached to the enlightening properties of his illuminating intellect, his אור השכל.  When Joshua received a similar command in Joshua 4,15 he was told של נעלך, “remove your shoe (singular).” The difference between Moses and Joshua was that Moses had separated from his wife and was thus able to divorce himself more easily from earthly concerns. Joshua had not. G’d had told Moses in Deut. 5,28: “you- stay here with Me,” something which had enabled him to remain closer to G’d and to holiness.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words של נעליך suggest that the Shechinah was revealed to Moses on two levels, in two colours, i.e. “white” fire and “black” fire. These two “colours” symbolised the two attributes, the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy respectively.
    The words אל תקרב הלום של, “do not come closer, remove!” meant that the reverence Moses was to display for G’d’s Majesty as well as for the sacredness of the site should stop his attempt to inspect the phenomenon more closely. Another thing which was hinted to Moses at this time was that the Torah which would be written in black fire on white fire would be given at this site. This is the reason that G’d used the expression של, i.e. the two letters of this word are the first two letters of שחור  and לבן “black and white,” respectively.
   אדמת קודש הוא, “it is holy ground.” The word אדמת is in the construct form of the word קדש, i.e. Mount Sinai is holy ground. Compare Psalms 68,18 אדנ-י בם סיני בקודש, “the Lord is among them as in Sinai in holiness.” Now that Moses was only at the very beginning of his career as a prophet he was not yet allowed to step on this holy ground. The word הלום is itself a reference to the שכינה, as it is a word describing Majesty, Royalty (Shemot Rabbah 2,6). This is based on Samuel I 10,22: הבא עוד הלום איש?, “has anyone else come here?” [Samuel referred to Saul who was to be king, Ed.]. The word is again used in that sense in Samuel II 7,18: כי הביאותני עד הלום, “for He has brought me thus far?” [David acknowledging his position of King over Israel by grace of the Lord. Ed.] Seeing that the שכינה is emanated from a holy source, Moses was given his first inkling of the meaning of holiness. in terms of “holy ground.”
    
    3,6. אנכי אלוקי אביך, “I am the G’d of your father, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is the same as if G’d had said “the G’d of your fathers (pl).” We find such constructions in Exodus 15,2 אל-הי אבי וארוממנהו, “the G’d of my father (sing) and I want to exalt Him.” There too the word “my father” really means “my fathers.”
    A Midrashic (Shemot Rabbah 3,1) approach to the words “G’d of your father.” These words refer to Amram. Actually, G’d had wanted to say: “I am your G’d.” However, we have a rule that G’d does not associate His name with the living in the event such a person turns wicked. This is why G’d chose the nearest relative who was no longer alive, i.e. Moses’ father, who had been a righteous person and died as a righteous person. According to Tanchuma (Shemot 19)  when Moses heard the voice calling him  he rejoiced thinking that his father Amram was still alive. [Moses had been away from Egypt for many decades at this point. Ed.]. At that point G’d added: “I am the G’d of your father,” i.e. I misled you when I called your name in the voice of your father. I did this in order not to frighten you. The above proves that it is quite usual for prophets to become frightened at the time a voice from G’d suddenly calls to them. They need to be put at ease in order to overcome their fear. This is why we find in Samuel I 3,4  that when G’d first called to Samuel. He did so making His voice sound like that of the High Priest Eli, Samuel’s mentor.
    A kabbalistic approach: The “father” G’d referred to was Adam, i.e. G’d had already been the G’d of Adam This was appropriate seeing that when Hevel had offered his sacrifice he had had a glimpse of the Shechinah for longer than is permissible and had incurred the death penalty as a result. This is why Moses quickly turned away his face when he became aware of the fact that it was G’d speaking out of the bush. He was ashamed to look at something he had seen once before just as a person is ashamed to come face to face with sins committed on a previous occasion. Seeing that Moses was Hevel’s reincarnation it is not surprising that G’d described Himself as the “G’d of your father (Adam).” When our sages in Berachot 7 explain the verse (Exodus 33,20) “you cannot see My face for man cannot see My face and live,” G’d supposedly told Moses: “when I wanted to show you My face you did not want to look, (here at the bush); now that you want to see My face, I am not ready to show it to you.” In chapter 33,18 Moses had asked: “Please show me Your Presence.”
    This passage in the Talmud is at variance with a statement by Rabbi Meir who is quoted on that same folio as saying that due to three merits Moses was granted three things. Seeing he had turned aside at the bush, not wanting to look at something forbidden, he was granted to behold the image of G’d’s “face.” Seeing he displayed the proper degree of awe and reverence in the presence of such a vision (כי ירא, “for he was afraid” verse 6),  he was granted that when he descended from Mount Sinai that the skin of his forehead radiated light so that the people in turn were afraid to approach him (Exodus 34,30). Finally, as a reward for not having indulged his eyes (מהביט, when he had a chance to do so at the bush), he was granted (Numbers 12,8) greater visions than any other prophet as G’d explained to Miriam and Aaron on that occasion. Whereas visions seen by lesser prophets are known as אספקלריא שאינה מאירה, “blurred visions,” Moses enjoyed visions described as מאירה, distinct, brilliant. The latter is the kind of vision which originates with the attribute of Mercy.
    
    3,7. ויאמר ה’, “the Lord said.” We have to understand why the whole paragraph up until now employs the name אלו-הים to describe G’d,  whereas in this verse the name of G’d mentioned is the tetragram. The reason is simple. This is the moment at which G’d promises for the first time that the time has arrived for Him to display His pity for His people and to arrange for their redemption.
   ראה ראיתי, “I have indeed seen, etc.” In this verse we encounter three references to G’d’s awareness of what had been happening to the Jewish people. Each awareness mentioned is more specific and more encompassing than the previous one. G’d begins by speaking about what He has seen; He continues describing what He has heard; finally He describes the result of what He has seen and heard as “I have become intimately aware,” ידעתי את מכאוביו, “I have become intimately familiar with its pains.” According to what we read here the sensation of seeing something is not as powerful a tool to awaken responses as is hearing something. Only a combination of seeing and hearing is a truly powerful tool to arouse compassion. It is a fact that when one observes something without hearing any sound it is difficult to truly understand what the picture means. Similarly, if one hears sounds without seeing what causes these sounds, one also cannot form a coherent idea of what one has heard. One needs to both hear and see something in order to be able to evaluate these phenomena. The Bible uses the expression ראיה or שמיעה on different occasions as substitutes for the word הבנה, understanding. For example, we are told that a people whose language we do not “hear” is one that we do not understand (Deut. 28,49). The same is true of “seeing” unaccompanied by “hearing.” This is what  Solomon said in Kohelet 1,16לבי ראה , “my heart has seen.” If someone has understood something only with his heart this is not comparable to someone’s understanding which was based on seeing and hearing it first.
    Shemot Rabbah 3,2, questioning the need for the repetition of the word ראה concludes that G’d told Moses that there would indeed be two events to be witnessed by G’d but that Moses would witness only one of them, i.e. the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai. The second event, the Israelites trying to wriggle out of keeping the Torah, would be something reserved for G’d to see. Moses would not have to see it in his lifetime. The latter event is depicted by Ezekiel 1,10 “and the face of the ox (turned) to the left.” The “left” is always an allusion to something sinful.
    
    3,8. וארד להצילו ...אל ארץ טובה, “I shall descend in order to save it....to a good land, etc.” What was the need for the Torah to lavish so many compliments on the stones and trees of the land of Canaan? Was it not enough for a people in the condition of abject slavery such as the Jewish people to be told that they would be redeemed and would become free? Would they not consider this a welcome message even if the land they would go to would be of inferior quality? The fact is that all the compliments in our verse apply to the Torah. Torah has been described as לקח טוב, “good” instruction; (Proverbs 4,2) it has been described as רחבה, “spacious” (Psalms 119,96). All the adjectives in this verse apply to Torah as if the Torah had written “to a land (Torah) which is good, spacious flowing with milk and honey” (compare Song of Songs 4,11).
    The details of the land of Israel itself are described only commencing with the words: אל ארץ הכנעני, “to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, etc.” G’d’s message to the Israelites is that they would inherit the land of these nations as these people are not worthy of living in a country in which the Torah makes its home. Our commentary corresponds to what I have found in Bereshit Rabbah 16,7 on Genesis 2,12: “the gold of this land was good;” the Midrash says: “there is no Torah comparable to the Torah in the land of Israel and there is no wisdom comparable to the wisdom to be found in the land of Israel.”  We may add that the words אל מקום הכנעני “to the place of the Canaanite,” instead of the usual “to the land of the Canaanite,” contain an additional message, i.e. that the Israelites would wipe out the present inhabitants of that land and inherit their land. They would not merely live there as residents as had their forefathers.
    
    3,9. צעקת בני ישראל באה אלי, “the outcry of the Children of Israel has come to Me.”  Has this very wording not already been mentioned in verse 7? According to a kabbalistic approach the words צעקת בני ישראל in this verse are a reference to כנסת ישראל, the mystical dimension of the Jewish people, the representative of the Jewish people in the celestial spheres. It is this כנסת ישראל which has added its outcry in front of G’d pleading on behalf of its counterparts in the terrestrial world. 
   וגם ראיתי את הלחץ, “and I have also seen the pressure, etc.” Rabbeinu Chananel comments on the word לחץ that this pressure was due to the fact that Joseph at the time had assigned the province of Goshen to a family comprising only 70 souls. He had not realised that the population explosion that was to follow would result in the province of Goshen being far too small to contain all the Israelites and to provide them with a livelihood. At the same time, the Egyptians had not been prepared to make allowance for this and to allocate additional land to the Israelites. The Rabbi supports his view of the meaning of the word לחץ by citing Judges 1,34: וילחצו האמורי את בני דן ההרה כי לא נתנו לרדת לעמק, “the Emorites squeezed the Danites into the hill country; they would not let them come down to the plain.”
    
    3,10. ועתה לכה ואשלחך אל פרעה, “and now, go and I shall dispatch you to Pharaoh.” Actually, we would have expected G’d to say ועתה לך!, “go now!” Why did G’d use this cumbersome form of instruction? According to the plain meaning of the text the letter ה here is an allusion to the five days the Israelites would spend encamped at Mount Sinai prior to receiving the Ten Commandments on the sixth day of Sivan. This is also why G’d added: “this shall be the sign for you.” The word אות in this instance referred to the extra letter ה. G’d said to Moses (verse 12) “when you take out the people from Egypt you will serve the Lord at this mountain” (for five days and on the sixth you will receive the Torah). 
    A kabbalistic approach: The additional letter ה in the word לכה, represents the final letter ה in the Ineffable Name י-ה-ו-ה; this explains why G’d added in verses 12 זה לך האות “this letter ה (of My name) will be for you (proof) that, etc.” The letter ה of this name is also known as זה, such as in זה אלי ואנוהו, in Exodus 15,2 or such as in Exodus 13,8 בעבור זה עשה לי,  “for the sake of זה G’d has done for me, etc.”
    
    3,11. מי אנכי כי אלך אל פרעה? “who am I that I should go to Pharaoh?” Nachmanides writes on this verse that G’d instructed Moses to perform two tasks and that Moses was afraid of either one of them. The first instruction to Moses was to free the Jewish people, something that could be accomplished by bringing them back to the province of Goshen to remain free there. The second instruction was to take the Jewish people out of Egypt and lead them to the land occupied by the Canaanites. Concerning the first task Moses said to G’d: “who am I the lowly shepherd to demand such a thing from the powerful King? He will simply have me killed.” We have a parallel for this in Samuel I 16,2 where G’d had commanded the prophet to appoint one of Yishai’s sons as king instead of King Saul, and the prophet says to G’d: “as soon as Saul will hear about this he will kill me!” 
    Concerning the command to take the Jewish people out of Egypt, Moses said:  “this is a great and intelligent nation. They will not allow me, an ignorant shepherd, to lead them into a confrontation with powerful nations such as the Emorites, the Canaanites, etc.” Moses agreed that the people would definitely be anxious to be free of the burden of hard labour and slavery. After all, which nation does not yearn to be free? However, they would not obey the call to ascend to the land of the Canaanite. In the event, Moses proved right as every time the Israelites faced war against the Canaanites the people were scared and even preferred to go back to Egypt.
    G’d responded to both of Moses’ fears. Concerning Moses’ fear of confronting Pharaoh, G’d said “I will be with you, i.e. you need not be afraid of being killed.” He pointed to the vision Moses had now experienced which would be the sign that at this very spot the Jewish people would serve the Lord prior to being given the Torah. Once they would accept this they would become true servants of the Lord. The whole purpose of the phenomenon of the bush which refused to burn to cinders was to reinforce Moses’ belief in the success of the mission assigned to him. What was intended as a sign for Moses not to be afraid of confronting Pharaoh, would also be a sign for the Jewish people never to be afraid to confront the Gentile nations once they arrive at Mount Sinai. For the time being the people would be prepared to obey Moses’ instructions to follow him to a place only three days’ march away from their homes in Egypt. Thus far Nachmanides.
    
    3,13. ואמרו לי מה שמו? מה אומר אליהם? “when they will say to me: “what is His name? What shall I say to them?” Actually, Moses should have assumed that the people would ask him for a sign that he had been sent by G’d to be their redeemer. Deut. 13,13 describes the legitimisation of a man claiming to be a prophet to be that he promises that a certain event or events would occur and that after these events have occurred he uses this as his legitimisation as a prophet. Seeing Moses wanted the people to follow him out of Egypt, he most certainly would have to perform some very impressive miracle or miracles. When Moses asked G’d which of His names (attributes) he was to invoke to prove that he was a legitimate messenger this would not be considered a miracle or proof at all. If the people were familiar with such a name of G’d there was no reason why Moses should not also be familiar with it. It would prove nothing. If, on the other hand, the people were not familiar with that name of G’d, what proof would mention of that name be that the man in front of them had been appointed by their G’d to be their redeemer? We can therefore well understand Moses’ reaction: “but they will not believe me.” This is why G’d had to equip Moses with the ability to perform certain miracles to help convince the people that he was no charlatan.
    The plain meaning of the words “what is His name?” is: “what is the proof of His existence?” Moses wanted to know how to convince the people that G’d exercised supervision both of the universe and the fate of His people, something which had been sorely absent for so many years. He wanted that G’d reveal to him an attribute which would be adequate to convince the leaders of the people that He was real and took a real interest in them.  This is the reason G‘d replied אהיה אשר אהיה, “I shall be whoever I shall be”, i.e. that He was the only true existence of this universe, that all other phenomena in this world are transient, bound to expire sooner or later. G’d meant for Moses to explain this concept to the elders of the people.
    Nachmanides explains the words as הנמצא אשר הוא נמצא which is Maimonides’ way of explaining the name אהיה אשר אהיה in his Moreh Nevuchim.  It means that G’d’s Presence  is capable and likely to become manifest. Not only had He never been absent, but He would never be absent in the future either (though His Presence might not always be manifest). According to the explanations provided by both Maimonides and Nachmanides, Moses’ question had been addressed to G’d’s being manifest and His providing proof of His intervention in the fate of man. If that were really so, we have to express our amazement that the elders of Israel at the time should have had the slightest doubt about such fundamental tenets of our faith. Why would they require proof and reassurance of something so basic? Moreover, how would the revelation of a name of G’d they had not heard before serve to strengthen their belief in His involvement in their fate? If there had been any heretics amongst them denying G’d’s existence, telling people like that of another name of G’d would hardly impress them.
    Rabbi Bachya Ibn Pakuda, author of the work חובות הלבבות, “duties of the heart,” writes in the tenth chapter of שער היחוד  that when Moses quoted the Jewish people as asking him “what is His (G’d’s) name,” he meant that they would want to know something about G’d’s Essence. We always describe G’d in terms such as “the G’d of heaven and earth,” or “the G’d of the winds,” always comparing G’d to phenomena with which we are familiar. The reason we have to do this is because we have no idea of G’d’s Essence. It is something beyond our comprehension. Moses was quite astute therefore in asking: “what shall I tell them if they want to know Your Essence?”
    The fact is that knowledge about G’d may be acquired by two methods. It can be attained through tradition or it may be attained by means of an intellectual process of reasoning and observation. When G’d told Moses that אהיה אשר אהיה, He addressed people who looked for knowledge of Him by means of their intellect. In addition, He also informed Moses that He was the G’d of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, i.e. there was a long tradition of knowledge about Him and about what He had done for the patriarchs. He did so because the common people would not be able to arrive at valid conclusions about G’d by using only their intellectual powers. The cognition of G’d via the process of קבלה, history, tradition, is described in Job 15,18 in the following words: “that which wise men have transmitted from their fathers and have not withheld.”
    A Midrashic approach to the above (based on Shemot Rabbah 3,6). Moses actually had asked to know G’d’s “great” name, i.e. His Essence. Thereupon G’d said to Moses: “You want to know My name? I am known according to My deeds. When I am busy judging My creatures, I am known as “elohim.” When I am preoccupied  in fighting against the wicked, I am known as “tzeva-ot.” When I am suspending judgment of man’s sin temporarily, I am known as “shaddai.” When I am seated on the throne of Mercy I am known as ‘‎Hashem.’” What the sages of the Midrash wanted to convey to us by means of these illustrations is  אין רבוי ביחוד, that there is no such thing as a “plural which can be applied to the Unique One, to G’d.” The fact that G’d enjoys being known by a multiplicity of “names” does not mean that each name represents a different deity or even a different “power.” G’d is One. The reason He is known by many names is that man cannot express in his language all the attributes of G’d which combine to make up His Essence in a single word or expression. The nearest thing we can do is to describe facets of G’d’s Essence in terms reflecting His activities.
    It is important that you, the reader, appreciate that in our verse (14) the attribute (name) אהיה is mentioned three times.  This is meant to reflect G’d’s existence on three levels. It is a hint that G’d is supreme in three time zones. He is and was supreme in the past; He is and remains supreme in the present; He is and will remain supreme in the future. The reason this is so is because “time” does not effect G’d as it does any of His creatures. G’d is the “constant.” The creatures are the ones effected by the concept of time. If we would have to translate the words אהיה אשר אהיה, we would have to say: “I am the One who has not only been the same in the past as in the present, but I will continue to be the same in the future for all time.” Whenever we use the tetragram, the eternal nature of G’d is also meant to be part of that name. There is no need to elaborate on this further.
    A rational/scientific approach: The study of the permutations of the name or names of G’d yields the result that the letters in the name אהיה symbolise the existence of G’d in all three time zones. The letter א relating as it does to a “beginning,” is reminiscent of the “past;” the middle letter ה is reminiscent of something which is “in between,” i.e. the הוה the present. The letter י, the last one of the single digits (1-0) and the objective of all calculations is reminiscent of the future, i.e. יהיה. The last letter ה teaches that G’d’s existence during all the three time zones described is that of an ever-present one. He is no more or no less distant from the past than He is from the future. He relates to all time zones as if they were the present, the “here and now.” 
    The spelling of the tetragram (י-ה-ו-ה) alludes to the same thing. The reason it commences with the letter י is that the letter א is the head of all numbers beginning with the digit 1. When we think of the number 9  which is the last of the single-digit numbers for instance, and we then think about the number 10, we need to use the letter א)) in its capacity as the digit 1. It is impossible to write the number 10 in numbers without resorting to the digit 1. It follows that the letter א serves both as the beginning in the sequence 1-10 as well as at its end. In a similar manner the Creator (represented by the א) is also both beginning and end of all things, of all existence.-The letter י then is to be viewed as being a combination of the two digits 9+1 respectively. It is the first letter of the Ineffable Name in order to pre-empt the inquiry of what had been prior to the beginning, prior to “number 1,” and what would come after the “end.” א represents the beginning, whereas ט represents the last digit. By placing the letter י (combining 1+9) at the beginning, the Torah wishes to forestall such questions. One may therefore conceive of the tetragram as a combination of היה and יהיה. It teaches that G’d was “before” anything and will continue to exist “after” everything. His name will remain unchanged.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: “they will say to me: ‘what is His name?’” Moses meant they would ask him in what capacity, i.e. which of G’d’s names (attributes) had communicated with him? 
    Nachmanides writes as follows concerning all this: “I do not believe that the elders of the Jewish people at the time had the slightest doubt about the continued existence of the G’d of their forefathers as suggested by Maimonides. Moses was also sufficiently knowledgeable as befits someone appointed as a prophet to be aware of the intellectual and theological level of the elders of the Jewish people. (compare Sifri Deut. 1) He simply exploited this opportunity to present G’d with a theoretical situation which might face him when trying to legitimise himself in the eyes of these elders, in order for him personally to obtain additional insights from G’d as to whether G’d would bring the redemption in His capacity as the attribute of Mercy or in His capacity as the attribute of Justice. During the lives of the patriarchs G’d manifested Himself by means of נסים נסתרים, miracles which did not openly contradict the laws of nature. Moses assumed that the elders might ask him if G’d were now going to perform נסים גלויים, visible miracles, i.e. phenomena which demonstrate His mastery over the laws of nature. The former type of miracles are usually performed by the attribute of Justice whereas the latter type are the domain of the attribute of Mercy. When Moses asked G’d what “name” he should tell the people about, he meant under what heading the forthcoming redemption would take place. G’d’s reply that He is אהיה אשר אהיה, meant that He intended to perform only “hidden miracles,” that He did not intend to upset the laws of nature in order to bring about the release of the Israelites.
    G’d made this plain when He told Moses that he should tell the people אהיה שלחני אליכם, “the One who is called אהיה has sent me to you.” Had G’d wanted to inform the people that He intended to employ both the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy, He would have instructed Moses to present himself as the messenger from the One Who calls Himself אהיה אשר אהיה, and would have had to answer the inquiry by the elders with the words אהיה אשר אהיה שלחני אליכם. When, in verse 15, G’d gives additional instructions to Moses how to speak to the people by telling him to refer also to the fact that He had been both Hashem and elohim for the patriarchs, this is to teach the people that though the element of Mercy, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה had played a role in His dealing with the patriarchs, this element had not been manifest to them. It was important that now the people understand that even though this element might manifest itself in front of their very eyes it was but another facet of the unique and indivisible G’d. He wanted Moses and the people to understand that even the letters in the name אהיה which we have explained as pointing at the attribute of Justice are (basically) the same as the letters in the Ineffable Name, the only difference being that the letter א at the beginning sums up the idea that G’d is both ”first” and ”last,” as we explained earlier. G’d informed Moses and had him inform the people that the attributes represented by both names would accompany him and enable him to discharge his mission successfully.
    The letters א and י respectively reflect the wisdom of Solomon and the wisdom of G’d respectively. The prophet in Kings I 5,26 wrote  וי-הוה נתן חכמה לשלמה  “and the Lord (tetragram without the letter א in front) had granted wisdom to Solomon.” The verse commences with the conjunctive letter ו to show that this wisdom of Solomon was “secondary” to that represented by the name אהיה with the letter א in front. At this point the author digresses and explains the significance of the letters א-י at the beginning and end of the name of G’d which we use most of the time and which is spelled א-ד-נ-י. That name is also a combination of the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice, seeing that when you subtract the letters א-י which represent the “Mercy” aspect you are left with the letter דן, “judged.” [I believe that Solomon’s wisdom consisted primarily in knowing how to judge truly when the evidence available to him was not adequate according to most yardsticks. This may be why our author uses this whole verse to mention  Solomon. The author continues in this vein for some considerable length pointing out that such expressions by David (Psalms 138,2) as כי הגדלת על כל שמך אמרתך, “because You have exalted Your name, Your word above all,” can all be understood in terms of what G’d revealed in our verse. I have decided to condense the remainder of his comments on the mysticism involved here. Ed.]
    When the Torah emphasises G’d saying to Moses כה תאמר אל בני ישראל a second time in verse 15, the words אל-בני, etc., which are quite unnecessary, may be an allusion to לבנים “the bricks” i.e. the same letters as אל-בני. The people making the bricks under intolerable conditions qualified for the attribute of Mercy. Actually, we find that the message of the Torah here is divided into four parts. Section one was addressed to Moses alone. Section two was addressed to the  people making the bricks. Section three was addressed to the Israelites who were neither bricklayers nor elders.  Section four was addressed to the elders. They were mentioned last as G’d revealed to them elements of the emanations which by definition grants the student of this discipline an insight into the relationship between the beginning and the end.
    
    3,15. אלו-הי אברהם, אלו-הי יצחק, ואלו-הי יעקב שלחני אליכם זה שמי לעולם וזה זכרי לדור דור, “the G’d of Avraham, the G’d of Yitzchak, and the G’d of Yaakov has sent me to you (with the message) ‘this is My Name forever and this is My remembrance from generation to generation.’” According to the plain meaning of the text G’d informed Moses that the name He mentioned now was the one He wanted to be known by amongst mankind, and this was the name by which He would be remembered throughout the generations. When Jews speak about G’d in their prayers they refer to Him as the G’d of Avraham, the G’d of Yitzchak, etc. The additional letter ו in front of the words ואלו-הי יעקב is something that is customary whenever you enumerate a list of names. We find other examples of this in the sequence of the gem stones in the breastplate of the High Priest, i.e. נופך, ספיר, ויהלום (Exodus 25,18). Another example of such a construction is found in Micah 6,4 ואשלח לפניך את משה, אהרון, ומרים. “I did send before you Moses, Aaron and Miriam.”
    A Midrashic approach  based on Pessachim 3 on the words “this is My name, etc.” G’d explained to Moses that contrary to usual practice G’d’s name is not spelled the way it is spoken. Although His name may be spelled with the letters י-ה it would be pronounced as if it had been spelled with א-ד. It is a well known fact that the Ineffable Name was pronounced in accordance with its spelling only in the Holy Temple not outside its precincts (Sotah 38). This has been confirmed in Midrash Tehillim (Psalms 87) where Rabbi Chiya son of Idi asks the rhetorical question of why the exalted name of G’d could be pronounced only inside the Holy Temple whereas outside we have to content ourselves with referring to G’d in a more oblique fashion, using substitute names? He pointed to Psalms 87,3 where the sons of Korach say:  נכבדות מדבר בך עיר האלו-הים סלה, “glorious things  are spoken of You, O city of G’d, selah.” Rabbi Chiya interpreted this line to mean that the glorious name of G’d maybe spoken only in the Temple. In the provinces, i.e. “the city of G’d,” He may be referred to only by means of כנוים. Our sages (Eyruvin 18) add that ever since the destruction of the Temple, “pronouns” substitute for His real name. Mankind was meant to use only the two first letters of the tetragram, i.e. the letters י-ה. They base this on Psalm 150,6 כל הנשמה תהלל י-ה, הללו י-ה. The meaning of this verse is that while the Temple is standing not all souls would praise G’d by using the same names for Him. Inside the Temple His real name would be used whereas outside people would have to be content with using כנויים. Once the Temple had been destroyed, כל הנשמה “every soul” was reduced to the same common denominator of having to praise the Lord by invoking only His “substitute” names. They may use only “half” His name, i.e. the letters י-ה.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words זה שמי לעלם refer to the attributes חסד ופחד whose combined numerical value equals that of the word לעלם. This corresponds to the meaning of אלו-הי אברהם ואלו-הי יצחק who personified these two attributes. The words זה זכרי allude to the attribute זכור, the emanation “harmony.” This was the attribute personified by Yaakov. The reason that the letter ו was added to the word אלו-הי  is that this letter joins the tenth emanation, i.e. it is the link to that emanation  also known as דור. The generations, דורות, derive from this emanation.
    According to Nachmanides the word זכרי  is a reference to the emanation יסוד, which in his view is the emanation from which the שבת הגדול is derived. This concept was personified by the term אלו-הי יעקב. The reason it is mentioned here in connection with the expression לדר דר, is that the tenth emanation is known as דור, seeing that all future generations derive from it. [Counting the emanations from the one closest to the Essence of G’d, i.e. כתר down to the tenth emanation (nowadays known as מלכות, Ed.) This tenth emanation is what we call our terrestrial universe, the עולם העשיה, the world of tangible phenomena. All generations of human beings have their origin in that generation. Ed.] When Isaiah 41,4 speaks of G’d as קורא הדורות מראש “announcing the generations from the start,” this is an association of זכר, having something in common with the concept of the שבת הגדול, which is a concept that is paired with that of the כנסת ישראל. 
    Let us try and explain this in more popular language. The Midrash Bereshit Rabbah 11,8 describes the Sabbath as complaining to G’d that every day has its partner whereas the Sabbath was the only day which had not been assigned a partner. G’d responded that the Jewish people, כנסת ישראל, would become the partner of the Sabbath. The emanation יסוד  argued similarly in front ot G’d, seeing it represents a decisive force. Every decisive force is perceivd as זכר, masculine. This emanation יסוד is also known אמת, truth. Truth is the seal of the Almighty. It is the 7th of the 13 attributes G’d revealed to Moses, i.e. the central one. As such it is a decisive force. Decisive forces are by definition masculine, i.e. זכר. To sum up: The word זכרי refers to the power of the attribute of Mercy, an attribute present in some measure both in the emanation תפארת as well as in the emanation יסוד. The emanation יסוד is the source of G’d’s blessings for His creatures; this is the mystical dimension of the verse (Proverbs 10,7) זכר צדיק לברכה, “the memory of the just is a source of blessing.” Concerning this concept David said in Psalms 145,17 צדיק ה’ בכל דרכיו, ”G’d is righteous in all His ways,” seeing that all the “paths of the world and all its activities are essentially originating with Him.” Seeing that He displays a tendency towards the attribute of חסד whenever He makes a decision, David continued by saying וחסיד בכל מעשיו, that G’d is “full of loving kindness in all the activities He completes.” As a result, He is “close to all those who call upon Him; and he performs the wishes of those who fear Him.” However, the words: “G’d protects and guards all those who love him,” apply only to those of the tenth emanation, the one which is adjacent to Him.
    Another dimension of our verse: The words “this is My name forever” refer to the tetragram, a name which is capable of 12 permutations [a variety of 12 possible letters when it is spelled as words instead of as letters, such as י=יוד. Ed.] These 12 permutations symbolize 12 בתים, houses, which in turn comprise 48 letters. This is the mystical dimension of Sukkah 53 where we are told that Achitofel applied a logical form of reasoning “on his own” [which had not been handed down by previous generations, Ed.] saying that if it is in order to deliberately dissolve the Holy name of G’d which comprises 48 letters in order to restore domestic peace between husband and wife [in the case of a Sotah, a woman suspected by her husband of infidelity, Ed.] how much more so is it permissible to do so in order to restore peace on earth, not just between one man and his wife. [Following this piece of reasoning they wrote the tetragram on a shard and threw it into the hole under the altar called שיתין, the place from which earth had been formed in order to prevent the waters gushing forth from there from flooding the earth.]
    
    3,16. פקד פקדתי אתכם, “I have surely remembered you.” The Torah speaks here of two distinct remembrances. One is that Israel is being remembered, the other that the שכינה, which had descended with Yaakov to Egypt and had been exiled and subjected to abuse together with the Jewish people, was also now being “remembered.” The שכינה had been alluded to at the time by the letter ה at the end of the word מצרימה in Genesis 46,4 where G’d had promised to also bring it up again as we have explained there. The שכינה referred to by our sages in that context is none other than the כנסת ישראל which is referred to in verse nine as צעקת בני ישראל. This is also the reason that G’d said to Moses that He had remembered אתכם ואת העשוי לכם במצרים, “you  and the כנסת ישראל,” the letter ה of the word מצרימה which we referred to earlier as proof that the שכינה descended to Egypt also. It is this שכינה which shared the pain that the Jewish people were experiencing.
    As to the meaning of the word עשוי, “what has been done.” The word is related to Tzefaniah 33,19 הנני עושה את כל מעניך, which means that G’d is actively suffering as a result of His people suffering from by the Gentiles.
    Another reason for the repetition of the words פקד יפקד is that it refers to two separate remembrances one by the attribute of Mercy the other by the attribute of Justice. The first one is extended to the Jewish people, hence the Torah writes פקדתי אתכם, “I have remembered you.” The second is that G’d’s attribute of Justice will remember יפקד, (future tense) the Egyptians and what they had done to the Israelites in Egypt. This is a reference to the promise G’d made to Avraham in Genesis 15,14: “and also the nation who enslave them I will judge.”
    
    3,18.אלו-הי העבריים נקרה עלינו , “the G’d of the Hebrews has manifested Himself to us.” According to the plain meaning of the text the additional letter י in the word עבריים is an allusion to the forthcoming ten plagues with which G’d would afflict the Egyptians. [they would have an extra ten of something added to them] According to Shemot Rabbah 3,8 the letter alludes to the Israelites crossing the sea. (עברי ים )
    A kabbalistic approach:  the extra letter י is an allusion to the first עברי the most noble Avraham who had been called by the Torah אברם העברי, Avraham from the other side (of the river Euphrates compare Genesis 14,13.) He had been called thus as he was the first person who (without parental or scholarly guidance) had found his way to G’d. Concerning Avraham we read in the ספר יצירה (the most ancient kabbalistic text) chapter 1, Mishnah 7 discussing the ten emanations all of which were created prior to anything tangible נעוץ סופן כתחילתן כשלהבת בגחלת “the end is connected to its beginning as is the flame to its coal.” In other words, the letter י is a reminder that Avraham the first Jew recognised that G’d is eternal and had no beginning, and that He used the ten emanations to create the tangible universe out of “nothing.” The letter י is added on occasion where it did not first appear to be needed in order to remind us of the ten emanations which preceded the creation of the physical, tangible universe. You find an example of this when Solomon admonishes us (Kohelet 12,1)  וזכור את בוראיך, “and remember your Creator.” There is no reason for the י after the word בורא except to point to something additional connected with the Creator and His creation.
   דרך שלשת ימים, “a distance of three days.” We must not accuse Moses of deliberately misleading Pharaoh in order for the Israelites to escape from his authority. Moses meant that in order to receive the commandments from G’d the people had to travel a distance of three days from the boundaries of Egypt. G’d had intended to introduce the commandments gradually, first the Sabbath legislation, such as happened later at Marah (Exodus 15,25 compare Mechilta 1 on 15,22). G’d had also introduced Avraham gradually to any demand He made upon him. He had not said: ”take your son Yitzchak and offer him as a sacrifice,” but had introduced the subject in stages  saying 1) “your son;” 2) “your only one;” 3) “the one you love;” 4) “Yitzchak.” (compare Genesis 22,2)
    
    3,19. ולא ביד חזקה, “except through a strong hand.” These words mean that a single plague would not be enough to change Pharaoh’s attitude but that he would have to suffer numerous plagues before he would respond. The word ולא could also mean “except.” Rashi  understands the words יד חזקה as a reference to Pharaoh’s strong hand, i.e. stubborn attitude. G’d’s message then was that that Moses should not be surprised that he would see Pharaoh remain unbelievably stubborn. Such stubbornness would not be due to Pharaoh’s unaided strength of character but would be the result of G’d reinforcing his resolve to keep the Jewish people enslaved.  Proof of the validity of this interpretation are the words (Exodus 6,1) כי ביד חזקה ישלחם, “for due to a strong hand he will dismiss them.” G’d clearly referred to His own strong hand in that verse. Onkelos also supports this view when he writes: ולא מן קדם דחיליה תקיף, “not before he becomes very much afraid.” This is the reason that verse 20 follows immediately with the words: “and I will  stretch out My hand and smite Egypt with all My miracles.” 
    The word נפלאתי, in verse 20 is spelled defective, i.e. without the letter ו which is part of the plural ending, in order to remind us that it is impossible for G’d to display “all” of His miracles, as we would have assumed after reading the word בכל, i.e. “with all.” This matter has been elaborated on in Job 26,14: “these are  but glimpses of His rule, the mere whisper that we perceive of Him. Who can absorb the thunder of His mighty deeds?”
    Using a kabbalistic approach, it is possible that the reason the Torah describes the plagues as “all” of G’d’s miracles is the fact they numbered ten, corresponding to the total number of the emanations. The last one of these emanations is also known as כל “all.” It would be the final emanation (counting from מלכות in an ascending order) beyond which is the forever concealed א, G’d’s Essence. [According to Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai as quoted by Pardes Rimonim in chapter 23, the emanation which may be called כל is the emanation יסוד as it is the one containing the 50 שערי בינה, i.e. all the gateways to בינה, “insight.” This would be the 2nd lowest emanation then. Ed.]
    All the miracles of a supernatural nature which have occurred after the six days of creation had their origin in this domain of א which remains forever inaccessible to us. All the miracles mentioned in the Bible originate in a world to which we have no access. The reason that these miracles are known as נפלאות, is because although their origin is in a domain that is completely hidden, their manifestation makes the existence of such a domain נגלה, “revealed.” This is the reason the Torah needed to describe these miracle with two words, i.e. בכל as well as נפלאתי. The first word relates to the hidden domain from which these miracles emanate; the second word refers to the fact that they have become manifest. The whole verse may be understaood thus: “I shall smite Egypt with the number of plagues which include the emanation “all” i.e. נפלאתי. When you understand the verse in this way this also accounts for the fact that the word ידי, “My hand,” has been repeated once more in verse 20 after G’d had already said in verse 19 that he would employ “His hand.” The sequence of the plagues would be ד”צך עד”ש באח”ב, corresponding to the list of emanations starting with the lowest emanation מלכות, seeing that blood corresponds to that emanation. (compare Zohar Parshat Vaeyra 29.)
    
    3,22. ושאלה אשה משכנתה, “each woman will ask her neighbour, etc.” There can be no question of G’d permitting the Israelites to engage in deception by giving the impression that what they asked for would only be borrowed whereas they did not intend to return it. The word  ושאלה means “she will request (as a gift).” We find the word שאל used as the request for gifts in connection with Gideon (Judges 8,24) אשאלה מכם שאלה, “I have a request to make from you; each one of you give me the earring he has received as booty.” Clearly, Gideon did not mean to “borrow” thousands of earrings. Another occasion when the word שאל is used as a request for outright possession is Kings I 2,20 שאלה אחת קטנה אני שואלת ממך, Bat Sheva speaking to her son King Solomon: “I have a small request to make from you” [that Adoniah be permitted to marry Avishag the concubine of David]  Clearly the word שאלה did not refer to something or somebody which would merely be borrowed. In other words, the word שאל as applicable to the request of a gift is not unique, and this is what G’d had in mind when he told Moses what the Israelites would do prior to the Exodus.
    As to the peculiar wording “a woman will request from her neighbour” instead of “a man will request from an Egyptian,” the Torah merely wanted to indicate that if even the Egyptian women would give gifts to their Jewish neighbours how much more so would the men give gifts to the male Israelites. We find a parallel for this in Isaiah 33,23  פסחים בזזו בז, “the lame shall seize booty.” If even the lame seized booty, how much more booty must have been seized by the able-bodied! (compare commentary by Rabbeinu Chananel).
    
    4,2. מזה בידך, “what is this in your hand?” The absence of the letter ה in the word מזה instead of מה זה, is an allusion to the fact that only five out of the plagues would be performed by means of Moses’ staff. They were: the snake, the hail, the locust, the darkness, the splitting of the sea of Reeds. All the other miracles did not involve Moses’ staff as an instrument. Some of the other plagues were initiated by G’d personally, some by Aaron. A Midrashic (Tanchuma Shemot 23) approach: the word מזה could be read with the vowel chirik under the letter מ instead of the vowel patach. The verse then would be the beginning of a line saying: “from this (staff) in your hand (you will be smitten).”  [The idea is that since you Moses have slandered the Jewish people just as the original serpent engaged in slander, ultimately your use of this staff (when hitting the rock instead of speaking to it) will become your undoing.”)
    
    4,3. השליכהו ארצהת וישליכהו ארצה ויהי לנחש. “Throw it to the ground! He threw it to the ground and it turned into a snake.” You should realise that the changing of the staff into a snake was related to the reversal of the natural power inherent in the letters used by the Torah. It is alluded to in our verse so that when the order of the letters would be reversed the snake could become changed into a staff again. [according to Torat Chayim quoting a Rabbi Naftali, -cited by Rabbi Chavell-the final letters in the words ארצה, וישליכהו, ויהי are the letters of the tetragram in reversed order. When these letters appear again in the proper order at the end of the words ויהי למטה בכפו, it is easy to understand why the snake turned again into a staff.] We know that basically the tetragarm consists of the three letter י-ה-ו. The letter ה appears twice in that name.
    We may understand that by means of these two miracles, i.e.  Moses’ staff turning into a snake and his hand becoming afflicted with tzoraat, G’d hinted to him that it was in His power to kill the living and to revive the dead. The staff had been a dried out piece of wood, devoid of life of any sort, and by throwing it on the ground it turned into a living organism. Moses’ hand on the other hand, which had been part of a perfectly healthy living organism, suddenly became as if dead. The disease tzoraat is viewed by the Bible as a form of death as we know from Moses’ prayer for his sister Miriam (Numbers 12,12) “do not let her remain like a dead person!” G’d (Moses) performed both of these miracles here in the desert and later in the presence of the assembled Jewish people in Egypt (4,30). This was what G’d had meant when He said: “so that they will believe that the Lord G’d has indeed appeared to you” (verse 5). The second miracle was repeated in accordance with G’d having said: “in the event they will not believe the impression made by the first miracle, they will believe the impact of the second miracle” (verse 8).
    The question remains why these miracles had first to be performed in the desert, i.e. while Moses was standing at the foot of Mount Chorev. After all, surely Moses did not doubt anything G’d told him! We have to accept what our sages Shemot Rabbah 3,15) handed down to us as their tradition, i.e. that the first miracle Moses had to perform was to make him aware that he had slandered the Jewish people when he had stated that the people would not believe that G’d had appointed him as their redeemer. He had no right to say this (4,1) after G’d Himself had told him in 3,18 ושמעו לקולך, “they (the Jewish people) will hearken to your voice (message).” The second miracle, that of Moses’ hand becoming afflicted with tzoraat was as a punishment for his slandering his people and not believing G’d. The miracles performed a different function  each time Moses performed it.
    
    4,8. והאמינו לקול האות האחרון, “they will believe and pay heed to the second miracle.” G’d referred to the miracle involving the tzoraat as the “last” one instead of as “the second one,” as it was the last one relative to the first one. Besides, it was the last miracle Moses performed in the desert where he had no audience.
    
    4,9. והיו לדם ביבשת “they (the waters) will turn into blood on the dry land.”  The reason the Torah repeats the word והיו, is because  the people will first observe that the water poured on the dry land was still water. Only afterwards will it turn into blood to prove there had not been a sleight of hand. This is why the Torah had to write והיו לדם ביבשת.
    
    4,10. בי אדוני לא איש דברים אנכי, “Please, My Lord, I have never been a man of many words.” According to Shemot Rabbah 3,16 G’d tried to seduce Moses into accepting his mission for seven days. The fact that this dialogue had continued for some days is proved by Moses adding the words “since yesterday or the day before.” This already accounts for three days; he had  added the word גם three times which adds another three days. Seeing that this conversation took place on the day following the previous conversation this makes seven days during which G’d waited for Moses to accept His invitation to become the leader of the Jewish people
    Concerning Moses’ additional argument that he was not suitable for this appointment as he was כבד פה וכבד לשון, “I am slow of speech and slow of tongue,” we have been told in Pessikta Zutrata on this verse that while growing up in Pharaoh’s palace Moses once took the king’s crown and threw it on the ground. The king wanted to execute him on account of this misdemeanour. His astrologers used this incident to point out that Moses must  be the boy of whom they had warned that he would become the redeemer of the Israelites. According to Shemot Rabbah 1,12 Pharaoh consulted with his closest advisors who included Bileam, Yitro. and Job. They offered different advice, one saying that the boy was guilty of death, the other saying that it was a youthful prank not to be taken seriously. They devised a means to test if there had been an evil intent in Moses knocking off his foster grandfather’s crown. They placed before him a bowl containing both a golden coin and a glowing coal. If Moses were to grab for the coal this would prove that he had not had any evil intention. If he were to grab for the golden coin this would be a sign that he was dangerous and he would have to be killed. Moses was about to grab the golden coin when an angel pushed his hand toward the coal and he burned his tongue when trying to taste it. According to this Midrash this is where Moses’ stammer originated. 
    When he said כבד פה וכבד לשון אנכי, he meant that seeing that he had been so handicapped from his earliest youth, now that he was already eighty years old this handicap had become much more difficult for him to conquer. He implied that seeing G’d had not seen fit to cure him of this affliction this was proof that he was not the right man for the mission G’d wanted to send him on. Actually, the only reason G’d had never cured him of his stammer had been that Moses had been remiss in not praying to be cured. The reason he did not pray to be cured was so as to avoid having no  excuse to refuse this mission. Rabbeinu Chananel writes that the fact that Moses mentioned two facets of his handicap separately, i.e. כבד פה and כבד לשון is proof that he had difficulty enunciating the letters ז-ש-ר-ס—ץ all of which require one’s teeth. Furthermore he mentioned the word כבד לשון to indicate that he also had difficulty with the letters involving the tongue, i.e. ק-ט-ל-נ-ת.
    4,11. או מי ישום אלם, “or Who makes one dumb?” The word אלם refers to someone who cannot speak because he is not equipped to communicate thoughts at all, and the expression ישום in our verse does not apply to Moses’ situation. However, seeing that man is by definition a creature who communicates thoughts by means of speech, the word אלם when applied to a human being means that the tendons controlling his tongue have been 
locked into place and that is the only reason that they act as if they never had a sense of speech at all. Maimonides writes in his in his Moreh Nevuchim 3,10 that if someone removes pillars supporting a roof thereby causing the roof to collapse, he is considered as having removed the roof. In other words, if one removes light one has thereby created darkness. It follows that the removal of the ability to speak is equivalent to making someone dumb. As to the words או חרש, “or deaf,” why did the Torah not quote the alternative of “or provides him with the ability to hear or to be deaf” which would have corresponded to the words “gave man a mouth or made him dumb?” The Torah may have chosen to omit the words “or gives him an ear to hear with,” in order to remind us that the sense of hearing is closely related to the sense of speech. After all, failure to hear means inability to benefit from the sense of speech. It follows that the word חרש, deaf, already includes part of any statement made concerning the ability of communicating thoughts through speech. It sufficed therefore to mention only the opposite of the ability to hear, the deafness of a person.
    We need to understand the structure of this verse in which three (senses) attributes of man, each one superior to the following one are described. First we are told about the ability to speak, an ability connected to the soul, the ability to express what the soul feels. The opposite of this ability is to be a dumb, silent person. The second (sense) attribute the Torah mentions is the ability to hear, (a passive attribute). This ability is rated as superior to the (sense) attribute of sight. Here the Torah contrasts פקח and עור, someone possessing sight with someone who is blind. Solomon (Proverbs 15,30) writes: “enlightenment gladdens the heart, good news (received by the ear) puts fat on the bones.” Solomon made it clear that whereas the sense of sight expands the heart, the sense of hearing does something more tangible for man’s bones. In other words, the sense of hearing bestows greater benefit on man than the sense of sight. Our sages (Baba Kama 85) confirm this  when they ruled that if one robs someone of his eyesight he has to pay compensation for the eye. If one robs someone of his hearing he has to pay compensation as if he had caused total disability. Seeing that the Torah had indicated that the ear is superior to the eye, Solomon continues (Proverbs 15,31) “the ear that listens to life-giving discipline will abide with the scholars.” I am aware that that you may ask, that if this is so why did Leah name her first son Reuven, commenting on what G’d had seen, whereas she called her second son Shimon, commenting on what G’d had heard? (Genesis 29,32 and 29,33) She ought to have called the first son Shimon and the second son Reuven!
    This matter can be understood only by reference to kabbalah, a knowledge of the mystical bond between the terrestrial and the celestial parts of the universe. The sense of sight is anchored in the energy or potential inherent in the attribute of G’d represented by the last letter ה in the tetragram. The ability to hear, on the other hand, is anchored in the potential inherent in the letter ו of that name of G’d (compare commentary on Genesis 29,32). This obligated Leah to name her firstborn in a manner reflecting the letter ה of the name of G’d before she named a son in a way which reflected the letterו  which follows the letter ה in the alphabet. [the letters of the alphabet are understood to reflect an ascending order of significance. Ed.]
   הלא אנכי “Is it not I?” Possibly the addition of the word י-ה-ו-ה at the end of this verse is a reference to the emanation בינה, (נשמה) which is given an outlet by means of the power of speech possessed by man. This idea is reflected in (Job 32,8) “but truly it is the spirit in man, the breath of Shaddai that gives them understanding.” Psalms 45,2 alludes to this when the sons of Korach observe: “I speak my poem to a king; my tongue is the pen of an expert scribe.” I have made some comment on this phenomenon on Genesis 1,26 נעשה אדם (page 56).
    4,13. בי אדו-ני שלח נא ביד תשלח, “please My Lord, send through whomever You usually send!” We have explained previously (3,13) that Moses had been appointed by the attribute of Justice which formed a minor part of the attribute of Mercy. This is the reason that he used this attribute of G’d here which reflects the attribute of Justice. The aspect of the attribute of Justice is contained in the letters אי at the beginning and the end of the word א-ד-נ-י. These two letters were “borrowed” from the names אהיה and י-ה-ו-ה- respectively. The letter י has the vowel kametz, alluding to the attribute of Mercy as explained in connection with 3,13. The words ביד תשלח are best translated as “by means of someone qualified to undertake a mission on Your behalf.” By saying this Moses wanted to make clear that he did not consider himself qualified to speak to the king. He implied further that it would not reflect honour on G’d to have to dispatch a stammering representative as if no one else better qualified was at G’d’s disposal. This is also the way Onkelos translates this verse, i.e. ביד מאן דכשר למשלח.
    
    4,14. ויחר אף ה' במשה, “The Lord became angry at  Moses.” Whenever the Torah mentions that G’d became angry at someone this has tangible consequences. Here too G’d’s anger had immediate consequences as our sages (Shemot Rabbah 3,17) comment that as a result of Moses’ last remarks he lost the entitlement to become the High Priest. This is the significance of G’d saying: “is there not Aaron the Levite?” G’d meant that as of now Aaron had been slated to become the Priest instead of remaining merely a Levite. According to another Midrash, the result of Moses’ improper remark was that he would now never be cured of his speech defect. G’d could have honoured Moses by curing his affliction at least as easily as He honoured Moses by making the  skin of his face radiate light.
    Another comment on the words: “is there not your brother Aaron the Levite? I know that he can speak fluently,” is that with these words G’d indicated that by contrast Moses would never be cured from his stammer.
   וראך ושמח בלבו, “when he sees you he will be happy in his heart.” The Torah informs us with this comment that neither of the two brothers would be jealous of the other’s rank. This is what inspired David to sing (Psalms 133,1) “how good and how pleasant it is that brothers dwell together.” The Torah did not speak about Aaron being happy בפיו, with his “mouth,” i.e. expressing joy about Moses’ appointment verbally, but it wrote that he was “happy in his heart.” Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai  comments that the heart which was so generous that it could be happy at the elevation to leadership of his younger brother was found worthy to wear the breastplate with the urim vetumim, the parchment enabling him to communicate with G’d at will. (Exodus 28,30 compare Tanchuma Shemot 27).
    
    4,23. בני בכורי ישראל, “My firstborn son is Israel.” Rabbeinu Chananel comments: “G’d implied that the fact that He had delivered the Israelites into Pharaoh’s hands should not be misconstrued by him to indicate that G’d did not care much about the Israelites. He allowed this to happen only in order to discipline them. What G’d allowed to happen to the Israelites was analogous to what Moses told them in Deut. 8,5: “bear in mind that the Lord G’d disciplines you just as a man disciplines his son. Now that you Pharaoh have exceeded your mandate and have behaved in an exceptionally cruel manner toward My firstborn son, I will retaliate by smiting your own firstborn son. This was a reference to the tenth plague. 
    G’d called Israel “My firstborn son” as a sign of distinction just as we find in Hoseah 2,1: ‘they shall be called ‘Children’-of- the Living-G’d.” We find that Mount Sinai, the most sacred of the mountains is called “Mountain of the Lord,” (Numbers 10,32) and the Temple is called “the House of the Lord” (Isaiah 56,7) “and let them rejoice in My House of prayer.” Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel. According to the above we may understand our verse to mean: (G’d speaking to Moses) “take note of all the miracles which I have placed at your disposal, i.e. the ten plagues. The reason I will perform them all is that I will strengthen the heart of Pharaoh after he has not responded to the first five plagues  and you will perform the last five plagues. Prior to the last plague, the one during which the firstborns of Egypt will be slain, you will say to him: ‘Israel is My firstborn son.’ Now the Israelites will be redeemed and it will become manifest that they are My firstborn son and that they are distinguished.”
    As to the words: “let My people go so they can serve Me,” why did G’d not instruct Moses to say to Pharaoh: “let My firstborn son go,” seeing He had already told Pharaoh that Israel was G’d’s firstborn son? The answer is that as long as Israel was in bondage He called them only “My son,” for how was the fact that they were “firstborns” manifest in the treatment they were still being subjected to? If you will examine the verses at the time of the redemption you will find that as of that time G’d did refer to the Israelites as firstborn, as He did in fact to Himself in 13,2 קדש לי כל בכור, the deeper meaning of which is “Sanctify for Me the ‘firstborn’ as part of the legislation requiring that the firstborn amongst man and Jewish-owned beast be sanctified. The meaning of that verse is parallel to Exodus 25,2 ויקחו לי תרומה, “and they will take a gift for Me.” Kabbalists have explained those words to mean  ויקחו אותי תרומה, “they will take Me as a gift.” [a reference to G’d’s Presence in the Tabernacle as a gift to the Jewish people.] We deduce from the fact that the Jewish people were called בכור, only from the time redemption and onwards that G’d Himself was with them while they were in bondage. This is why their status as G’d’s firstborn was not manifest during all those years.
    I have found confirmation of this approach in the Sefer Habahir of Rabbi Nechunyah ben Hakanah (item 104 edition by Rabbi Margulies). ‘Rabbi Eliezer was asked by his disciples: “how are we to understand the words  קדש לי כל בכור seeing that G’d surely cannot be referred to as having a ‘first-born?’” He answered them: “Indeed yes; the meaning of the words קדש לי כל בכור is that G’d’s sanctity is the result of His becoming sanctified by the Jewish people. The proof of this meaning of the words קדש לי כל בכור is in the line בני בכורי ישראל, “My firstborn son is Israel.” It suggests that G’d too was with them in Egypt. If not, G’d would not have commanded Pharaoh “release My son so that he can serve Me,” but “ release My firstborn.” 
    
    4,24. ויהי בדרך במלון,”It was on the journey, at the inn, etc.” The word ויהי refers to Moses, as if to say: “when Moses was on the way at the inn, etc.” [the alternative is that it could have referred to the baby]. The meaning of the words ויפגשהו ה' is that an angel met him. This angel is described by the holy name of G’d although it was one of the lower ranking angels [a category that was not in constant touch with the highest sphere in the heavens. Ed.] as it had been dispatched in order to complete a specific task  G’d wanted to be carried out. This is also confirmed by Shemot Rabbah 5,8 which writes that the performance of the rite of circumcision is so dear to G’d that Moses was not allowed to delay it unnecessarily for even a single hour.” 
   ויפגשהו ה' ויבקש המיתו, “G’d confronted him and wanted to kill him.”  The angel wanted to kill Moses (not Eliezer, the baby). Even though this angel was dispatched by the attribute of Mercy, he tried to kill Moses. Rabbi Yossi adds: “on no account must you presume that Moses had been negligent (lazy) in performing this rite. The delay had been due to Moses deliberating if to circumcise the baby immediately and to wait before moving on for three days until the baby was no longer in danger, or if to proceed without delay seeing G’d had commanded him “go back to Egypt” (verse 19). If we accept Rabbi Yossi’s comment the question is why Moses was punished and almost lost his life? The answer is that he first concentrated on matters related to his lodgings at the inn instead of circumcising Eliezer immediately. We have a rule (Pessachim 64) that one does not delay the performance of a commandment once the time has arrived for it to be performed.
    When we referred to the angel as being an “angel of Mercy,” this means that he was a messenger of the attribute of Mercy. You should appreciate that according to the Midrash the surprising feature of what occurred is that Tziporah performed the circumcision (verse 25). Surely, if Moses had been at the inn he himself should have performed this commandment! This is why Rabbeinu Chananel said that Moses was not at the inn at all, for the Torah had written earlier (verse 20) that Moses took his wife and children and let them ride on the donkey whereas he himself took the staff of G’d in his hand and walked. The meaning of these two verses is that Moses sent his wife and children ahead of him. If he had been walking and they were riding on the donkey it makes sense that they arrived at the inn before he did. When the Torah wrote of the angel: “he wanted to kill him,” the reference must be to the infant Eliezer. The angel assumed the shape of a snake devouring the upper half of the baby’s body down to the area where the circumcision should have occurred. The snake then spit out the baby and started to devour him from his feet upwards stopping at the same area as previously. At that point, Tziporah, realising what the problem was, seized a sharp piece of flint and performed the act of circumcision. She had understood that the whole phenomenon was a punishment for not circumcising this infant on the eighth day after its birth. Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel at the beginning of his commentary on Parshat Yitro. On the other hand, I have seen that Rashi is of the opinion that Moses was present at the inn at the time but had been taken sick; since he was unable to perform the circumcision Tziporah acted as his surrogate.
    
    4,26. וירף ממנו, “so he released him;” the snake released.  We also find the word הרף applied to the snake in Chronicles I 21,15  ויאמר למלאך המשחית רב עתה הרף ידך, “He said to the angel of destruction: Enough!, now release your hand!” This occurred after Tziporah had removed her son’s foreskin.
    It is possible to explain that in view of the Torah only writing “he released him,” instead of writing that ”the angel went on his way,” that at that point the circumcision had not yet been fully completed and that Tziporah understood the hint and completed it by removing the second membrane and performing what we call פריעה, a procedure which prevents the foreskin from growing back. The fact that she mentioned the words חתן דמים, “a bridegroom through blood” twice, indicates that the omission of either part of the procedure made Moses guilty of the death penalty.
    
    4,26, ויפגשהו בהר האלו-הים וישק לו, “he met him at the Mountain of G’d and he kissed him.” Tanchuma Shemot 27 comments on our verse that it is a perfect illustration of Song of Songs 8,1: “If only it could be as with a brother, as if you had nursed at my mother’s breast; then I could kiss you.” We also have a verse in Psalms 85,11: “love (kindness) and truth meet; justice and well-being kiss.” The word “kindness” is a metaphor describing Aaron of whom the Torah wrote (Deut. 33,8) “Your Tumim and Urim for your devout and loving man.” The word “truth” is a metaphor for Moses of whom G’d said  (Numbers 12,6) “he is trusted in My entire house (because he is so truthful).” Moses is also described as the personification of צדק, righteousness, in Deut. 33,21 “he carried out G’d’s righteous-ness,” whereas Aaron personified שלום, peace, as we know from Maleachi 2,6 “in peace (harmony) and equity he walked with Me.”
    
    4,28. את כל דברי ה' אשר שלחו,“all the words of the Lord which He had dispatched him (to say).” The word “all” is a reference to Moses’ vision at the burning bush. He even reported the fact that he had refused to accept the mission repeatedly. According to Shir Hashirim Rabbah the words “all the words of the Lord,” indicate that Moses told Aaron all the holy names G’d had revealed to him, i.e. the name אהיה, the name י-ה-ו-ה, the composition of the name א-ד-נ-י, and the significance of its first and last letter, as we have already explained earlier. He also explained to him that the sequence אהיה אשר אהיה points to the fact that the attribute of Mercy may be found even within the attribute of Justice. All this is the opinion of Nachmanides.
    
    5,2. מי ה' אשר אשמע בקולו, “Who is this Hashem that I should obey His instructions?” Tanchuma Vaeyra 5 comments on this that when Pharaoh heard Moses mention the name of G’d, he took out a register of all known deities and did not find the name Hashem listed there. What the Midrash means is that Pharaoh was intelligent and knowledgeable enough to be familiar with the extent to which earth was populated and civilisations had been established. He knew that the earth had been divided into 7 climatic zones and that each zone had been assigned a deity (zodiac constellation) to supervise its fate. He was also familiar with the 70 nations and what deity was responsible for their respective fates. Seeing that he could not find the name of Hashem listed anywhere in his list, he challenged Moses by saying: “who is this Hashem?” He was unaware that the Hashem Moses had spoken of was the supreme G’d who presided over all forces in the universe and without whose approval no other power could wield any influence in the universe.
    Our sages in the above Midrash illustrated this by a parable. A priest had a servant who was mentally defective. Once when the priest had left the country this servant went in search of him. When he came to a cemetery he started shouting at the people assembled there: ”have you seen my master?” The people answered him: ‘is not your master a certain priest, etc.?’ The servant confirmed that this was so. Thereupon the people said to him: ”you idiot why do you look for a priest in a cemetery, a place which is out of bounds to priests?” Similarly, what business does a king have in a slaughterhouse? Moses and Aaron replied to Pharaoh that the reason he had never heard of the supreme G’d was that he had not looked for Him in the right place. Earth, which is a vast cemetery for mankind was most certainly not the place where he could expect to find the supreme G’d. The gods Pharaoh had spoken of were all dead themselves whereas the supreme G’d personified life, growth, development, etc. In answer to Pharaoh’s question what this G’d did and what He had accomplished, Moses and Aaron listed the fact that He had created the universe, the plants, the animals, man, etc., that He made mountains, covered the earth with an atmosphere, that He appoints kings, etc. After hearing this Pharaoh became angry exclaiming: “I have created myself and I am lord of the universe! The river Nile is my river. Who is this G’d that I should take orders from Him?” Thereupon G’d said: “you wicked person!” I am going to bring a plague upon you from this very river which you claim to own and to have created. This is why the first plague was the turning of the waters of the river Nile into blood.
    Another explanation of the words: “who is this G’d that I should pay heed to His command?” Pharaoh did not deny G’d’s existence but he felt slighted that G’d did not communicate with him directly as he had done to the Pharaoh who had kidnapped Sarah, and to Avimelech who had wanted to marry Sarah against her will. Seeing that this G’d had revealed Himself to these two kings they had reason to obey His instructions. Seeing that this G’d had not revealed Himself to him, he saw no reason to accept what Moses said as instructions emanating from that G’d. He was angry that G’d had not given him an opportunity to defend his conduct as He had done for Avimelech. [this assumes that the Pharaoh in Genesis 13,17 was the same one as here some 400 years later. Ed.]
    5,3. אלו-הי העברים נקרא עלינו, “the G’d of the Hebrews has manifested Himself to us.” It is somewhat peculiar that after Pharaoh had denied any knowledge of the G’d in whose name Moses and Aaron had addressed him, Aaron and Moses continue to refer to this G’d. Were they bent on intensifying the confrontation?” The fact is that G’d had told Moses in advance (Exodus 3,18) that when Moses would come to Pharaoh he was to tell him that the G’d of the Hebrews had manifested Himself to the Israelites; G’d had added then already that Pharaoh would not respond positively to the request to release the Jewish people  even for a journey of three days in order to offer sacrifices to their G’d.”
    A closer look at our verse shows that here Moses described the G’d of the Hebrews in terms of אלו-הי, i.e. a term for G’d which was familiar to Pharaoh. Moreover, the word נקרא [as opposed to נקרה in 3,18 Ed.] implied that failure to obey G’d’s command would result in harm to the Jewish people. This is why they added “lest He smite us with the plague of the sword.” There cannot be a question then of Moses and Aaron provoking a confrontation for the sake of a confrontation. On the contrary, they made their previous request sound plausible and even advantageous for Pharaoh. Pharaoh, revealing the true wickedness of his nature, did not even debate the merits of the request but accused Moses and Aaron of interfering with the people’s work schedule and he told them to go about their own business.
   ונזבחה לה' אלוקינו פן יפגענו בדבר או בחרב, “and we will bring offerings to the Lord our G’d lest He strike us dead with a plague or the sword.” In this verse we hear something about the mystical dimension of animal sacrifice, i.e. that it may atone for people guilty of  death. Chabakuk 3,5  spells out that plague is a punishment by G’d when he said: “Pestilence marches before Him, and plague comes forth at His heels.” The reason Moses added death by the sword as an alternative is connected to Isaiah 66,16: ”For with fire will the Lord contend, with His sword, against all flesh.” You are aware that the שכינה represents the attribute of Justice. This is the source of the powerful fire which consumed the Israelites’ offerings on the altar in the Temple. This is what the Torah referred to when it wrote: (Leviticus 9,6) “so that the glory of the Lord will appear to you (and consume the sacrifice).”  Immediately after that (verse 24) the Torah reports that “fire descended from before the Lord and consumed the burnt offerings and the fat parts.” This is also the reason the שכינה describes the daily public offerings (Numbers 28,2) as קרבני לחמי, “the offerings of food due to Me.” G’d added the word לאשי, “to be consumed by My fire.” This is why at the beginning of this verse Moses had spoken of G’d as אלוקים as it is this attribute which receives and responds to animal sacrifice. Only subsequent to mentioning this attribute did he spell out the need for the Israelites to offer sacrifices He also mentioned the attribute Hashem, as though the sacrifice is offered to the attribute of Justice, the intent behind it is the great name of G’d, and this is what David had in mind when he said (Psalms 50,14) “sacrifice a thank-offering to G’d and pay your vows to the Most High.” The mechanics are that the sacrifice is presented to the attribute of Justice but the idea behind is is recognition of the Most High, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה. [If this were not so the sacrifice would be no more than an attempted  bribe. Ed.]
    
    5,4. לכו לסבלותיכם,” go about your business!” He meant “attend to your affairs.” [The Levites were not performing slave labour]. The Egyptians, i.e. Pharaoh,  respected Joseph’s law that religious dignitaries were not owned by Pharaoh. Pharaoh himself was interested in the people having religious leadership and instructionas that would make them a disciplined people. According to Shemot Rabbah 5,16 Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi  said that Pharaoh meant that the only reason Moses and Aaron were bent on going to the desert to sacrifice to their G’d was because they were beneficiaries of the law that the Levites did not have to perform slave-labour. He therefore ordered them to join the Isaelites .
    
    5,7. לא תאספון לתת תבן, “do not continue to supply straw, etc.” It is entirely possible that this decree was in force for only a single day and that the unusual letter א in the word תאספון is proof of this. This is the view of Rabbeinu Chananel.
    
    5,9. תכבד העבודה, “increase the workload!” The Egyptians were punished for this new decree at the sea when their chariots found it especially difficult to escape the onrushing waters. This is why the Torah specifically mentions (14,25) that “G’d made it כבד, “hard, difficult,” for the drivers to guide their chariots. Because the Egyptians decreed that the Jews had to provide their own straw, we find that they were tossed on the sea like straw (15,7). When we read here that the people had to scatter in order to find the straw, we find that in Jeremiah 18,17 the prophet describes that the Egyptians were scattered all over the sea. G’d’s punishing arm made the punishment fit the crime wherever possible. As to Pharaoh’s derisive comment that Moses and Aaron should not cause the people to turn to “false hopes,” Onkelos renders the words  דברי שקר as “vain slogans.”
    
    5,22. אדנ-י למה הרעות לעם הזה, “My Lord, why have You allowed things to become worse for this people?” Moses chose this name of G’d as he was not afraid of the element of the attribute of Mercy which is part of this name; he was however afraid of the central part of the name, the word דן, the attribute of Justice. This fear of Moses is expressed in his adding the extra letter ה at the end of the word הרעותה. It is as if he had said to G’d: “Why did You allow the harmful effect of the attribute of Justice to be invoked against this people?” He added the words: “why did You send me?” He meant: “why did You not wait until the predetermined time for the redemption when these negative elements of the attribute of Justice could not have affected the people?” This is the way Nachmanides explains Moses’ outcry.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Vaeyra 1) When Moses began to question G’d’s methods in our verse, G’d responded by saying to him: “what a pity that the patriarchs are no longer alive; they are indeed unforgettable. When I told Avraham  to walk ahead of Me and be perfect, he did not question  My ways. When he searched for a piece of ground to bury his wife Sarah and could not find it until he finally paid a fortune of 400 shekel for a cave, he did not question Me and My ways [after all G’d had promised the whole of the land of Canaan to Avraham and his descendants. Ed.]. When I told Yitzchak to stay in the land of Canaan during the famine instead of seeking relief in Egypt, he did not question My ways. How many times did he have to dig for water only to be denied its use by the Philistines? He never questioned My ways. I had promised Yaakov that the land he was lying on was all going to be his and his children’s and when it came to finding a piece of land whereon to put his tent 26 years later he had to acquire a small tract near Shechem for 100 kessitah (an outrageous amount) yet he never questioned My ways. You, on the other hand, who are only at the very beginning of your career as My messenger already are beginning to question My ways! First you wanted to know My name; now you accuse Me of making things worse for the Jewish people! Truly, עתה תראה “what I am going to do to Pharaoh now you will experience, but because you have seen fit to question My ways you will not live to see what I am going to do to the 31 kings of the land of Canaan.” This will be a battle under the leadership of Joshua. According to this Midrash Moses had already accepted the decree that he would not enter the land of Canaan at this time. Thus far the Midrash.
    
    It appears to me that when you read the plain text without trying to read between the lines as did the sages of the Midrash, you will come to the conclusion that Moses had not sinned at all with what he asked. There are two reasons for not finding fault with Moses’ question למה הרעותה לעם הזה, “for what purpose did You allow this people to experience a deterioration in their plight instead of redeeming them immediately?” The Torah wanted to inform us that improvements or deteriorations in the fate of the Jewish nation are the result of G’d’s doing, not of someone else’s doing. By his very question, Moses wanted to make it clear that he understood this. After all, evil does originate with G’d though in a more indirect manner than good. Did not Tzefaniah 1,12 admonish the people saying: “I will punish those who say to themselves: ‘the Lord will do nothing good or bad?’” Secondly, If Moses had been under the impression that his question had been sinful, it is hard to understand why he would repeat the same mistake in Numbers 11,11 where he used similar language applying it to his own situation when he asked G’d למה הרעות לעבדך ולמה לא מצתי חן בעיניך, וגו', “why did You do this evil to Your servant; why did I not find favour in Your eyes, etc.”
    Moses did commit a sin however when he said in the following verse: “Ever since I have come to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has done evil to this people, but You did not rescue Your people.” In response to this criticism of G’d’s methods, G’d told Moses that he would indeed shortly observe how He would make good on His promise against Pharaoh and the Egyptians; He implied that Moses would not become a witness to how G’d would make good on His promise to bring the Israelites to the Holy Land. The lesson G’d was going to teach Pharaoh would be that he himself would ask the Jewish people to leave. They would not escape but Pharaoh would actually expel them.
    I have found support for my theory in the wording of Tanchuma Vaeyra 1 which quotes Moses as saying: “seeing that I have sinned with a remark commencing with the word אז, I wish to make amends by extolling You with a song commencing with the word אז.” (Exodus 15,1). As to the Midrash which I have quoted earlier in which G’d is reported as saying to Moses ‘you have questioned My ways already at the beginning of your mission by asking “what is Your name,” and now you continue by saying: “why have You made things worse, etc.?’” I do not think that we need to interpret these words by G’d as a rebuke. The reason the Midrash had G’d quote these words was simply because they had been the first words Moses addressed to G’d during that entire dialogue at the burning bush.
    I have seen in the commentary by Rabbeinu Chananel that the words למה הרעותה are not a complaint at all. They were simply a question; Moses asked for enlightenment. He did not mean to criticise. Moses’ question included the whole subject of צדיק ורע לו ורשע וטוב לו, of why the righteous is often seen to suffer whereas the wicked is often perceived as prospering in all his undertakings. Moses wanted to know the point of this attribute, this phenomenon? He referred not to what had occurred during the time since his appointment but to what had occurred during the hundreds of years prior to his appointment during which time the innocent Israelites had been subject to all kinds of torture at the hands of an immoral society such as the Egyptians.
    Seeing that afflictions can be divided into two categories, i.e. the ones which are retribution and the ones which are known as יסורין של אהבה, afflictions which reflect G’d’s love for the afflicted, Moses wanted enlightenment. We know that there are these two kinds of afflictions from Isaiah 57,17: “for their sinful greed I was angry; I struck them and turned away My wrath.” On the other hand, we know of a different category of afflictions described in Deut. 8,16: “who fed you manna in the wilderness...in order to test you through hardships and to benefit you in the end.” These latter kinds of afflictions are called יסורין של אהבה, and concerning them David has said (Psalms 94,12) “happy is the man whom You discipline, O Lord, the man whom You instruct in Your teaching.” Seeing that Moses had now observed that ever since his appointment to Pharaoh the latter had increased the people’s workload, Moses asked G’d why He had allowed this seeing that it was within His power to save them and He had not made use of that power. The meaning of הרעותה is: “You have allowed things to get worse,” not “You have made things worse.” It is similar to Exodus 1,17 when the Torah wrote of the midwives ותחיין את הילדים. The meaning obviously is not that the midwives “gave life” to the children, but that they had allowed the children to survive. When Pharaoh (Exodus 1,22) ordered וכל הבת תחיון, the meaning was not “you shall bring to life every daughter,” but “you may allow every daughter to survive.” After all, it is not within the power of human beings to grant life or death. Moses spoke out of a fear that Pharaoh would further add to the sufferings of the Jewish people.
    Actually, many hundreds of years later the prophet Jeremiah posed a similar question when he asked (Jeremiah 12,1) “Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are the perpetrators of treachery at ease?” Jeremiah wanted to know if the ease experienced by the wicked is the compensation they receive from G’d in this life for any good deeds they have performed, or if their ease was a form of punishment which would reinforce them in their belief that they were not accountable for their wicked deeds. As a result of their continuing their wicked ways their eventual punishment would be so much greater. At that time G’d answered him that whatever ease the wicked experience in this life is only a prelude to their eventual terrible punishment.
    We find that David was troubled by similar thoughts when he asked of  G’d (Psalms 69,28) “add to their guilt, let them have no share of Your beneficence; may they be erased from the book of life; and not be inscribed with the righteous.”
    G’d’s answer to Moses’s question: “now you will see, etc.” meant that he would become aware that the afflictions suffered by the Israelites were only designed to increase the reward they would reap at the end of their period of enslavement; at the same time it would also serve to double and redouble the punishments to be endured by their oppressors The first message was contained in the words עתה תראה, the second in the words אשר אעשה לפרעה, “what I am going to do to Pharaoh.”
    There is an allusion to our present exile under the descendants of Edom in the experience of the Jewish people in their first exile under the Egyptians. The Jews in Egypt had to bear up under increasingly difficult conditions only in order to experience a wonderful redemption and in seeing their oppressors being killed after suffering many plagues and then dying a painful death by drowning. Similarly, when the time comes we will experience a wonderful redemption when the Messiah will arrive, a redemption by comparison to which the Exodus of the Jewish people will fade into relative insignificance. David referred to this redemption in Psalm 130,6 where he described the longing of the  כנסת ישראלsaying “I am more eager for the Lord than watchmen for the morning.” If in spite of our impatient wait for the redemption it has been delayed then this is only in order to add to the guilt of our oppressors in the interval and in order to punish them more severely for their sins against G’d and against His people. Just as we find that oppression of the Jewish people reached a new intensity after Moses asked that his people be allowed to celebrate a holiday for the Lord in the desert, the redemption in the future will be ushered in after a period of unparalleled suffering by the Jewish people. The initial attempt at bringing about the final redemption will suffer setbacks just as the initial attempt by Moses to secure the release of the Jewish people encountered setbacks.
    Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 5,20 comment on verse 20 where Moses and Aaron are being assailed by the overseers of the Jewish labourers for having been instrumental in their situation deteriorating rather than improving,  that after 6 months G’d appeared to Moses in Midian and said to him: “go back to Egypt (4,19) for all the people who wish to kill you have died.” When Moses and Aaron met, the former coming from Midian and the latter from Egypt, the overseers met them as they emerged from their audience with Pharaoh. We find a similar comment in Midrash Chazit on Song of Songs 2,9: “My beloved is like a gazelle.” Just as a gazelle is visible to the eye one moment, disappears and then reappears, so the first redeemer appeared to the Jewish people, disappeared, and reappeared again in due course. Rabbi Tanchuma said that Moses disappeared for only three months and that this is the meaning of ויפגעו את משה ואת אהרן. [The expression ויפגעו always refers to an unexpected meeting, i.e. since both Moses and Aaron had returned to their previous abodes there was no reason to expect them at the palace gates of Pharaoh at the time [quoted in the name of עץ יוסף]. When the prophet Micah 7,15 speaks of G’d performing miracles “just as in the days when you came out of Egypt,” he alludes to certain similarities between what preceded the Exodus from Egypt to what will occur when the final redemption will be at hand. We have another Midrash (Sanhedrin 98) according to which the meaning of Isaiah 59,19: “for he will come like a hemmed in stream which the wind of the Lord drives on,” is that if you observe a certain generation being hemmed in by troubles from all sides like a river, await him (the Messiah) seeing that the prophet Isaiah continued there (verse 20) “for he shall come as a redeemer to Zion and to those who turn back from sin.”
    
    
    
    
   וארא  אל  אברהם
    
    
    
   
   ה' קנני ראשית דרכו קדם מפעליו מאז, “The Lord created me at the beginning of His course; as the first of His works of old” (Proverbs 8,22). In this verse Solomon speaks in the name of the emanation חכמה, wisdom. This is the level of wisdom which is concealed even from the מלאכי השרת, “the ministering angels.” Job referred to this elusive wisdom when he said: ”but where can wisdom be found?” (Job 28,12) Concerning this level of wisdom we also have a verse in Job 28,21 “it is hidden from the eyes of all living, concealed from the fowl of heaven.” Our sages  interpreted the words: “from the fowl of heaven” as a reference to the ministering angels. This is the “wisdom” which preceded creation of heaven and earth. We have an allusion to this fact in Proverbs 3,19: “The Lord founded the earth by wisdom; He established the heavens by understanding.” We have a further verse in Scripture alluding to this in the very next verse. “By His knowledge the depths burst apart, and the skies distilled dew.” All 
the verses we have just quoted prove that heaven and earth, the depths and all that is contained within them have been created by G’d using this חכמה, “wisdom” as His instrument.  This is also what Solomon meant to say in Proverbs 8,25-29: “Before [the  foundations of] the mountains were sunk, before the hills I was born. He had not yet made earth and fields of the world’s first clump of clay. I was there when He set the heavens into place; when He fixed the horizon upon the deep. When He made the heavens above firm, and the fountains of the deep gushed forth; when He assigned the sea its limits so that its waters never transgress His command.”
    If you want to examine the various expressions used by Solomon in greater depth, the expression “the deep” refers to what our sages call the קו ירוק, another word for the emanation בינה, “insight.” The word הרים, “mountains” is a reference to the patriarchs. (the emanations חסד, גבורה and תפארת represented by the patriarchs.) The word ארץ is a reference to the emanation סוף [an alternate name for the emanation מלכות, Ed.] 
    Solomon called this חכמה by the name ראשית, seeing that it preceded the creation of the universe popularly known as מעשה בראשית. This was also the reason that when the Torah commenced its report about the creation of the universe it had to commence with the word בראשית. The word ראשית not only refers to the beginning of something in terms of time, but it also means that something is superior in quality. An example is found in Amos 6,6: וראשית שמנים ימשחו, “and anoint themselves with the best oils.”  Just as superior oil floats to the top of all other liquids so wisdom rises to the top of all other forms of existence. This is what is meant by the words in our opening verse: “He has  created (acquired) me at the beginning of His discourse.” In other words, wisdom proclaims that it had been G’d’s first acquisition, something G’d has secured for Himself from a hidden source. This mysterious source is the region in which wisdom originates. Inasmuch as the  words “and from the fowl of heaven it is hidden,” were understood to be a reference to the angels, it is clear that the word קנני of which Solomon spoke in Proverbs 8,22, has its root in the word קן, i.e. a bird’s nest. The nest is the place in which the bird originates. Solomon explained that the original “site” of wisdom gave birth to wisdom which is its first “nest.” Wisdom  relates to all other phenomena in this universe as does the nest to all the chicks hatched in it, i.e. it is its origin.  If all this is true then wisdom was not created out of a total void as some of the philosophers have thought, but it is a phenomenon and a derivative of the original אין, void or nothingness, the supreme and hidden source. This is what Job spoke about when he said: “where can wisdom be found?” These words of Job must not be understood as an inquiry, a question expressing hopelessness, but as a piece of information. The Torah has informed us that “wisdom” emanates from a hidden source. The Torah itself was created by drawing on that hidden source. Seeing that the Torah originates in that domain it is called לקח טוב, “good instruction” (Proverbs 4,2)  and the ministering angels are envious that it was entrusted to man. 
    Our sages in Shabbat 85 confirmed this when they described that when G’d was about to give the Torah to Moses the angels were upset and remonstrated with G’d how He could entrust such a hidden treasure to mere man, a creature that defiles himself so often, a creature dominated often by its evil urge? We derive the fact that such a conversation took place from David’s remark in Psalms 8,2: “O Lord, our Lord, How majestic is Your name throughout the earth, You Who have covered the heavens with Your splendour!“ This statement reflects the angels’ argument that G’d’s splendour should remain in the heaven and not be made available on earth. G’d answered the angels with rhetorical questions such as: “it is written in the Torah ‘you should remember the Sabbath to keep it holy.’ It is written: ‘honour your father and your mother!;’ it is written in the Torah: ‘you shall not steal, etc., etc.’ Is there any need for such instructions for celestial beings? Do you suffer from either an evil urge or exposure to defilement? Are there foods which are permitted to you and others which are not?” Thus far the Midrash.
    I believe that when the Midrash speaks about “jealousy” between the angels and man we need to examine these words. Jealousy is an emotion which is the result of man being equipped with an evil urge. Seeing that G’d Himself is on record as denying that the angels possess an evil urge, how could they be described as being “jealous” of man? This fact is spelled out even more forcefully in Chagigah 15 where the Talmud states: “in the celestial regions such concepts as standing, being seated, jealousy and competition are non-existent.” It is a region in which all beings are inclined to agree with one another in the search for a deeper understanding of the Essence of their Creator. The nutrition of these celestial beings consists of their obtaining progressively deeper insights into the Essence of G’d. This ensures the continued existence of the ministering angels. Seeing that all these beings are united in the same aspirations, how could there exist amongst them something described as ‘jealousy?” At the same time, it is no secret that jealousy is a well known phenomenon amongst human beings which afflicts mostly people who are envious of their immediate superiors. You do not find that a king is envious or jealous of a simple villager, neither is the villager envious of the king seeing that the difference between their respective social situations makes comparisons pointless. A fool is not jealous of a scholar as he has no conception of what it means to be a scholar. The scholar is not envious of the fool as he has no need of him. Jealousy is reserved for people of similar status. A scholar may be jealous of another scholar, a warrior of another warrior who has achieved greater fame, etc. A rich man is jealous of someone richer than himself (compare Avodah Zarah 55). Having appreciated all this, how could one apply the term “jealousy” to a relationship between such unequals as human beings and the ministering angels? 
    We must therefore understand this term when used by the Midrash to describe a situation prevailing in the celestial regions as a mere euphemism, a parable. Clearly, the angels were aware of the difference between human beings, creatures who were a fusion of body and soul, of the material and the spiritual. It is equally clear that they were aware that most of what is written in the Torah in the form of legislation was not addressed to them as they were not capable of fulfilling such commandments by reason of their being of a uniform “material,” i.e. disembodied creatures.  What concerned the angels was that there was a “wisdom” which was deemed appropriate for creatures whom they considered inferior by definition precisely because they had bodies and urges which interfered with their serving their Creator at all times. They could not understand why such a superior wisdom would be entrusted to inferior beings instead of to them! They had assumed that the absence of a body made them superior to man by definition. They considered any matter which was a combination of materials as something inferior to matter consisting of a single element. Creatures which were the result of some fusion represented to the angels something of a dichotomy, containing built-in tensions. G’d, in a manner of speaking agreed with them, saying that precisely because of this built-in tension the superior wisdom represented by Torah was needed by man.
    A superior person such as Moses attained the highest level of insight called ראשית, something not attained by any other living human being, as testified to in the Torah itself (Deut. 33,21) where we read: ”He saw (chose) for himself the ראשית, the best; for that is where the lawgiver’s portion is hidden.” He received this from the domain called ראשית. This attainment by Moses was not part of his prophetic qualities but an intellectual achievement on his part. This is why the Torah refers to it as וירא, “he saw,” i.e. he comprehended. The other outstanding achievement of Moses, the one called by our sages אספקלריא מאירה, “a clear vision,” was something that he attained as a prophetic quality. It was an insight into the workings of the attribute of Mercy. This was something which the patriarchs with whom G’d communicated in His dimension as the attribute of Justice had not comprehended as  personal insights. [They had been aware of it as a phenomenon but not by personal experience applied to their lives. Ed.] All the other prophets who experienced various levels of revelations did not experience such revelations of the attribute of Mercy. This was an attribute which resulted in certain supernatural miracles becoming part of G’d’s manifestations during those days. 
    
    The word אספקלריא employed by our sages (Yevamot 49) to describe visions received by the prophets is an acronym composed of ספק קלריא, i.e. “supplied a degree of light, enlightenment.” It resembles the ability to look through a solid body because the material the body is made of is transparent glass. When the sages said that all  prophets other than Moses received אספקלריא שאינה מאירה, the meaning is not that they received blurred visions which they could not decipher, but that G’d did not supply additional light so that what was beyond the solid material was lit up brilliantly. The “picture” they saw was clear, not blurred, but insufficiently illuminated to reveal to them every detail. When Moses received a similar vision, the “picture” was brilliantly illuminated so that he could distinguish every detail in it. To reflect this fact G’d made the skin of Moses’ forehead radiate light so brilliant that the people approaching him became intimidated by that light (Exodus 34,20). They could not absorb it, i.e. “digest it.” It blinded them. Proof that Avraham and the other patriarchs did not receive this level of prophetic insight is provided by the fact that Avraham never uttered the tetragram when he addressed G’d but used the name א-ד-נ-י. Moses, on the other hand, used the name י-ה-ו-ה when addressing G’d. Moses employed both the attribute of G’d שדי as well as His attribute י-ה-ו-ה when he was active in his capacity as a prophet. When G’d reveals Himself to a prophet preparatory to performing “hidden” miracles, i.e. miracles which are not directly “impossible” in terms of the laws of nature, such revelations are also called אספקלריא שאינה מאירה, “unclear vision.”
    
    6,3. וארא אל אברהם אל יצחק ואל יעקב באל שדי, ושמי ה’ לא נודעתי להם. “whereas I appeared to Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, I appeared to them in My capacity as the G’d  Shaddai, but in my capacity as Hashem I did not become familiar to them.” The Torah used the expression וידבר אלו-הים when telling Moses about this, whereas at the beginning of the chapter, 2 verses earlier, when G’d spoke to Moses this was prefaced by the words ויאמר ה'. There is a reason for this. The name ה’ denotes the attribute of Mercy, and the word ויאמר  implies a friendly tone used by the speaker, whereas the name אלו-הים is a reference to the attribute of Justice, and the word וידבר implies that the speaker uses stern language. We find proof of this when the brothers related how Joseph had spoken to them when he accused them of being spies. They said: (Genesis 42,30) דבר האיש אדוני הארץ אתנו קשות, “the man, the ruler of the country spoke harshly with us.” When you examine the entire dialogue between G’d and Moses at the burning bush, you will find that in all the sixteen instances when G’d addressed Moses He did not once use דבור, i.e. stern language. Here G’d resorted to דבור, to stern language, after Moses had challenged His method of doing justice with the words: “why did You make matters bad for the people, etc.?” Also the attribute אלוה-ים which is mentioned here indicates that it was the attribute of Justice which addressed Moses here in contrast with the attribute of Mercy which G’d had employed previously at the burning bush. At the end of the previous portion G’d is on record as responding kindly to Moses’ challenge, i.e. ויאמר ה’...עתה תראה, He had reassured Moses that He was going to punish those who deserved it and reward those who had experienced suffering. Now however, G’d wanted to let Moses know that he had overstepped the bounds of what is proper by asking that question. It is not unusual for G’d to at almost one and the same time appear both as a stern mentor and as a kindly teacher. In Leviticus 19,3 we read איש את אמו ואביו תיראו ואת שבתותי תשמורו אני ה’ אלוקיכם, “each one of you shall display reverence for his mother and his father and you shall observe My Sabbath days, I am Your G’d (the merciful) and the (just).” G’d employs the attribute of Justice to lend weight to the command, but He also employs the attribute of Mercy to inform us that He can be counted on to reward our compliance with His instructions. We encounter a similarly worded verse in Leviticus 19,12 where the Torah first forbids the use of G’d’s name to swear a false oath, by writing לא תשבעו בשמי לשקר וחללת את שם אלוה-יך, “do not use My name to swear a false oath and to thereby defile My name (attribute of Justice)- אני ה’, “for I am the Merciful G’d (attribute of Mercy). Again our sages explain the conclusion of this verse in which G’d suddenly switches to the use of the tetragram as meaning that (“I am guaranteed to pay you your reward for observing My commandment”).
    The point G’d is making here is that although He had not bothered to add the assurance that He would recompense the patriarchs for observing His commandments again and again, they nevertheless had not seen fit to question His manner of running the universe every time they were mystified by something which appeared to affront their sense of justice. Moses, who had been the recipient of such assurances, seeing he had become privy to the fact that G’d upsets the laws of nature (in order to help His people) had seen fit to question Him and His methods. Use of the word שדי in our verse is a reference to G’d’s handling the universe and sometimes employing an attribute designed to overcome the powers He has delegated to the horoscopic influences on the fate of man. However, He had not employed the powers inherent in the use of His four-lettered holy name י-ה—ו-ה  in His relations with them.
    According to the opening word וארא, “I have become visible,” in our verse, the word נודעתי used as a contrast is strange; we would have expected the Torah to write לא נראתי להם, I have not become visible to them, by My attribute י-ה-ו-ה, or words to that effect. Or, the verse should have commenced with the words ואודע אל אברהם אל יצחק וגו’ “I became visible to Avraham, to Yitzchak, etc.” Why this asymmetry in the verbs used here? The answer is that the patriarchs as a rule experienced their visions at night. It was appropriate therefore to apply the expression “vision” from the root ראה “to see” to their experiences of encounters with G’d. G’d wanted to contrast the fact that Moses had been granted a revelation of His presence while he was fully awake already the first time he had had a communication from G’d. The word נודעתי which is derived from ידע, “to know intimately,” was therefore more appropriate to bring home to Moses that G’d had seen fit to let him experience a superior form of divine communication. In fact the use of the intransitive form לא נודעתי instead of the transitive form לא הודעתי להם, “I have not made (Myself) known to them,” teaches that He and His name are all one. We find a similar switch between the transitive and intransitive use of the same word in Exodus 33,22 והיה בעבור כבודי.....עד עברי. The Torah wanted to inform Moses (and us) that he and His כבוד are all one.
    Nachmanides writes as follows. “The true message of this verse is in strict accordance with the text. G’d announced to Moses that “whereas I had appeared to the patriarchs as the attribute שדי,” such as when G’d contrasted His appearance to them with what He spelled out to Aaron and Miriam in Numbers 12,6 when He said: במראה אליו אתודע, ‘I make Myself known to him (prophets other than Moses) in a vision.’” G’d implied that He certainly did not reveal Himself to those prophets in His capacity as  ‘by My name י-ה-ו-ה ‘ while granting them prophetic insights.” This did not imply that the patriarchs had not been aware of such an attribute of G’d. This then accounts for the fact that when Avraham addressed G’d he employed the name of the letters א-ד-נ-י  (superior to the attribute אלו-הים) which contains two of the letters of the tetragram. G’d’s entire dealings with Moses were based on use of the attribute of Mercy on a regular basis. This attribute is present in more pronounced form in the name  י-ה-ו-ה than in any other name of G’d. [I am omitting the balance of Nachmanides’ comments on this verse. Ed.]
    
    6,6. לכן אמור אל בני ישראל אני י-ה-ו-ה . Therefore “say to the Children of Israel: “I AM  י-ה-ו-ה-.”  After the Torah had written earlier (3,15) “and say also to the Children of Israel ‘Hashem the G’d of your forefathers has sent me to you this is My name forever and My remembrance from generation to generation,’ and He had already commanded him to inform the Israelites of this attribute of G’d, He now repeated these instructions adding that the redemption would occur in four stages, i.e. ‘I will take you out, I will save you, I will redeem you and I will acquire you as My people (and I will bring you to the land, etc.).’”
    The difference between these four stages of the redemption is as follows: stage one referred to termination of slave labour. Stage two meant that the Israelites would no longer be legally inferior to the Egyptians. Stage three was a hint of the crossing of the sea by the Israelites. Stage four was a hint that they would be given the Torah. The promise of freedom from slave labour is contained in the words 
   והוצאתי אתכם מתחת סבלות מצרים. This implied that whereas the slave labour would be canceled, the Israelites would still be under the authority of the Egyptians. In fact, according to our tradition this state of affairs continued for six months. According to Rosh Hashana 11 the slave labour terminated on the first of Tishrey, whereas the Exodus followed 61/2 months later on the 15th of Nissan. Concerning this event the Torah wrote here והצלתי אתכם מעבודתם, “I will save you from being slaves to them.”  It meant freedom from paying taxes to the Egyptian government. The advent of total independence was promised in the words וגאלתי אתכם בזרוע נטויה ובמשפטים גדולים, “and I will liberate you with an outstretched arm and great judgments.” This was an allusion to what would occur at the Sea of Reeds. This experience would remove the Israelites’ fear, (i.e. their slave mentality) from their erstwhile masters. Seeing how the Egyptians drowned would once and for all free the people not only physically but also mentally. The words “great judgments” in the plural referred to a number of phenomena witnessed by the Jewish people; they were first referred to in Exodus 14,31 and they have been elaborated on by Isaiah 51,9 when he specifically referred to G’d employing His ‘arm’ as He had done once before. Rashi, quoting Mechilta on the Shirat Hayam, already points to the fact that when the Egyptians drowned horse and rider remained inseparably attached to one another; he based himself on Exodus 15,1. Moses enumerated several additional phenomena in that song, all of which account for the expression “great judgments.” This stage was going to be followed by והייתי לכם לאלו-הים, “I will become your G’d”- seeing that you accept Me as such. The words ולקחתי אתכם לי לעם, “I will take you to be My nation,” implies the promise of being given the Torah, a tangible demonstration of that promise. The words וידעתם כי אני ה’ אלוקיכם mean that henceforth, after the revelation at Mount Sinai, “you will know forever more that I am the Lord your G’d” (both attributes.). The promise concludes with the words המוציא אתכם מארץ מצרים, “Who is taking you out of the land of Egypt;” you will never credit anyone else including yourselves with having accomplished that feat.
    
    6,8. והבאתי אתכם אל הארץ, “I will bring you to the land, etc.” Seeing that all the previous promises were meant to be realised in the immediate future, this promise too was intended to be fulfilled promptly. If the sin of the spies who talked the people into refusing to engage in a military struggle to oust the Canaanites had not occurred, this promise too would have been fulfilled promptly.
    The prophet Ezekiel 34,13 speaks of similar four stages of redemption of the Jewish people in the future. I quote: “I shall bring them out from the nations and gather them from the lands and bring them to their ground and tend them on Israel’s mountains, etc.” When commemorating the Exodus annually on the night of the Seder  we drink four cups of wine corresponding to these four stages of our redemption outlined by the above-mentioned four expressions. The reward received by the righteous for their conduct has been compared to a כוס, a cup, by David in Psalms 23,5 where he speaks of כוסי רויה, “my cup is abundant.” We find a similar reference in Psalms 16,5: “G’d is my allotted share and cup.” The word כוס, cup, in that context occurs also in Psalms 116,13 “I will raise the cup (in thanksgiving) for salvations experienced.” Isaiah writes something similar (Isaiah 66,11) “that you may suck from her breast consolation to the full.” The author continues to quote examples from the Bible showing that traditionally we either drank or will drink cups of wine as a form of thanksgiving to the Lord for salvations experienced or yet to be experienced.
   נשאתי את ידי, “I have raised My hand.” The Torah employs an anthropomorphism here (using language employed by human beings to portray non-existent limbs of disembodied Beings such as G’d). The whole verse is to be understood as an allegory.  When a man swears an oath he usually raises his hand towards heaven to reflect his sincerity and earnestness. The Torah used this form of expression to describe that G’d related with similar seriousness and determination to what He had in mind for the descendants of Avraham, etc. This is not an isolated instance in which G’d is described as “raising His hand.” Compare Deuteronomy 32,40: “For I have raised My hand to heaven.”
    Nachmanides writes in a similar fashion, prefacing his comment with the words: על דרך האמת. “I have raised My strong arm to Myself that I will give them the land.” He also quotes the verse in Deut. 32,9 as a parallel to our verse. Nachmanides points out, however, that he does not consider Daniel 12,7 ורם ימינו ושמאלו אל השמים,  “he (the man dressed in linen, an angel) raised  his right hand and his left hand to heaven,” to be in the same category. In that instance the angel is portrayed as swearing an oath in the name of the Lord.
   מורשה, “an inheritance.” G’d refrains from saying ירושה. There is a  difference between מורשה andירושה . The people addressed were not the ones who would personally receive the land as a heritage seeing that all those who were adults would never get there due to the sin of the spies. They would, however, bequeath their claim to it to their children, i.e. they would be מורישים. This is why the Torah used the word מורשה instead of ירושה. We need to interpret the word מורשה in Deut. 33,4 in a similar manner. Torah cannot be handed down as an inheritance as if it were a house, a field, or a business, i.e. some object  merely to be passed on from father to son. Inasmuch as Torah is an inheritance it remains such only for that particular generation. which stood at Mount Sinai and had received it as an inheritance, i.e. something inalienable, not to be stolen from them. The next generation had to study Torah on its own in order that it should become an inheritance for them also. However, the children of someone who “owned” Torah are predisposed to acquire it for themselves. Hence Torah is forevermore a מורשה for such children. Parents have been commanded not only to study Torah but to train their children in studying Torah, ושננתם לבניך, (Deut. 6,7). it is a מורשה, something to be transmitted to successive generations down the ages. By the same token later generations of Jews are as duty-bound to observe the commandments of the Torah as were those who had actually received it at Sinai. According to our sages the souls of those generations had already stood at Mount Sinai at the time when G’d revealed Himself to Moses and to the people (Pessikta Zutrata Va-etchanan 5,3). This concept is spelled out in detail in Deut. 29,14 “including all those who are not present (in the flesh) on this day.” (the day Moses renewed the covenant with the generation who would enter the Holy Land). G’d concluded this promise with the words אני ה’, seeing He had commenced the paragraph (verse 2) 
    The message is : “I Who make a promise can be relied upon to translate it into reality.”
    
    6,9. ולא שמעו אל משה, “but they did not listen to Moses.”  The reason was not that they either disbelieved G’d’s promise or His servant Moses, but it was due only to shortness of breath and  hard work. The people’s collective condition was much like that of an individual  who wishes himself dead as he can no longer bear the pain that he is enduring. According to a Midrashic approach (Pessikta zutrata) the word מקצר in the expression מקצר רוח which totals 430 in numerical value, made them believe that the redemption was due to occur only after 430 years of such suffering. Such a prospect naturally made them deaf to Moses’ promises at this time. [They did not realise that by commencing the count from the time G’d had revealed Himself to Avraham at the covenant between the pieces 430 years had just about elapsed so that the redemption was close at hand. Ed.]
    
    6,13. ויצום אל בני ישראל, “He commanded them regarding the Children of Israel.” G’d commanded Moses and Aaron to put up with the expressions of frustration by the people and not to get impatient with them nor to curse them.
   ואל פרעה מלך מצרים, “and regarding Pharaoh the King of Egypt.” He instructed them to display respect for Pharaoh seeing he was the King of Egypt. Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 6,3 use the unusual wording on 5,3 where Moses and Aaron referred to G’d as punishing Israel if they did not offer sacrifices to Him as proof. What Moses and Aaron meant was that G’d would punish Pharaoh for refusing to let the Israelites do that. However, they deliberately phrased it the way they did out of respect for Pharaoh’s official position. Here too, G’d repeats the warning to Moses and Aaron to continue in their deferential manner. We note that even in Exodus 11,8 (near the end of all the plagues when Moses predicted that instead of his having to come to Pharaoh’s palace for an audience the role of petitioner and the one who is being petitioned would be reversed) he did not say (though he meant it) that Pharaoh would trouble himself to come to him, but said “all your servants will come down to me and will bow down to me begging us to leave.”
    Another Midrash (Mechilta on the verse we quoted from 11,8) understands the words: “He commanded them concerning the Children of Israel,” as a warning to tell the Israelites to desist from idolatrous practices. The Midrash bases this interpretation on Genesis 2,16 where the word ויצו is also understood as a warning against idolatrous practices. [one of the 7 Noachide laws.] They derive this meaning of the word צו from Hoseah 5,11 כי הואיל הלך אחרי צו, “for he (the Jewish people) agreed to follow the command of its kings to indulge in idolatry).” Ezekiel 20,5-9 also makes clear reference to the Israelites serving idols while they were enslaved in Egypt, and their being warned to desist prior to the redemption. He warns his compatriots not to commit the same errors made by the Israelites then. 
    
    6,14. אלה ראשי בית אבותם, “these are the heads of their father’s houses.” Seeing that the time of the end Israelites’ stay in Egypt was close at hand, and their redemption meant their separation from Egyptian society, the Torah saw fit to list their genealogies from Reuven until Levi, seeing that Moses and Aaron were Levites. The word אלה, “these,” is used to disqualify anyone else from belonging to the Jewish nation. Had the Torah not begun this list with the tribe of Reuven but had only listed Levi as the head of the “houses,” we might have thought that Levi was the firstborn as far as the genealogy of the Israelites leaving Egypt was concerned, and that the entire list was only recorded in honour of Moses.
    
    6,23. ויקח אהרן את אלישבע בת עמינדב אחות נחשון, “Aaron married Elisheva daughter of Aminadav, sister of Nachshon (from the tribe of Yehudah).” The point of the Torah giving us these details at this time was to show that the tribe representing Royalty and the tribe representing the Priesthood (religious leadership) formed a liaison through marriage. Elisheva was the sister of the outstanding one of the princes of the twelve tribes, Nachshon scion of the tribe of Yehudah. The verse even mentions the background of the mother of Pinchas seeing that Pinchas became a High Priest in due course through his own -rather than merely hereditary- merit. It is customary in Scriptures that the mother of the ruling monarchs are mentioned (by name and /or background) For instance: Kings I 15,2 records the name of the mother of Aviyam King of Yehudah as being Maachah daughter of Avishalom. In Chronicles II 20,31 we are told that the mother of King Yehoshaphat was Azuvah daughter of Shilchi. The reason the Torah identifies the wife of Eleazar as “of the daughters (pl) of Putiel” instead of merely stating her personal name or that she was “a daughter” of Putiel is to indicate that she was descended either from Yitro or from Joseph. According to Sotah 43 there was some doubt if this lady was related paternally or maternally respectively to descendants of Joseph/Yitro respectively. Our paragraph contains the names of no fewer than six prophets from the tribe of Levi. They are: Aaron, Moses, Pinchas (identical with Elijah), plus three sons of Korach Assir, Elkanah, and Aviasaph. (verse 24) They have been enumerated in the list of 48 prophets in Megillah 14. These six prophets all lived during the same time. Presumably, the verse in Numbers 26,11 stating that Korach’s sons did not die (during the uprising) refers to these three prophets.
    
    6,26. הוא אהרן ומשה, “the same Aaron and Moses, etc.”  Aaron was mentioned here ahead of Moses seeing he was the older of the two brothers. In verse 27, the Torah lists Moses ahead of Aaron seeing that he was greater than his brother in stature as prophet. We find that the Torah sometimes mentions Joshua ahead of Calev (Numbers 14,38), whereas at other times it mentions Calev ahead of Joshua (Numbers 14,30). Joshua was greater than Calev seeing he was a prophet. Calev was greater than Joshua by genealogy, seeing he was from the tribe of Yehudah. We also find something similar when the Torah mentions heaven and earth. In Genesis 1,1 the Torah mentions heaven ahead of earth seeing that disembodied celestial beings are more distinguished than creatures who require a body in order to be functional. They also enjoy infinite life as distinct from creatures on earth. On the other hand, in Genesis 2,4 the Torah lists the earth ahead of the heaven. The reason is that the Holy Temple and the Shechinah are at home on earth rather than in the heaven. The reason the Torah repeats (verse 28) “it was on the day that G’d spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,” is because earlier (verse 13) it sounded as if the command to release the Israelites from Egypt was addressed to both Moses and Aaron. The Torah wants to clarify that the verbal instructions for this were issued by G’d only to Moses. Moses relayed them to Aaron.
    
    6,30. הן אני ערל שפתים ואיך ישמע אלי פרעה, ”here I am (still) of  sealed lips. How could Pharaoh listen to me?”  When G’d had commanded Moses and Aaron to go to Pharaoh earlier in our chapter Moses had remained silent. He assumed that the instructions had been intended for Aaron. When, at this point, he alone was addressed by G’d i.e. “all that I am saying to you,” he repeated his previous argument that his speech defect made him unfit to serve as G’d’s vessel  and that even the people did not listen to him. At this point G’d explained to him (ויאמר ה’) in a friendly fashion how He would deal with that problem.
    
    7,1. ראה נתתיך אלהים, “See, I have made you a master over Pharaoh,” i.e. that Pharaoh would listen to him. Firstly, G’d would give Moses a stature that Pharaoh could not ignore. Secondly, as to the matter of verbal communication between them, G’d appointed Aaron as Moses’ spokesman. The word נביאך, usually translated as “your prophet” must be understood here as ניב שפתיך, ((Isaiah 57,19) “he will express what emerges from your lips.” Onkelos also translates the word as “your interpreter.”
    Shemot Rabbah 8,1 understands the words אלוהים לפרעה as “Pharaoh appointed himself as god.” He did this by claiming “the Nile is mine because I have created it “(Ezekiel 29,3). In response to this arrogance G’d told Moses that he was nothing, but that on the contrary, He would show him that Moses would be his “god.”
    
    7,3. ואני אקשה את לב פרעה, “and I will harden the heart of Pharaoh.” Many people ask that if G’d’ hardened Pharaoh’s heart so that he refused to release the Israelites how could G’d justify bringing the plagues upon him and the Egyptians seeing these people had acted under duress? Such plagues would represent caprice, undeserved violence by the Creator against people who were not guilty. How can we reconcile this with our concept of a fair and just G’d? Punishing Pharaoh for divinely inspired obstinacy and refusal to change his ways seems unfair. The answer is, of course, that Pharaoh had already been a confirmed sinner, having committed other sins which accounted for his forfeiting the right to do Teshuvah, repentance. If his only sin had been that he refused to let the Israelites go, and G’d had indeed made his heart stubborn on that score alone, punishing him would indeed have been doing violence to his rights as a human being.
    Pharaoh’s original sin versus the Jewish people has been spelled out in Exodus 3,5 where he used the natural (or unnatural) increase of the births amongst the Jewish people as a pretext to “outsmart” them and to kill their babies. Seeing that he had displayed his wickedness for all to see without having been interfered with by G’d, the time had now come when his punishment was that he was deprived of his free choice. Had G’d allowed Pharaoh and his people to become  penitents He could not even have punished them for what they had done up until now. We have proof of this from the story of Jonah and Nineveh. G’d accepted the repentance of the people of Nineveh and they completely escaped punishment. This is why G’d had to find a stratagem to prevent the Egyptians from becoming penitents at this stage.
    A Midrashic approach based on Shemot Rabbah 13,3: Rabbi Yochanan said that this verse provides the heretics with ammunition and enables them to claim that if Pharaoh did not do Teshuvah it was G’d’s fault, not his own. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish replied that on the contrary, this very verse is an answer to the heretics as it demonstrates Solomon’s saying (Proverbs 3,34)  “at the scoffers He scoffs, but to the humble He shows grace.” G’d had issued three successive warnings to Pharaoh and he had failed to respond to any of them. As a result, G’d slammed the door to Teshuvah shut. It is only after the fifth plague that the Torah actually uses the transitive form of “G’d hardened Pharaoh’s heart,” instead of the intransitive “Pharaoh’s heart remained hard” (compare 8,28 and contrast with 9,12). According to this Midrash the words which G’d spoke to Moses in our verse where He said: “I will harden the heart of Pharaoh,” refer to the last five plagues. We observe that several times when the plagues were really hurting the Egyptians Pharaoh weakened and made promises and offered compromises to Moses until in the end he reneged. The reason he reneged was that G’d hardened his heart although without such interference he would have given in much sooner. G’d had provided an additional rationale for all this when He said (9,16) “in order for My name to become a household word all over the earth.” This is analogous to Ezekiel 38,23 והתגדלתי והתקדשתי ונודעתי לעיני גוים רבים, “Thus will I be exalted and sanctified and become known in the eyes of many nations, etc.”
    You should know that the obstinacy of Pharaoh had already been hinted at to Moses at the very beginning of his career as a prophet at the burning bush when G’d had shown him a bush which burned without being consumed. G’d had compared the multiple troubles and plagues to fire, and Pharaoh and the wicked Egyptians as the bush of thorns which refused to submit to the fire (plagues). This had been G’d’s way of alerting Moses to the remarkable obstinacy which would be displayed by Pharaoh plus the fact that this would be just as unnatural as the spectacle he was observing at the time.
    
    7,4. והוצאתי את צבאותי, “and I will take out My hosts.” Here G’d referred to the Jewish people as “My hosts.” He meant to contrast them and their influence on earth with that of the planetary system. In Deut. 1,10 Moses himself refers to the multitude of the Jewish people as “here you are to-day as numerous as the stars in the heaven.” When G’d said צבאותי, He also referred to His hosts in the celestial regions. The correct translation of our verse is: “I will lead forth My celestial hosts together with My people on earth the Children of Israel.” This is another instance from which our sages derive their oft-repeated principle (Megillah 29) that the Shechinah was exiled together with the Jewish people. If even a relatively high celestial Being such as the Shechinah considered itself in exile while the Jewish people were in exile, how much more so is this true of other (lower) echelons of celestial beings! The Talmud Shevuot 35 stipulates that the word צבאות ranks as one of the names of G’d therefore must not be erased. The reason is that it represents the heavenly hosts. When later on (12,41) the Torah speaks of יצאו כל צבאות ה’ מארץ מצרים, “all the hosts of the Lord departed from the land of Egypt,” the reference is to both G’d’s celestial and terrestrial hosts (compare Mechilta on that verse).
    
    7,9. כי ידבר אליכם פרעה, “when Pharaoh speaks to you, saying, etc.” Here G’d informed Moses that Pharaoh would demand that he perform a miracle in order to legitimise himself. This was standard practice. A person is not accepted as a genuine prophet before he has performed some miracle (Maimonides Hilchot Yesodey Hatorah 7,7).
    Shemot Rabbah 9,1 phrases it thus. Seeing that even righteous people demand legitimisation by the performance of a miracle,  it is clear that wicked people will do no less. We find that after the deluge G’d said to Noach that He would not ever again bring a deluge to wipe out all the people. Noach asked for a sign. Thereupon G’d gave him the sign of the rainbow (Genesis 9,12). When King Chiskiyah was told by the prophet Isaiah that G’d had accepted his prayer for an extension of his life, the King (a very loyal Jew who almost became the Messiah) asked for a sign that the message from Isaiah which contradicted his earlier message that he should make his last will and testament was true (Isaiah 38,1-7). Seeing that these righteous people asked G’d for a sign, we cannot blame Pharaoh for asking Moses to perform some miracle.
    
    7,10. ויהי לתנין, “it turned into a snake.” This was the first of the many miracles Moses performed for Pharaoh. The word תנין, means serpent; we know this from verse 15 where G’d referred to Moses’ staff as having turned into a נחש, a snake. The reason the staff turned into a snake and not into some other animal was that the snake had been the first creature to introduce sin by seducing Chavah with its tongue. Pharaoh had also sinned with his tongue, when he refused to recognise the existence of the G’d of Israel and used this pretext to add that he was not obligated to obey a deity he had never heard of. Just as the serpent at the time had been punished, so Pharaoh starts being punished.
    It has become accepted norm that when one slanders G’d or His existence, one is bitten by snakes as we know from Numbers 21,5 “the people spoke out against G’d and Moses“ which is followed by (21,6) ”G’d sent fiery serpents against the people and they bit the people.” Furthermore, just as a snake can make itself rigid and wriggle out of unpleasant situations, so Pharaoh squirmed and on other occasions remained rigid in order to avoid having to obey G’d’s wishes. Whenever the plagues got the better of him he seemed to relent in order to gain relief only to renege in the hope that G’d had exhausted His power. He would resume his obstinate stance of refusing to let the Israelites go. The reason that this נחש is called תנין in our verse is that Pharaoh has been referred to elsewhere as the התנים הגדול הרובץ בתוך יאוריו, “the great sea-monster that crouches within its rivers” (Ezekiel 29,3). The word תנין here contains a hint that just as the staff of Aaron swallowed all the staffs of the Egyptian magicians so the sea (G’d) would swallow Pharaoh and his army at the sea of Reeds. According to an unnamed Midrash, when Pharaoh saw the transformation of the staffs of his magicians into snakes, he exclaimed: “is this your G’d’s trademark? Now I know where all the witchcraft in this world originates.”
    
    7,11.ויקרא גם פרעה , “Pharaoh also called in.” According to an ancient version in the Tanchuma Vaeyra 11 the word גם means that Pharaoh also called in his wife and that the latter then called in the sorcerers of Egypt. The practice of witchcraft was so commonplace in Egypt that Pharaoh’s wife and even young children were well versed in such sleights of hand.  
   גם הם, “they too.” First he had only called on the children; subsequently on the wise men and sorcerers. This is the reason why the Torah repeated the word גם  when writing ויעשו גם הם, “they did likewise.” Rabbi Shimon ben Pezzi said (Shemot Rabbah 9,3): “what did the sages perceive that they compared the wriggling of a snake to the conduct typical of  the kingdom of Egypt seeing they quoted Jeremiah 46,22 ‘she shall rustle away like a snake.’  Just as a snake winds its way slithering hither and thither, the king of Egypt did likewise. Just as the snake hisses prior to killing, so the Egyptian Kingdom hisses prior to killing its enemies.” Moses suspended the staff over Pharaoh telling him that it would become the source of the plagues he was going to inflict upon him.
   בלהטיהם, “with their spells.” Some kind of witchcraft. The ability to perform such tricks is anchored in the מלאכי חבלה, spiritually negative forces [whose origin are wasted human sperm, and other sins committed by man. Ed.] The word is derived from לוהט as in אש לוהט, (Psalms 104,4) “fiery flames.” The author speculates about a variety of causes responsible for these phenomena. One of his suggestions is that they attack man בלט, when he is unaware. The word חרטומים is a combination of two words i.e.חר טמי , “people who consult dead bones.” Most necromancers employ either human bones or animal bones to receive their knowledge of matters not accessible to ordinary people (compare Nachmanides).
    
    7,12. ויהיו לתנינם, “they (the staffs of the sorcerers) turned into snakes.”  The Torah refrained from saying ויהיו תנינים, which would have meant that they actually became snakes. The sorcerers did not have the power to do that. They could only create the illusion not the real thing. The wording of the Torah here is similar to Joshua 7,5: “their hearts melted into water.” This was a description of people losing courage. It did not describe a phenomenon literally. We have another example of this in (Samuel I 25,37) וימת לבו בקרבו והוא היה לאבן, which translated literally would mean “his heart (Naval’s) died within him, and it turned into stone.” The word אבן is merely a figure of speech.
    You may well counter that the expression ויהי לתנין is also used when Moses’ staff turned into a snake, so what is so peculiar about the Torah not writing תנין when describing what happened to the staffs of the sorcerers? We have to explain that in the case of Moses’ i.e. Aaron’s staff, this was a true transformation of the staff into a snake and that a similar wording is found in Genesis 2,7 ויהי האדם לנפש חיה where the letter ל at the beginning of the word לנפש certainly does not speak about something illusory. However, by way of contrast, what the sorcerers did was merely sleight of hand. Seeing that the wording lent itself to two different interpretations, the Torah had to write immediately that Aaron’s staff swallowed all the staffs of the sorcerers in order the show the qualitative difference between what Aaron had done and what the Egyptians had been able to do. The fact that the Torah describes “their staffs” as being swallowed instead of “their snakes” being swallowed, shows that their staffs had remained staffs in spite of appearing to be snakes. Another proof that the sorcerers only created an illusion is that the Torah does not describe them as having performed their art in the presence of Pharaoh and his servants as the Torah had been at pains to emphasise concerning Moses’ miracle.
    Alternatively, supposing that the חרטומים had really been capable of turning their staffs into snakes as the Talmud Chulin 7 suggests, why then were they called sorcerers instead of prophets? The answer is that they denied the power of the celestial forces. We could interpret the words ויהיו לתנינים to mean that their staffs did indeed turn into live snakes. The letter ל would be justified seeing that later on these snakes reverted to being staffs. The qualitative edge of Moses’ staff was simply that it swallowed the staffs of the sorcerers. According to Shemot Rabbah 9,7 when Pharaoh observed that Moses’ staff (as a staff) was able to swallow the combined staffs of his sorcerers he reflected that it might equally be capable of swallowing him and his throne. The word ויבלע means that something inert was able to swallow both something else inert and  something live. We have a parallel in Numbers 16,32 when the earth swallowed both Korach and family as well as his tents and belongings.
    
    7,17. בזאת תדע כי אני ה', “through this you shall know that I am Hashem.” You have claimed “I do not know of any “Hashem.” I am going to perform something which will make sure that you do know Me.” We know from Exodus 14,18 that in the meantime the Egyptians would find out who Hashem is There are several verses making a similar point.
    A kabbalistic approach: The Ineffable Name which had been “hidden” up until now would be revealed by an attribute known as זאת. This was the יד הגדולה, “the great hand” which G’d displayed in His treatment of the Egyptians. The words describing Pharaoh’s obstinacy most clearly are found in verse 23, ולא שת לבו גם לזאת, “he did not take to heart even זאת, “G’d’s manifesting Himself as the attribute זאת,” i.e. the Ineffable Name.
   הנה אנכי מכה במטה אשר בידי, “I am about to strike with the staff which is my hand, etc.” The words הנה אנכי mean “at my command,” (seeing Aaron was doing the actual striking of the river, verse 20); The verse teaches that the water was transformed not only in appearance but also in taste as well as in smell. We know that the appearance changed from verse 20 where the miracle is described as occurring before the eyes  of Pharaoh and his servants. We know that the taste of the river changed from the words: “the fish in the river died.” Fish live in a cool environment. When the water turned into blood it also became warmer. The fish drank from it and died as they could not survive in the warmer temperatures. We know that the smell of the river changed from the words: “the river stank.”
    
    7,22. ויעשו כן חרטומי מצרים, “the sorcerers of Egypt did likewise.” Seeing that all the water had turned into blood, where did the sorcerers take water from? We must therefore assume that Moses and Aaron struck only the waters of the Nile. This is supported by the words “the waters in the river” in our verse. Most of the verses dealing with the subject do not describe Moses and Aaron as striking “all the waters in Egypt.” Even verse 18 speaks only of the inability of the Egyptians to drink water “from the river.” It follows that the sorcerers had ample sources of water to draw on in order to demonstrate their skill. If we adopt this line of reasoning, how do we understand the words in verse 19 that Moses and Aaron were commanded to stretch out their hands over “all the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their ponds over their canals and over all their gathering of waters and they shall become blood?” How do we account for the fact that apparently Moses and Aaron did not comply fully with G’d’s command and struck only the waters in the river (verse 20)? We may answer this apparent omission by Moses and Aaron by remembering that the Nile was the primary source of water in Egypt and that all the ponds and canals were in the nature of tributaries receiving their water supply from the Nile. This, of course, brings us back to the question of “where did the חרטומים take water from to demonstrate their tricks?” 
    The answer is that they started digging in the ground. They found some water which they proceeded to turn into what looked like blood. Moses’ decree applied only to waters which were already visible as such not to subterranean pools of water. Alternatively, seeing that the sorcerers had heard the warning announcing this forthcoming plague, they had hastened to some areas where the water had not yet turned into blood, had taken some water out of its natural habitat and had then proceeded to demonstrate their skill in turning such water which had been divorced from its source into blood. They claimed that they had done this by their own efforts, though in fact, these waters also turned into blood once Moses and Aaron decreed that the waters in the Nile and those supplied by the Nile should turn into blood. You will note that Moses’ deed is attributed by the Torah to having occurred while Pharaoh and his servants were watching, i.e. לעיני פרעה ועבדיו, whereas it is not mentioned anywhere that Pharaoh or his servants actually watched the water used by the sorcerers changing into blood (verse 22).
    Another possible approach to this short paragraph is that G’d actually gave two separate instructions. 1) He commanded that the river be struck with the staff in order that its waters turn into blood. 2) Stretching out of Aaron’s hand while he was holding the staff without actually striking the waters of the tributaries, the ponds the canals, etc. When we read in verse 17 “here I am about to strike the waters in the Nile with the staff in my hand,” this referred to the river Nile only and was addressed to Aaron. Moses was not permitted to strike the river Nile seeing it was the instrument which had saved his life when he was in the basket. He was not permitted to strike the Nile to produce the frogs either (compare 8,2.)  When the Torah reports (in the plural) “Moses and Aaron did so just as G’d had commanded them; he raised his staff and struck the waters in the Nile before the eyes of Pharaoh, etc.,” this means that Aaron raised his hand with Moses’ staff and inclined it in all four directions over all the waters in Egypt. Moses’ part in all this was to warn Pharaoh of the forthcoming plague. This, after all, was what G’d had commanded in verse 19. When the Torah appears to repeat in verse 21 ויהי הדם בכל ארץ מצרים, “the blood was throughout the land of Egypt,” this means that by merely stretching out his hand whilst holding the staff the other sources of water in Egypt were turned into blood also.
    
    7,24. מים לשתות, “water for drinking.” It is clear from the wording that they did not succeed in drinking the water they found. Had they done so, the Torah would have written: מים וישתו, ”water which they drank.” Seeing they did not succeed in drinking the water mentioned in our verse, how did they manage for seven days without water? We are therefore compelled to interpret the verse to mean that they did indeed drink water they found as a result of digging for it. The meaning of the word לשתות maybe interpreted in two ways: whereas they did drink it this was still as if they could not drink it as the water was salt-water. This is the meaning of the additional words: “for they could not drink the waters from the river.” Seeing they could not drink regular water, they were forced to drink water which tasted very salty.
   כי לא יכלו לשתות מים ממימי היאור, “for they could not drink the waters of the river Nile,” which were sweet and fit for drinking. This is the explanation of the gaon Rabbi Saadyah. He makes the point that there is a difference in meaning between the word מי and the word מימי. The word מימי is used only for water which is fit to drink. We find proof of this in Numbers 20,8 ונתן את מימיו, “and it will yield its waters.” Or, Exodus 23,25: וברך את לחמכם ואת מימיך, “He will bless your bread and your water.” Another example is found in Chronicles II 32,30 יחזקיה סתם את מוצא מימי גיחון, “King Chiskiyah stopped up the sources of the waters from the river Gichon.” The word מי is used to describe waters unfit for drinking in Genesis 7,7 מפני מי המבול, “on account of the waters of the deluge;” another example of the word מי referring to waters not fit to drink is Exodus 15,19 וישב ה' עליהם את מי הים, “G’d turned  back upon them the waters of the sea.” The author quotes additional verses making the same point.
    
    7,25. וימלא שבעת ימים, “seven days were completed.”  The Torah spells out that the duration of the first plague was seven days, the length of time a menstruating woman is bleeding or is considered impure due to bleeding. The ritual state of the Egyptians was comparable to that of a menstruating woman. The Torah did not bother to give us data for the length of subsequent plagues as they lasted seven days unless otherwise reported. The interval between one plague and the next was 21 days so that a plague and its aftermath lasted approx. a month. We find this confirmed by Rabbi Eliezer Hakalir in his liturgical poem (recited in Ashkenazi congregations on the eighth day of Passover, commencing with the words מה מועיל רשע רשע בעליו) He says there that a full month was allocated to each plague and that three quarters of the month was allowed for warning and waiting. The fourth part of the month was the actual duration of the plague.
    
    7,27. את כל גבולך, “your entire territory.” The word “your territory” excludes the territory of Cham. The sons of Cham (the kushim, negroes?) and the sons of Mitzrayim had a territory  גבול,  between their respective territories. According to  Shemot Rabbah 10,2 this area had remained disputed between them until that time. Due to the plague of the frogs they made peace amongst themselves. They came to the realisation that the area not invaded by the frogs belonged to the territory of Cham. We derive this from the words of Moses’ warning “your entire territory,” i.e.  not anyone else’s territory.
    
    7,29. ובכה ובעמך, “against you as well as against your people.” The unusual letter ה at the end of the word ובך “and against you,” indicates that every one of the ten plagues was subdivided into 5 plagues. [compare Haggadah shel Pessach Rabbi Yossi Hagalilee]
    
    8,5 למתי אעתיר לך?, “for when shall I pray on your behalf?” Rashi comments: ”if the Torah had written מתי אעתיר, the meaning would have been: “when shall I pray?” Seeing the Torah wrote למתי, the meaning is: “concerning which time, i.e. which day shall I pray for the plague to be removed?” You find a parallel wording when Pharaoh asked for the plague of wild beasts to be removed from his land. There too the wild beasts were removed the next day (8,25-26). Although Moses prayed for the removal of the plague as soon as he left the presence of Pharaoh, the plague was not removed until the following day. The wording there confirms Rashi’s approach here. 
    I am surprised at the comments by Nachmanides who claims that Moses delayed praying until the following day. He claims that the letter ל in the word למתי is similar to the letter ל in the words למן היום אשר יצאת מארץ מצרים, “ever since the day you departed from the land of Egypt” (Deut. 9,7). In other words, the letter ל is integral to the word מתי, and is not a prefix. The argument of Nachmanides is that if Moses had prayed on the same day that the frogs be removed only on the morrow, then the Torah would have added the word ממחרת, “on the following day,” to its report in verse 9 that the frogs did die and would have written: “G’d did as Moses had said and the frogs died on the morrow.” Seeing that the Torah did not do so it is clear that the frogs perished immediately after Moses prayed. Seeing Pharaoh did not want them to die or retreat until the following day this leaves us with no choice but to assume that Moses held off with his prayer until the following day. Thus far Nachmanides.
    I feel that if that were so the Torah would have mentioned in connection with the plague of wild beasts that Moses delayed his prayer. Seeing that the Torah did not do so this is proof that Rashi is correct. Moses never said that he would pray only on the morrow. Seeing that already during the plague of frogs Pharaoh acted as if time were not of the essence to him and he wanted the frogs dead or removed only on the following day, Moses took a cue from this when he announced in future that the plagues he would orchestrate would occur on the following day, such as in 8,19. The same occurred again with the plague of hail which Moses also announced as about to occur on the day following his announcement (9,18). The same was true of the plague of pestilence when Moses gave a full day’s warning for the G’d-fearing people to bring their livestock to safety (9,5). The same occurred again when Moses announced the plague of the locusts (10,4). 
    The reason why Pharaoh did not ask for the frogs to die or disappear immediately was that he thought that the plague had run its course and that by waiting a day he could show up Moses as not having had anything to do with the cessation of that plague. When Moses demonstrated that the frogs would leave when he wanted, he showed that the plague fulfilled the purpose of showing למען תדע כי אין כה' אלוקינו, “so that you’ll know there is no one like the Lord our G’d.”
    
    8,8. ויצעק משה אל ה' על דבר הצפרדעים, “Moses cried out to the Lord on account of the frogs.” You will not encounter the expression “he cried out” in connection with any other plague which Moses asked G’d to stop. The Torah then reported only the normal ויעתר משה, “Moses pleaded,” or “Moses spread out his hands,” or similar expressions. It is possible to explain the words על דבר הצפרדעים as something necessary in view of the fact that G’d had announced that the frogs would “ascend from the river.” G’d had also spoken of ושרץ, that the river would produce a swarm of frogs each time these frogs were reported as having arisen from the river, making it sound like a natural occurrence. Seeing Moses was interested in making sure the Egyptians would not forget the supernatural element of this plague, he spoke of the דבר הצפרדעים, “the whole subject of the frogs,” i.e. their arrival and their departure. Moses wanted the manner in which the frogs would disappear to reflect that their appearance too had been due to supernatural causes. Even the words אשר שם לפרעה, “which He had inflicted on Pharaoh,” were not superfluous in Moses’ prayer. He stressed at every turn the divine origin of what had happened.
    
    8,14. ויעשו כן החרטמם בלטיהם להוציא את הכנים, “the sorcerers did so with their secret art in order to remove the lice.” Seeing the Torah testifies that they did not succeed, why did the Torah first write ויעשו כן, “they did likewise?” The words refer to the manner in which they wanted to reproduce the plague, i.e. they too struck the dust of the earth with their staffs, similar to what Moses had done (verse 12). Now that we know that  ויעשו כן, “they did likewise,” does not necessarily mean that the sorcerers succeeded in duplicating Moses’ and Aaron’s miracles, we may presume that in the previous instance when the Torah wrote this expression (concerning the snake and the blood) the sorcerers also did nothing more than create an allusion. The words ולא יכולו, “they were unable,” applies to all their efforts.
    Whereas prior to this the Egyptian sorcerers had been accorded the title  חרטומי מצרים, here the word מצרים is missing. It is possible that up until now these sorcerers had been held in high esteem by all the Egyptians. Now, however, they had already lost some of their image in the eyes of the people. By the time the third plague occurred and the sorcerers had to make a public admission that a higher power than they had caused this plague, i.e. אצבע אלו-הים היא, their esteem amongst the people declined further and is reflected In the missing letter י when we encounter the word  חרטומם again in 8,16. When someone’s name is spelled defectively this is an allusion to that person’s lack of ability, of power. We find these sorcerers at the nadir of their erstwhile reputation in 9,11 during the plague of “infectious boils” when they are reported as “unable” to make an appearance in the presence of Pharaoh. They were simply ashamed of their impotence. Not only were they unable to protect their fellow citizens but they could not even protect themselves.
    
    8,15. ויאמרו החרטומם אל פרעה, “the sorcerers said to Pharaoh.”  Up until this point the word חרטומים had always been spelled with the letter י. Now that they had been forced to admit their incompetence that letter was dropped. According to Kidushin 40 the absence of the letter י is an allusion to the proverb that of the ten units of magic G’d had allocated to the creatures on earth, nine had been appropriated by the Egyptians, whereas the remaining unit was dispersed all over the globe.
   אצבע אלו-הים היא, “it is a finger of G’d (His power).” Once the sorcerers saw that they could neither duplicate nor remove the lice they admitted that that plague was a manifestation of the power of the Lord and this is why Pharaoh did not continue to demand from them that they try and prove their abilities. They wanted to minimise the significance of that plague and that is why they attributed it to elohim instead of to Hashem. They dared not mention that name seeing Pharaoh had not yet acknowledged His existence. Pharaoh and his servants had mentioned that name only in their conversations with Moses and Aaron. This is the view of Nachmanides.
    However, the scholar Avraham Ibn Ezra wrote that the words “a finger of G’d” did not mean that they admitted that what Aaron had done was a miracle by G’d. They only meant to say that this plague was not supernatural, had nothing to do with the powers of either Moses or Aaron but was a natural phenomenon that could have been foreseen by the astrologers. This is the reason they referred to elohim, i.e. the attribute of G’d by means of which He allows laws of nature to operate. One of the proofs for the reasoning of the sorcerers, according to Ibn Ezra, was the fact that there had been no warning of this plague as opposed to the warnings which had been issued prior to the plague of blood and the plague of the frogs. This proved to them that even Moses had not known ahead of time that this plague would strike Egypt.
    Nachmanides makes an additional point that the first two plagues did not involve the creation of new creatures, seeing that the frogs had their habitat in or near the river and all that happened was that they left their habitat in great numbers. In the case of the river turning into blood, this too did not involve creation of a new species but merely a role-reversal of the life-giving content of the river-bed into a life-killing content, i.e. blood. Blood, under other circumstances is for man or the mammals what water is for the fish. In the case of the “lice” however, the Torah speaks of ויהיו, “there came into existence.” Suddenly insects were created out of the dust. The expression ויהי, and ויהיו, is found primarily during the story of creation at the beginning of Genesis. Only Hashem possesses the power to create something at the stage of בריאה. The power of water and earth to produce is restricted  to the level of יצירה and onwards. 
    In Psalms 8,4 David describes “when I behold Your heavens the work of Your fingers,” he makes the point that creation of a whole planetary systems is no more effort for G’d than the creation of the smallest insect. Rabbi Saadyah gaon makes a similar point when he points out that the word אצבע, finger, occurs in the Bible in three contexts. It occurs here with the plague of insect, כנים; it occurs in Psalms as we just quoted in connection with the creation of the planetary systems, and it occurs in connection with the Tablets (Ten Commandments) which are attributed to having been written with the finger of elohim (Exodus 31,18). Although there seems little common ground between these three domains, i.e. the planetary system, the insects, and the Tablets which, though inferior in size to the planetary system are superior in their spiritual significance, the common denominator between all of these is G’d’s ability to create.
    According to Shemot Rabbah 10,7 however, all that the sorcerers admitted was that their craft did not extend to mastery over creatures smaller than a lentil.  When the Torah said לא יכולו, “they were unable,” this meant only that they were unable to compete on that level. If they were unable to even collect such insects how much less able were they to produce them!
    
    8,17. הנני משליח בך..את הערוב, “I will unleash against you...the wild beasts.” You will not find that any of the other plagues was introduced with the letter ה as a form of definitive article except here. We would have expected the Torah to write here הנני משליח בך ערוב. We must remember that these wild beasts were not newly formed creatures. They already existed but the new element was that they invaded man’s habitat, something uncharacteristic. We find something similar when other kinds of disasters are mentioned in the Bible, for instance Leviticus 26,22.  The Torah writes in that context והשלחתי בכם את-חית השדה ושכלה אתכם, “I will dispatch against you the wild beasts of the field  and they will leave you bereft of your children.” In connection with the plague of frogs the Torah did write: “all your territory with frogs,” and the frogs were also not a new creation but simply emerged from their habitat the Nile. This is the reason that the vowel patach is under the letter ב in the word בצפרדעים (verse 27). It was to show that these frogs already existed but merely left their habitat, the Nile and its banks.
    According to Shemot Rabbah 9,9 (on 7,17) the difference between G’d striking man and man striking his fellow man is that when man attacks someone he is anxious to do so suddenly so as to preserve the advantage of surprise. Not so G’d. G’d gives fair warning to enable man to fall in with His wishes before he is taught a painful lesson. G’d warned Pharaoh in seven out of the ten plagues in order to afford him an opportunity to escape the plague by releasing the Israelites. Job 36,22 testifies to this attribute of G’d when Elihu proclaimed: “See, G’d is beyond reach in His power, who governs like Him?” The author meant that although G’d does not have any need to do so, He affords every sinner the opportunity to return to Him in penitence before punishing him. Only if the sinner fails to avail himself of such an opportunity does G’d carry out His threat as we know from Job 36,11-12: “if they serve obediently they will spend their days in happiness, their years in delight; but if they are not obedient, they shall perish by the sword.”
    
    8,18.והפלאתי ביום ההוא , “I shall set apart on that day, etc.” The fact that the first three plagues occurred in the land of Egypt without affecting the province of Goshen was not so remarkable due to the nature of the plagues. The manifestations of those plagues were more or less local in nature. Seeing that the plague of wild beasts originated far from civilised areas of Egypt, it was remarkable that the beasts should distinguish between areas inhabited by Israelites and areas inhabited by Egyptians. It was therefore an act of G’d to redirect the instinct of the beasts so that they ignored Israelites and their dwellings. 
   אשר עמי עומד עליה, “on which My people are standing.” This means: “in order to enable My people to maintain itself on it.”
   למען תדע כי אני ה' בקרב הארץ, “so that you will appreciate that I am Hashem right in the midst of the earth.” G’d meant that He exercises control right on earth, punishing sinners and rewarding and saving those who put their trust in Him. The line was designed to provide a striking contrast with Pharaoh’s declared philosophy that there was no such thing as providential guidance of the earth by a divine force.
    
    8,19. ושמתי פדת בין עמי ובין עמך, “I will make a distinction between My people and between your people.” G’d (Moses) had already mentioned that He would make a distinction between Goshen and the rest of the country. The additional information in this verse meant that even within Egypt proper the wild beasts would not attack the Israelites or their belongings. We have confirmation of this in Psalms 78,48 where Assaph (a contemporary of the event) said: ”He inflicted upon them swarms of wild beasts to devour them.” The word פדות is also related to “ransom.” Isaiah 43,3 speaks about G’d giving a “ransom” to Egypt (in return for releasing the Jewish people). The word is spelled defective in our verse, i.e. without the letter ו, indicating that the redemption from Egypt was not a total redemption as it was followed by other periods of enslavement of the Jewish people. When Psalms 111,9 speaks about פדות שלח לעמו, “He has sent redemption to His people,” the word פדות is spelled plene indicating that David speaks about the redemption of the future.
    
    8,25. וסר הערוב מפרעה, “and the wild beasts will depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people to-morrow.” Moses told Pharaoh this in order that he should not assume that the plague was bound to stop on that day and that Moses knew this based on his astrological calculations. Just as with the plague of frogs Pharaoh had asked that it not be stopped until the following day as he had hoped to embarrass Moses, Moses now turned the tables on him using the delay in arranging relief to prove the same point. Both arrival and cessation of the plagues were announced on the day following their being announced.
    
    8,27. ויסר הערוב “the wild beasts departed.” The Torah pointedly did not mention that these animals died as it had done with the frogs. In this instance G’d’s intention in bringing on this plague had been to make the lives of the Egyptians miserable; they were not to derive any benefit from these animals. The frogs were killed by G’d in order to produce the stench which discomfited the people. Had the wild beasts been allowed to die the Egyptians would have used their carcasses as food. G’d did not mean for this to happen.
    
    8,28. גם בפעם הזאת, “also on this occasion.” During the first three plagues, which were summarized by Rabbi Yehudah as דצ'ך, the sorcerers appeared before Pharaoh each time. Their presence had exerted a psychological pressure on Pharaoh to remain steadfast in his refusal. This time he remained obstinate without the presence of his sorcerers exerting such pressure on him. They had already concluded that they were up against a higher power when they could not reproduce the lice. Seeing that on this occasion Pharaoh was politically isolated, the Torah wrote the words “also on this occasion,” in order to draw our attention to the fact that this occasion was different from previous ones.
    
    9,3. הנה יד ה' הויה, “here the hand of the Lord is about to be, etc.” In introducing the fifth plague the Torah mentions “the hand” of G’d, the word הויה representing the attribute which forms the last letter ה in the Ineffable Name, the tetragram. This is a name which allows for 12 permutations [different spellings using the same letters a widely accepted kabbalistic method. Ed.] The words זה שמי לעולם, in 3,15 provided an allusion to this concept, the word לעולם hinting at concealed methods of writing this name. Seeing that this was the fifth plague, the Torah makes a point of listing five species of animals which would be afflicted, i.e. horses, donkeys, camels, cattle and flocks.
    
   במקנך אשר בשדה, “amongst your cattle which are out in the field.” He warned them about those animals which are normally out in the field. This is a typical construction similar to when the Torah wrote in Exodus 22,30: ובשר בשדה טרפה לא תאכלו, “you must not eat the flesh of an animal that was torn in the field.” The example the Torah cites is one that is commonplace; the legislation includes animals which are diseased in the stable. Similarly, here; the Torah singles out the animals which are usually in the field. This does not mean that the other animals would be safe from the plague. When the Torah reports how the plague affected the Egyptians it writes that all the cattle of Egypt died (verse 6), i.e. including the cattle kept at home.
    
    Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah mentions the word בשדה in connection with the cattle is that the Egyptians kept their cattle outdoors on a permanent basis. The reason was that shepherds of cattle were considered an abomination in Egypt (compare Genesis 46,34). These cattle were grazing far from Egypt proper, on the border of the province of Goshen, so that the cattle of the Israelites and that of the Egyptians intermingled. The fact that none of the Israelites’ cattle were affected by the plague was therefore all the more remarkable. Another reason why this was remarkable could have been that the bacteria causing the plague came from the same airspace so that it could have been expected to affect all the animals in equal measure
    
    9,5. וישם ה' מועד לאמור מחר יעשה ה' הדבר הזה בארץ, “G’d appointed a set time, saying: “G’d will carry out this matter in the land tomorrow.” Why this cumbersome language? All the Torah had to write was: “Tomorrow I will do it.” The plain meaning of this verse is that G’d gave Moses the date on which this plague would occur and he was to tell the Israelites the date, i.e. on the following day. 
    A kabbalistic approach: The apparent repetition וישם ה', ה' יעשה, “G’d (set) determined, G’d will do,” refers to G’d Who together with His celestial tribunal would orchestrate this plague. G’d’s celestial tribunal had already been mentioned at the beginning of the paragraph with the word הנה יד ה' הויה. This is not the only time when mention of G’d in the third person rather than quoting G’d in the first person means that the reference is to G’d’s celestial tribunal. Another example of this is found in Exodus 16,29 where the words ראו כי ה' נתן לכם השבת, “see, for the Lord has given you the Sabbath,” instead of “I have given you the Sabbath” refer to the same thing. There are many such examples. .
    
    9,8. וזרקו משה השמימה, “and Moses is to throw it heavenward.” It is a well known fact that each one of the ten plagues contained within it a number of miracles. In this instance the expression “your (pl) handfuls” combined with the singular “let him throw it heavenward” poses a problem. Why did they both have to fill their hands with the soot if only Moses was to throw it? The verse teaches therefore that Moses took in his one hand the combined four handfuls of soot, both his own and that of his brother Aaron. If one throws something upwards one uses only one hand; otherwise it is hardly called “throwing.” The ability of throwing all this soot with one hand then was one of the miracles. Another miracle was the fact that the whole land of Egypt became filled with dust which had originated only in the palms of two pairs of hands. The third miracle, of course, was the plague itself, the fact that this soot turned into erupting boils infecting man and beast alike in the whole of Egypt.
    
    9,12. ויחזק ה' את לב פרעה, “G’d hardened the heart of Pharaoh.” This was the sixth plague already and it is the first time that the Torah writes that it was G’d who made Pharaoh’s heart strong. Up until now he had hardened his heart unassisted by G’d but due to other considerations as we explained. Now there were no sorcerers who would have lent backbone to Pharaoh by their very presence and would have caused him to remain obstinate. They were ashamed to appear in public as they themselves were suffering from the symptoms of this שחין פורח אבעבעת. Had G’d not interfered at this point, Pharaoh might have capitulated and  perhaps would have decided to let the Israelites go.
    
    9,14. את כל מגפותי, “all  my  plagues.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason G’d referred to the plague of hail as “all My plagues” is that this plague contained within it most of the plagues that man and beast suffer from. This is why the Torah added the words מאדם עד בהמה, “from man to beast” in verse 25 when the impact of the plague is being described. All the trees were broken by the hail, not to mention any crops which were ready or close to harvesting. The ice, i.e. the cold which accompanied the phenomenon of this hail froze all plants which were already above ground. We find confirmation of this thought by Assaph in Psalms 78,47 “He killed their vines with hail, their sycamore with frost.” The word חנמל in that psalm is a variety of hail. It is a strong frost which breaks the blossoms of the trees and dries out their moisture. Shemot Rabbah 12,4 explains that the reason why this kind of hail is called חנמל is because  when it came נח מל, “it settled on the trees and cut them (as if ‘circumcised’)  a cut which does not grow back and regenerate itself.” This hail which contained destructive fire within it was even more damaging.
    A Midrashic approach based on Shemot Rabbah 12,4: The words “all My plagues” refers to the hail which broke the trees whereas the fire contained within it burned the roots. The force of the cold did not extinguish the fire, nor did the heat of the fire melt the hail (ice). You may understand the phenomenon when you consider the following parable: a king has two dukes who hate each other. After a number of years of such feuding between the dukes war broke out in the kingdom and the king required the services of both dukes in order to defeat the enemy. He needed to see to it that the two feuding dukes stopped fighting each other and combined to help him win the war. This is the deeper meaning of Job 25,2: המשל ופחד עמו,עושה שלום במרומיו, “Dominion and dread are His; He imposes peace in His heights.” The word המשל refers to the archangel Michael, the word פחד, to the archangel Gavriel. Michael is in charge of water, Gavriel in charge of fire. G’d imposes peace between them in order for His war against evil to be fought successfully. We find a similar concept in Ezekiel‘s vision of the מרכבה, “G’d’s heavenly entourage.” The prophet described a vision of the angels supporting G’d’s throne as respectively fiery and icy (1,13 and 1,22). If we consider that water or ice usually descends whereas fire usually rises, it becomes clear that we speak of natural forces with opposite characteristics, not to mention heat and cold which are opposites also. G’d arranged for water, i.e. the sky to have its habitat in the heights, whereas fire has its habitat down below.
    You will observe that our paragraph contains the word ברד, hail 14 times. [The word יד equals 14 in the numerical value of its letters. In other words, ברד was a manifestation of G’d’s “hand, יד.” Ed.] According to the author the reason that the word ברד appears 14 times is that it reflected the power of water. It is generally known that the planet moon exercises a force upon the water similar to the planet sun exercising its force upon fire. The moon is responsible for the phenomenon of the tides receding and rising respectively. During the first 14 days of the month the moon appears to increase in size, whereas during the last 14 days of the month the moon appears to decrease in size.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word כל, “all,” in the expression את כל מגפותי, “all My plagues,” may be understood as similar to the word “all” in ולא יעיר כל חמתו, “and did not give vent to all His fury” (Psalms 78,38). The meaning of the word in that context is the attribute called כל. This attribute describes G’d’s anger. Here too the Torah describes that this plague will be the result of G’d’s anger at Pharaoh having failed to respond to earlier methods to discipline him. Henceforth this attribute would be employed in order to humble him. This is why Moses needed to raise his hands (verse 29) when he prayed for the removal of this plague when the time came. He had not had to do this when he prayed for the removal of any of the preceding plagues. People had actually been dying from fear when they merely heard the sound of the hail. Seeing this plague was the result of the combined efforts of G’d and His celestial court it was more severe than the plagues preceding it. This fact is alluded to in the Torah especially mentioning the word קולות as part of the actual plague in verse 23: “and G’d sent thunder and hail.” Seeing this had been so, Moses had to make an increased effort in his prayer to stop the plague by using also his outstretched hands in prayer. He needed to sanctify all his ten fingers. The symbolism contained in raising one’s hands heavenwards in prayer is that it is an expression of one’s awareness of the source of the disaster which one wants to prevent by one’s prayer and by invoking G’d’s attribute of Mercy towards what transpires on earth. The plague’s effect on Pharaoh was that for the first time he publicly acknowledged that he and his people had sinned, that G’d was righteous (verse 27). As soon as Moses engaged in this kind of prayer the hail, etc., ceased (not on the next day as in previous plagues).
   בעבור תדע כי אין כמוני בכל הארץ, “so that you will appreciate that there is no One like Me in the whole universe.” Moses informed Pharaoh by means of this short line that G’d in His capacity as Hashem exists, exerts power over the fate of man on earth and that He has the ability to make things happen or to even reverse them. Moses had already demonstrated that Hashem exists when the plague of frogs occurred, when the Torah had introduced it by the words: “in order that you should know that there is none like Hashem” (8,6). This had meant that there is no Existence comparable to that of Hashem. The fact that this Existence exercises its dominion over creatures on earth was the purpose of the fourth plague, the wild beasts roaming at will through urban areas had been introduced with the words: “in order that you should appreciate that I am an Existence active in the very midst of the earth” (8,18). The message was that G’d acted on earth just like a king within his realm. At this point Pharaoh was taught the additional lesson about the uniqueness of every aspect of that Being known as Hashem. The reason that Moses had to repeat all this was that initially, Pharaoh had denied all three aspects of the meaning of Hashem, His existence, His impact on events, and His uniqueness. This meant simply that no other power in the universe commanded this range of abilities.
    According to Pessikta Zutrata on our verse, whenever we encounter such expressions as למען תדע, בעבור תדע “in order that you will know, so that you will know,” this is Moses’ reminder to Pharaoh of his original sin which consisted of his denial of the existence of Hashem. We have a proverb in Proverbs 27,22 “even if you pound the fool in a mortar, with a pestle along with the grain, his folly will not leave him.” Moses reminded  Pharaoh constantly of his sin. Pharaoh’s problem was that the constant pounding he received was such that it completely deadened his ability to react. He needed the weeks of relief between plagues to reassert his former obstinacy.
    
    9,16. בעבור הראותך את כוחי, “in order to demonstrate to you My power.” G’d did not also display His גבורות, as this was an aspect of His which He did not display in Egypt. However,  during the redemption of the future G’d will display this aspect of His power also as testified to by Ezekiel 40,4 who mentions this in connection with his vision of the building of the Third Temple. The key word in Ezekiel’s vision is the words הובאתה הנה הראותכה spelled with the letter ה at the end. This is a hint that at that time additional dimensions of G’d’s power and greatness will become manifest. The letter ה is absent in the word הראותך used by Moses to describe what G’d had shown Pharaoh.
    
    9,18. אשר לא היה כמוהו במצרים, “the like of which had never occurred in Egypt.” Moses did not say אשר לא היה במצרים כמוהו, but אשר לא היה כמוהו במצרים. This means that in the whole world there had never been a plague of hail comparable to the one that would strike Egypt. The reason that he added the word “in Egypt,” was that even in Egypt in which there is never any rain, i.e. precipitation, such a precipitation would now be experienced in its most catastrophic form.
    
    9,19. שלח העז את מקנך, “send, gather in your cattle.” Did they not die already during the plague of pestilence? Did not the Torah state in 9,6: “all the cattle of Egypt died?” Perhaps the cattle in our verse had been replacement cattle which the Egyptians had imported after the plague of pestilence. This may have accounted for the fact that Moses advised the Egyptians to bring these cattle home to save them from the hail. Alternatively, the meaning of 9,6 could have been that “most of the cattle died,” seeing that we have a talmudic principle of רובו ככולו, that when most of something is affected we treat it legally as if all of that something had been affected. (Midrash sechel tov to 9,6 stipulates that such comments as the word “all” are not to be taken literally) A third alternative: previously the animals which were owned in partnership between Jews and Egyptians did not die.
    
    9,23. קולות וברד ותהלך אש ארצה, “thunder and hail; the fire traveled earthward.” It is a well known fact that atmospheric changes occur during periods of hail. All diseases strike creatures composed of the four basic raw materials. The underlying reasons for such diseases afflicting man are the atmospheric changes which affect the four basic materials fire, water, wind, and earth.  As long as these four materials maintain their respective balance the bodies of the human beings consisting of them remain healthy. If one of those materials becomes stronger at the expense of the others, disease will manifest itself amongst human beings. In this instance two of these raw materials were in imbalance. The words “and the fire traveled earthward” expresses the reaction to this imbalance by the other two basic raw materials. The Torah describes fire as doing the reverse of its normal function, i.e. as traveling downwards instead of upwards, i.e. as doing the same as earth which always has a downward tendency. All of these phenomena demonstrated how G’d could change at will all the scientific axioms accepted by man as immutable.
    
    9,27. ה' הצדיק ואני ועמי הרשעים, “Hashem is the righteous One whereas I and my people are the wicked ones.” Pharaoh said to Moses in effect: ‘“you who are the messenger of Hashem are righteous and Hashem is righteous in His application of judgments. I and my people are wicked in that we refused to obey His commandments.” Seeing he had repeatedly denied even Hashem’s existence, Pharaoh now spelled out his mistake in detail as befits people confessing a sin. Actually, he only had to confess his own personal sin. However, seeing he was afraid he might be held responsible for the sins of his people because he was their king and he could have restrained them, he confessed their guilt also saying: “I and my people are the wicked ones.”.
    
    9, 28.  ורב מהיות קולות אלו-הים וברד, “there has been plenty of heavenly thunder and hail.” The word רב is an entreaty or allusion to the One who is “great” in providing salvation, i.e. G’d. Onkelos also translates the word in that way, i.e. וסגי קדמוהי רווחא. The meaning of the words העתירו אל ה' are an introduction, i.e. “entreat Hashem who is capable of providing such great relief.” It is noteworthy that while Pharaoh asked Moses and Aaron to plead with Hashem, he attributed the thunder to elohim, a different attribute of G’d. This may have been because the sound of this thunder inspires fear and leaves a palpable effect on one’s body. Our sages  (Berachot 59) said that thunder was created in order to break the crookedness of the heart.
    Pharaoh mentioned the thunder  before  the hail seeing that in verse 23 when the plague first began, the thunder was the first manifestation of what was to come. After the people had become suitably frightened the hail began to fall and man and beast who were outside died. You will find the same sequence occurring after Moses’ prayer to G’d to stop the plague (compare verse 33). That which had come first also ceased first. According to this principle we would have expected the Torah to write: וירא פרעה כי חדלו הקולות והברד והמטר ויוסף לחטוא, “when Pharaoh saw that the thunder, the hail and the rain had stopped, he continued to sin.” The fact is that the Torah writes the verse in such a way that the words “he continued to sin” are adjacent to the word “thunder.” This shows that the only factor which had caused him previously to agree to dismiss the Jewish people was the fear which the thunder had inspired in him. This testifies to the obstinacy of Pharaoh. Even the damage caused by the hail would not budge him; the only thing which he responded to was personal fear inspired by the sound of the thunder. As soon as this fear evaporated as a result of the cessation of the thunder, he continued to sin.
    
    9, 30-31. ידעתי כי טרם תיראון. והפשתה והשעורה נכתה. “I am aware that you have not yet developed reverence for the Lord G’d. The flax and the barley had been struck down.” These words are connected to the words: “you still have not developed reverence, etc.” They applied to a situation preceding Pharaoh’s confession that he was the sinner and G’d the righteous One. When Pharaoh spoke those words the flax and barley had already been struck, seeing their stalks were hard and the hail would break them. They were beyond reprieve, could not recover. However, the wheat and the spelt whose stalks were softer were able to recover after cessation of the plague. They could be saved if Pharaoh and his people would not continue to sin. This is the view of Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon.
   והפשתה גבעול, “the flax was in its stalk.” The word may be split into גבו על. The seed had already entered its stalk so that it grew. This is why it broke.
    9,32.  כי אפילות המה, “because they would ripen later.” As the stalks had not yet started growing they were not struck down by the hail.  According to Tanchuma Vaeyra 16 the words אפילות הנה are related to פלאי פלאות, that miraculous things happened to them. The fact that they were saved from the hail was not due to their being in a less advanced state of growth than the flax. Their natural state was such that they should have fallen victim to the hail. The roots beneath the ground should also have been fatally struck. The fire inside the hail would have seen to this. A miracle occurred.  Instead of reading the word אפילות the meaning of  it is פלאות, miracles.
    9,33. ומטר לא נתך ארצה, “and the rain did not reach the earth.” The Torah did not write that the rain did not descend to earth; it wrote לא נתך ארצה, “it was not  allowed to complete its descent.” (even after it had melted to become like regular rain).  Our sages in Tanchuma 17 state that the descent of the rain was arrested in mid-air for 41 years until Joshua 10,11 when it finally descended in the form of large (hail)stones from the sky.
    The prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 13,11) commanded these stones to fall. These stones were then called אלגביש, seeing that during these many years they had been “standing” on the back of איש. The איש in question was Moses who has been described in Numbers 12,3 as והאיש משה. Seeing that the hailstones give the illusion to the onlooker that they are pearls, they are called אבני אלגביש, as pearls are described in these terms in Job 28,18. The thunder also was suspended in mid-air only to descend to earth in the days of Elisha  (Kings II 7,6) where we are told: “the Lord had made the camp of Aram hear the sounds of chariots, a sound of horses, a sound of a mighty army.” [The sound was equated with thunder. Ed.]
    9,34. ויסף לחטא, “he continued to sin.” When the wicked experience troubles they are temporarily humbled; as soon as their troubles disappear they continue on as previously. When the Torah (verse 27) wrote that Pharaoh had exclaimed: “and Hashem is the righteous One,” this was an example of such a short-lived repentance. The very arrogance of the wicked is the cause of their eventual downfall. The pride  which had originally caused Pharaoh to say: “who is Hashem  that I should listen to His instructions” was the reason that ultimately he perished in the  Sea of Reeds. We find a parallel with Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon who had said (Daniel 4,27) “Is this not the great Babylon which I have built up into a royal house with my powerful strength and for the glorification of my splendour?“ It did not take long for him to be humbled as we read in verse 29 of the same chapter  that a heavenly voice announced that he would be driven from mankind and would have to live amongst the wild beasts.  The righteous, on the other hand, do not display arrogance but humble themselves. They attain whatever glory and prominence they achieve as a result of their very humility. This is what Solomon said in Proverb 29,23: ”the pride of a man will humiliate him, but the humble in spirit will retain honour.”
    
    
    
    
   בא  אל  פרעה
    
    
   אשרי אדם מפחד תמיד ומקשה לבו יפול ברעה, “Happy is the man who is always anxious; but he who hardens his heart will fall into misfortunes” (Proverbs 28,14). In this verse Solomon commands a Jewish person to be of “soft” heart and to be constantly concerned about the purpose and outcome of all his activities. He warns us not to he hard-hearted in order to avoid being punished for obstinacy. 
    The word  אשרי, “happy is,” is applied here to an individual who excels in a single virtue rather than in a variety of virtues. This is the only instance instance where David or Solomon uses this word as applicable to the possession by a person of a single virtue. The reason that generally we do not find this word applied to individuals excelling in only one particular virtue alone is that the word presupposes the possession of a string of good characteristics in order for such people to be accorded this compliment. 
    Let us look at Psalms 65,5: “Happy is the man You choose and bring near to dwell in Your courts;” the person chosen by G’d is not chosen by Him on account of his excelling in a solitary virtue; surely it is presumed that he is virtuous in a number of ways. The same is undoubtedly  true of  Psalms 84,6: “happy is the man who finds refuge in You, whose mind is on the (pilgrim) highways.” The expression מסלות, “highways,” proves by its being in the plural that the author speaks of the heart commanding a number of different virtues, such as reverence for G’d, faith in the Lord, etc., etc. The same is true of verse 13 in the same Psalm: “O Lord of hosts, happy is the man who trusts in You.” The virtue of trusting in the Lord itself comprises a number of positive traits and a number of praiseworthy virtues. In Psalm 1,1 where David describes as “happy” the person “who has not followed the counsel of the wicked,” the psalmist himself subdivides this virtue into neither having “sat with them, walked with them, or even having stood near them.” Just as in that instance more than one virtue or the ramifications of such virtue in all its aspects is required, so here too Solomon in describing a person as “happy” because he is constantly concerned or even “afraid,” refers to something more than meets the eye at first glance. He refers to people who weigh each one of their actions carefully, considering possible harmful effects and if the beneficial effects of their actions outweigh any possible harm they could cause. All this they do prior to deciding on a course of action. There can be no question that people who display this kind of sense of responsibilty are possessed of a whole string of virtues.
    Seeing that the person who is described by Solomon as “happy” is motivated by his שכל, by his intellect, and cannot perform the virtues involved unless he employs his intellect he is called אדם rather than איש (as for instance in Psalms 1,1). The term אדם derives from אדמה, earth, soil. It is as if Solomon had said: “happy he who is cut off from the earth;” prior to cutting himself off from earth he was linked to material matters. Now, by employing the virtues mentioned by Solomon and employing his שכל, a disembodied phenomenon, he will remain conscious of the responsibilities he enters into with every one of his actions. Seeing that he worries about the result and wider impact of his actions, this alone will protect him against committing a sin.
    When a person eats and drinks in order to indulge his appetite he thereby makes himself a partner to the animals. If however, he uses such an activity only in order to better perform service to the Lord, by maintaining his physical health at maximum level, then he has elevated the act of eating and drinking to an entirely new and spiritual level. The considerations which are valid for the manner and purpose of our food and drink intake apply in equal measure to the marital relations between husband and wife. Anyone who while indulging in sexual intercourse even with his wife is concerned simply with satisfying his biological urges and the gratification of his libido, is thereby making himself a partner to the animals. His main purpose when engaging in sexual activity must be to fulfill the commandment to be fruitful and to multiply and to raise children who will be G’d-fearing and, if possible, Torah scholars. Any other considerations are a desecration of the sex act. Similar considerations must guide people engaged in trade and commerce. Naturally, they must avoid being devious, and refrain from lies and cheating. If they were to use their business to cheat people they would lose their standing both in this world and in the world to come. But, even when they merely do not cheat or deceive, they have not yet performed these activities in a worthwhile manner. Unless their purpose is not the amassing of material wealth but to have the opportunity to acquire virtues such as to give liberally to charity, to endow brides who have no dowry, etc., etc., they have not performed what Solomon speaks of in our verse. The very money which is acquired by means of extortion, etc., becomes the instrument of the extortionist’s death sentence in the world to come. The desire to own money of this kind for the brief duration of life on earth is in itself a capital crime. It is comparable to the story of the bird which was so anxious to feed on the grain within the net that it found itself trapped within the net without hope of escape. Concerning this Solomon said (Proverbs 1,17-19) “in the eyes of every winged creature the outspread net means nothing. But they lie in wait for their own blood, they lie in wait for their own lives. So are the ways of all those who are greedy for gain; it takes the life of its owners.” 
    Solomon applied this parable to the people who are overly fond of money and are intent on amassing it. He said concerning such people (Proverbs 20,17) ”bread gained by deceit may taste sweet; but later his mouth will be filled with gravel.” The principles which must guide us in the examples listed apply to all of man’s activities. One must be worried constantly not to do something which runs counter to the teachings of the Torah and its outlook on life. Solomon views a person who is hard-hearted as the opposite of the one whom he describes as “constantly afraid.” The latter person obviously never considers the fact that he faces G’d every step of his life. The hard-hearted person does not think of what he does in terms of eventual reward of punishment. He who is constantly afraid does not have to worry about disaster facing him in the future as his lifestyle was his guarantee that no such disaster lurks in his future. He who is hard-hearted is always surprised when disaster strikes him and he is unprepared to cope with it. The reverse is true of the מפחד תמיד, the person who is constantly worried. His very worries are the reason that he will be spiritually uplifted. This is why Solomon applies to him the attribute אשרי, “happy.” Seeing that the proud and hard-hearted person elevated himself above others, Solomon chose the correct adjective when he described the result of such a person’s future as “he will fall into misfortune” We have a parallel verse in Proverbs 24,16: “for the righteous will rise even if he falls seven times; the wicked will be snared by evil.” Even a single stroke of misfortune will hit the hard-hearted so that he cannot recover from it. This is also the meaning of Psalms 34,22: “one misfortune is the deathblow of the wicked.” When Solomon wrote in Proverbs 16,4: “G’d has made everything for His purpose, even the wicked for the day of evil,” he meant that the evil which will strike the wicked has been prepared for him by G’d a long time in advance of it actually happening. It is part of what G’d does to enhance His Name, to be sanctified amongst those who observe His justice at work.
    What happened to Pharaoh in our portion and previously had long been planned by G’d. Seeing that he had hardened his heart he was bound to experience the down side to his behaviour. He had hardened his heart without G’d’s intervention already in 9,34. What applied to him also applied to most of his servants. In the end G’d hardened his heart even further in order to demonstrate His power to the world.
    
    10,1. ויאמר ה' אל משה בא אל פרעה כי אני הכבדתי את לבו ואת לב עבדיו וגו', G’d said to Moses: “Go to Pharaoh. For I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants.” Pessikta Zutrata Vaeyra 8,16 wrote that the arrangement of the ten plagues according to the pattern דצ'ך, עד'ש, בא'חב is based on the pattern of the first two plagues in a cycle being preceded by a warning whereas the third plague in that cycle occurred without warning as a punishment for the previous two plagues not having achieved their purpose. This is why the tenth plague was introduced again by a warning. When you examine the wording preceding the plagues in greater detail you will observe that the instructions to Moses  prior to the plagues introduced by warnings always were that Moses either התיצב, בא, לך אל, ונצבת, השכם והתיצב, etc. Our Rabbis established the rule that if someone was warned not to commit a sin and was warned a second time there is no need to warn such a person a third time (Sanhedrin 81). Seeing that the plague of locusts was the second in the cycle designed to teach Pharaoh “that there is no One like Me in the whole universe,” there was no need to warn him of the plague of darkness which would follow the locusts if the people had not been released by that time. In view of the statement in Sanhedrin, I believe that Moses would issue warnings concerning the same plague twice, once at the river’s edge and once in Pharaoh’s palace. Whenever G’d instructed Moses: “go to Pharaoh, the meaning is that he was to go to the palace. The verses of the Torah prove this theory. When Moses warned Pharaoh of the impending plague of the waters of the Nile turning into blood (7,15), this is followed by the report that Moses went to Pharaoh’s house (7,23) where the Torah says: “he (Pharaoh) did not pay any heed to this either.” The Torah meant that Pharaoh did not pay heed to the second warning either. The same pattern  occurred again and again with all the plagues concerning which Pharaoh was forewarned. The reason for these repeated warnings was to demonstrate the pride and arrogance with which Pharaoh reacted to these warnings. Pharaoh demonstrated his pride at the river claiming he had made the river, and he again demonstrated his pride in his palace feeling that this was not the place where anyone could dare threaten him. The very fact that Moses had the audacity to threaten him in his own palace put his back up. Were it not for this fact, why would the Torah have had to tell us that Moses came to his palace uninvited, and apparently not even at the command of G’d who had told him only to meet Pharaoh at the river’s bank? (7,15). The Torah wanted to show us Pharaoh’s arrogance. We have a similar situation with Nebuchadnezzar (Daniel 4,27) where the king boasted about his palace, saying openly that it demonstrated his glory and splendour. In verse 1 of that same chapter in Daniel he boasted: “I Nebuchadnezzar was tranquil and vigorous in my house, etc.” Just as Nebuchadnezzar’s arrogance was the reason for his downfall, so Pharaoh’s arrogance became the cause of his downfall. The plagues inflicted upon Pharaoh also emanated from “his” river and his palace. The Torah lists two reasons why G’d resorted to hardening Pharaoh’s heart. 1) in order to publicise His stature as the deity through a demonstration of His miracles. 2) In order for these miracles to become the talk of the town, world-wide. The expression שתי in למען שתי alludes to the ten plagues as the letter י in the middle was otherwise quite unnecessary.
    
    10,2. את אשר התעללתי, “how I have made a mockery.”  According to the plain meaning of the text the words mean “I have toyed with them when I performed great acts of retribution.” The expression is similar to the one used by David in Psalms 2,4: יושב בשמים ישחק, אד-ני ילעג למו, “The One who resides in heaven laughs; the Lord mocks at them.”
   וידעתם כי אני ה', “so that you will realise that I am Hashem.” Not only for a brief period of time, but throughout the generations. The lessons learned from what happened in Egypt to the Egyptians served the people of Israel for hundreds of years as a reminder of G’d’s power. Even the Gentile nations were impressed and accepted the lesson. We find this reflected in Samuel I 6,6: (after the ark had been captured by the Philistines but had spread disease and disaster in their land the priests of the Philistines speaking to their countrymen) “Do not harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts. As you know, when He made a mockery of them, they had to let Israel go and they departed.” 
    It is possible to explain the word התעללתי, as being derived from עילה, cause, pretext. Most actions performed in this terrestrial world are described as עלילות.  We refer you to Psalms 105,1 הודיעו בעמים עלילותיו, “acquaint the nations with His deeds.” We have a similar meaning of the word in Samuel I 2,3 (Chanah speaking) כי א-ל דעות ה' ולא(ו) נתכנו עלילות, “for the Lord is an all-knowing G’d; by Him actions are measured.” Onkelos also translates our verse here in this manner writing ית נסין די עבידת במצרים, “the miracles You performed in Egypt.” David also refers to G’d’s deeds as עלילות in Psalms 66,5 “who is held in awe by men for His acts.” The reason that G’d’s activities are referred to by a word which hints at עילה is that He is the prime Cause of everything which transpires. All His actions have been inspired by His original planning when He created the universe and man.
    The meaning of our verse in short: “through His actions in Egypt, He demonstrated that He must have been the original Cause of all existence.” This may have inspired Hoseah 12,10 to write: “I am the Lord your G’d המעלך from the land of Egypt.” He meant that the Exodus was the point which made the Gentile nations realise who אנכי is and who אלו-היך is.
    A Midrashic approach: (Pessikta Zutrata on our verse) the word התעללתי means that in response to the Egyptian being עולל My vineyard (the Jewish people, depriving them of their infants like cutting off unripe grapes), I have done the same to them  and remove them from this world.
    
    10,3. עד מתי מאנת לענות מפני, “how long will you still refuse to be humble before Me?”  All that G’d asks of man is that he be humble and modest. Isaiah spells it out (Isaiah 66,2) when he said: “Yet to such a one I look; to the poor and brokenhearted, who is concerned about My word.” The same prophet also said (66,1): “the heaven is My throne and the earth is My footstool...what place could serve as My abode?” Solomon confirmed this thought at the dedication of the Holy Temple in Kings I 8,27 when he said: “The heavens cannot contain You; how much less the house which I have built for You.” In view of all this “what house could possibly be big enough to accommodate Me, what place to serve as a resting-place for Me?” In spite of G’d’s being so far above anything remotely available on earth, He looks out for the brokenhearted on earth and for those who are concerned about His word. The brokenhearted one, עני, is identical with the נכנע, the humbled one. This is why Onkelos translates the words אל עני as לאתכנעא.
    We know the effect of humility on G’d from King Achav (Kings I 21,27-29) who humbled himself but once when admitting that he had sinned in allowing his wife to have Navot framed and executed. G’d used Achav’s repentance and humility to demonstrate to Elijah how much He valued such sentiments. He suspended the decree of death against him. 
    
    10,5. הצמח לכם מן השדה, “which grows for you from the field.” The plague of locusts occurred in Nissan seeing that during that month the trees start budding and flowers become visible on earth. The plague of hail which had preceded it occurred in Adar. All the ten plagues occurred within one calendar year as we know from Ediot 2,10 where the Mishnah states that the judgments executed upon the Egyptians occurred within twelve months. Seeing that the hail which occurred in Adar had broken the trees, and the flax and barley which had sprouted previously had been struck down already, there was only one month left before the redemption of the Israelites. During that interval both the trees grew and the wheat and spelt sprouted forth seeing that these species ripened late. Concerning these two species the Torah speaks about  “what grows for you from the field.” The locusts would devour anything which had not been destroyed by the hail. This is the way Nachmanides explains our verse.
    If we accept his words we would have to say that the last three of the ten plagues all occurred during the first half of the month of Nissan whereas the previous seven plagues were scattered over a period of eleven months. It would follow then that each of the previous plagues lasted for more than the seven days attributed by the Torah to the first plague, i.e. the river turning into blood. The interval between the plagues then would have been 30 days.[I believe this is a misprint and should read “21 days” as the author stated in his commentary on 7,25. Ed.] On the other hand, from the words: “seven days were completed” (7,15), we learned that the interval between the plagues was seven days. This would have applied to all the plagues so that we could divide the time equally between periods during which there was relief and periods when one of the plagues was in effect. If we were to assume that Moses began his career as a prophet on the 15th of Nissan and that G’d spent seven days persuading him to accept His mission, then these seven days corresponded to the seven days which the Jewish people would celebrate as the Passover holiday after the redemption. [the author had already alluded to these theories in connection in his commentary on 4,10 and 4,18].
     Subsequent to the 21st of Nissan, Moses first returned to Midian. He should have proceeded to Egypt immediately, but he had to return to Midian to get permission to be released from his oath to Yitro that he would not leave the country without his permission. This is the reason the Torah had to write (4,18 that Moses returned to Midian and his father-in-law, and having done so that G’d told him in 4,19 to proceed to Egypt.) G’d spoke to him “in Midian,” i.e. He told him “since you swore an oath in Midian you have to be released from that oath in Midian.”
    Moses then proceeded to Egypt where both he and Aaron arranged an audience with Pharaoh when the King told them that he did not know Hashem, etc. All the subsequent developments, including the new decree for the Israelites to provide their own straw could have occurred within eight days until the end of the month of Nissan. According to one Midrash, Moses then went into a retreat for 3 months and was not seen by anyone. This brings us to the end of the month of Tammuz. The plague of blood would have covered the first seven days in Av. They were followed by  relief until the end of the month. The plague of frogs and subsequent relief occupied the month of Ellul. This pattern continued until the month of Adar when the plague of locusts was decreed. The plague of darkness  occurred during the first seven days of Nissan followed by only seven days of respite. The plague of the dying of the firstborn occurred on the night of the 14-15th of Nissan so that the period from Moses’ experiencing the revelation at the bush until the Exodus was exactly 12 months. The wording in the Mishnah in Ediot that the judgments against the Egyptians extended over a period of 12 months must not be taken at face value then, but the Mishnah meant that from the time when G’d had decreed for these judgments to occur 12 months elapsed until the redemption.
    
    10,6. ויפן ויצא מעם פרעה, “he turned around and left the presence of Pharaoh.” Moses left immediately after having warned Pharaoh of the forthcoming plague without taking his leave. This was a well calculated move by Moses who wanted to give Pharaoh and his advisors an opportunity to consult amongst themselves and to release the Children of Israel prior to the onset of that plague. During the previous plague of hail the Egyptians had already viewed themselves as if they were about to die so that  now that Moses had warned that every remaining tree and food producing plant would die they had every reason to become scared. In fact, Moses had anticipated their reaction correctly as we know from verse eight where we are told that Moses and Aaron were recalled to the palace. This is the meaning of ויושב משה ואהרן, “Moses and Aaron were brought back.”
    
    10,7. עד מתי יהיה זה לנו למוקש, “for how long is this one going to remain a snare for us?”  According to the plain meaning of the text the servants said this on account of Moses. This explains the words זה משה האיש, “this man Moses.” (Exodus 32,1) The ערב רב had been well aware that it was Moses who had caused the plagues and that he was the Egyptians’ bane.
    It is possible, however, to understand the words as aimed at the cause of the plagues, at G’d whom the Jewish people extolled in the song after the crossing of the sea (15,2) with the words זה א-לי ואנוהו, this is my G’d and I want to build Him a Sanctuary.” According to this version Exodus 13 8 בעבור זה עשה ה' לי, the word זה in that verse would also be a reference to an attribute of G’d. The advisors of Pharaoh would then have revealed their true nature by still denying the supremacy of Hashem. 
    
    10,9. כי חג ה' לנו, “for it is a festival of Hashem for us.”  The festival Moses and Aaron spoke about was the holiday of Shavuot, the day the Torah would be given. G’d had already advised Moses of that event when He had told him at the burning bush: “when you take out the people from Egypt you will serve Me at this Mountain” (3,12). The festival Moses spoke of is not to be understood as the festival of Passover; the Passover was observed inside Egypt. It is also impossible to understand the word חג Moses spoke about as the festival of Tabernacles as nowhere is that festival connected to the Mountain of G’d. There is no doubt therefore, that the festival in question is Shavuot which occurs in the month of Sivan. The Torah writes: “in the third month after the Exodus of the Children of Israel from Egypt they arrived in the desert of Sinai.” The date mentioned there was the first day of Sivan (Shabbat 19). After an interval of five days the Torah (Ten Commandments) were given at Mount Sinai.
    
    10,10.ראו כי רעה נגד פניכם , “see here, the evil you plan is staring you in the face.” The meaning of these words is best expressed by Onkelos who translates: ”the evil you have in mind will backfire against you.” The word לאסתחרא in Onkelos means the same as תסוב in Hebrew, i.e. to turn back, to “backfire.” Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 13,5 explains Pharaoh’s argument being that normally young men and their elders are in the habit to offer sacrifices to their gods. Not so their infants and their wives. Anyone who insists that all these people come along must plan to flee and not to merely take a temporary leave of absence. This was the “evil” which Pharaoh accused Moses and Aaron of planning.
    A Midrashic approach quoted by Rashi understands the word רעה as the name of a star or planet (Mars) which is so named as it symbolises bloodshed and war. Pharaoh foresaw in his astrological charts that the Jewish people would suffer a blood bath in the desert. He warned them that their leaving Egypt would prove worse for them than their remaining in Egypt. Esau used to call that star Edom. This is why he referred to מן האדום האדום הזה, when he asked Yaakov to share with him that famous dish of broth (Genesis 25,30 see our commentary there). The wicked Pharaoh who was an expert astrologer called the star in question רעה. He attributed all misfortune in the world to the influence of that planet. He himself became a victim of that planet’s force as part of G’d’s retribution of measure for measure. When he foresaw a blood bath facing the Jews, he did not realise that this was the  reference to the Israelites who would be killed because they served the golden calf. This is what Moses referred to in his prayer after the sin of the golden calf when he said to G’d: “why should the Egyptians who would take note of G’d killing the entire people be able to say (boast) ברעה הוציאם, ‘He took them out under the auspices of the planet (horoscope) רעה, only in order to kill them’” (Exodus 32,12). Moses pointed out that if G’d carried out His intention of killing the people (32,10) He would cause a desecration of His recently established great name by playing into the hands of the Egyptians who had predicted this already here. As a result they would retroactively deny their recently held conviction that G’d had orchestrated the plagues out of His love for the Jewish people. They would henceforth attribute all those plagues to the stars and their respective constellations. When G’d accepted Moses’ argument, i.e. וינחם ה' על הרעה אשר דבר לעשות, “G’d relented concerning the רעה He had said He would do,” (32,14) He decided that the bloodletting would be that when Joshua would perform mass circumcision of the Israelites born in the desert. In Joshua 5,9 we find the expression “to-day I have removed from you the shame (full prediction) of Egypt.”
    
    10,13. וה' נהג רוח קדים, “and G’d guided an easterly wind, etc.”  As on previous occasions, the letter ו at the beginning of the name of G’d is an allusion to the celestial tribunal working together with G’d. An easterly wind is perceived as a forerunner to disaster striking on earth. We find that wind in evidence in 14,21 prior to the Egyptians drowning in the sea after the sea had been split to allow the Israelites to cross safely. Jeremiah 18,17  wrote concerning the surviving tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin “I will scatter them in front of the enemy like an easterly wind.”  Concerning the other ten tribes (prior to their exile) Hoseah 13,15 writes: “a blast of the easterly wind from the Lord will come blowing up from the desert and it will dry up its fountain and his spring will be parched.” Describing Israel going into exile, Isaiah 27,8 writes: “assailing them wih fury unchained, His pitilesss blast of the easterly wind bore them off on a day of gale.” There are more such quotes to be found in the Bible pertaining to an association between an easterly wind and disaster.
    
   הבוקר היה  ורוח הקדים נשא את הארבה, “when it had become morning, the easterly wind had carried the locusts.” The easterly wind brought disaster with it, whereas a westerly wind removed disaster. This is why the Torah wrote (verse 19) Hashem turned back a powerful west wind; it carried the locusts away  toward the sea and spewed it out there. The reason the Torah had spoken about “it was morning,” is an allusion  to the fact that usually disaster strikes the wicked in the morning. We have scriptural support for this from Psalms 101,8: “each morning I (G’d) will destroy all the wicked of the land.” When Moses predicted the disaster which would strike Korach and his fellow rebels, he  said (Numbers 16,5) “in the morning G’d will make known who is His and who is holy.” We also find that the salvation of the righteous occurs in the morning such as in Exodus 34,2 where G’d told Moses to be ready in the morning to ascend the mountain and to receive the replacement of the first set of tablets which he had smashed. Isaiah 33,2 also speaks of salvation for the righteous in the morning when he writes: ”be their arm every morning, also our deliverance in time of stress.” Lamentations 3,23 also refers to G’d’s mercies being renewed every morning and His grace being ample. 
    
    10,14. ואחריו לא יהיה כן, “and after it there will never again be its equal.” The Torah refers to a plague consisting of a single species of locusts, seeing that the prophet Yoel 2,2 describes a plague consisting of a variety of species of locusts, a plague which surpassed that of the one which occurred in Egypt now. The verse in Yoel speaks of “a day of densest cloud spread like soot over the hills; a vast enormous horde- nothing like it ever happened, and it shall never happen again through the years and ages.” In Yoel 2,25 when the prophecy had become true the prophet records: “consumed by grubs and locusts the great army I let loose against you, etc.” In  Psalms 105,34 David elaborates on this plague in Egypt explaining that there are altogether seven species of locusts, naming them ארבה, סלעם, חרגול, חגב, גזם, ילק, חסיל. Interestingly, the name ארבה occurs seven times in our paragraph. The species called ארבה is the largest and most voracious of them all, as it is described as “My great army” by G’d in Yoel 2,25.
    Nachmanides explains that seeing the very occurrence of a plague of locusts is not something so extraordinary, and moreover it is usually carried by an easterly wind,  the Torah had to add that the phenomenon of locusts experienced by the Egyptians at the command of Moses was something absolutely unique and could not be compared to previously known infestations of locusts.
    Rabbeinu Chananel, focusing on the words: “and there would be none like it in the future,” writes that no such plague would ever brought on again by a prophet. He sees in our wording here a parallel to Kings II 18,5:a “He trusted only in the Lord, the G’d of Israel; there was none like him among all the kings of Yehudah after him.” This means that Chiskiyah’s faith in G’d was indeed unparalleled but that the level of his fear of sin and other good virtues was matched by others. We also have a verse in Joshua 10,14: “neither before nor after has there ever been such a day when the Lord acted on words spoken by a man.” There too the meaning is that miracles such as performed at the instigation of Joshua remained unparalleled, but that G’d Himself might perform miracles greater than Joshua’s. We know of an incidence of G’d delaying sunset in order to enable Nakdimon ben Gurion to make good on a guarantee (Taanit 20), the difference being that on that occasion G’d acted without prompting by any man.
    
    10,15. ויכס את עין כל הארץ ותחשך הארץ, “it covered the surface of the entire land and the land was darkened.” There was no area which remained free from locusts. The matter is comparable to Yoel 2,9: “they rush up the wall, they dash about in the city; they climb into the houses, they enter like thieves by way of the windows.” The word עין here is derived from גוון, i.e. all the normal colours on earth turned to look black. 
    
    10,16. חטאתי לה' אלו-היכם ולכם, “I have sinned against the Lord your G’d and against you.” The reason Pharaoh added the words: “against you,” was because he had treated them disrespectfully and expelled them from his palace (verse 11).
    
    10,17. ועתה שא נא חטאתי אך הפעם והעתירו לה' אלו-היכם, “and now, please forgive my sin only this once and entreat the Lord your G’d.” Nachmanides points out that Pharaoh should have said: “pray to the Lord that He should forgive my sin.” After all, it was not up to Moses to forgive sins. The reason he worded his plea as he did was that G’d had appointed Moses to be a deity as far as Pharaoh was concerned (compare 7,1). The reason Pharaoh used the plural, i.e. העתירו, was in honour of Aaron. Pharaoh knew quite well that only Moses would do the praying. Moses had told him already twice “I will entreat the Lord” (8,25 and 8,5).
   רק את המות הזה, “only this death.” This teaches that human beings also died during the plague of locusts, just as they had died from the effects of the hail. Perhaps the locusts caused them to become blind as a result of which they were prone to have fatal accidents. In the days of Joshua it is reported that the affliction of the skin disease called tzoraat caused blindness (Sotah 36).  Alternatively, the reason that Pharaoh referred to this plague as “this death,” was that seeing the hail had killed the crops, the earth and the fruit, the locust finished what was still left over. As a result Pharaoh was correct in describing the situation in Egypt now as one of “this death.” The Torah adds the word רק, “only,” as  a hint that the way he felt about things was temporary. As soon as there would be relief he would undergo a change of heart. What appeared to him as hopeless at this moment would suddenly assume a totally new dimension. He would think that he had survived the worst that the Jewish G’d was able to do to him. He revealed his eventual change of mind by asking that Moses entreat G’d “only at this moment.” He implied that there would not again come a time when he needed Moses’ intercession.
    
    10,19. לא נשאר ארבה אחד בכל גבול מצרים, “not a single locust remained on Egyptian territory.” Moses’ prayer remained in force until this day. Locusts do not attack crops in Egypt. Even when locusts fly southward from the land of Israel and cross the border with Egypt, they will not molest fields in Egypt. This is a well known fact. When Moses prayed that the frogs should remain only in the river (8,8) a certain insect called altamseh remained; this insect multiplies from time to time and infests the land areas of Egypt. It is reported to sometimes swallow two human beings at one gulp. It is immune against spears and arrows and unless struck in its underbelly it cannot be killed. It is a sub-species of frogs. It was a remainder of Moses’ plague. However, due to Moses’ prayer now, not a single locust remained in Egypt that could breed there. This is how Rabbeinu Chananel explains this, basing himself additionally on Chronicles I 16,9  “speak of all His wondrous acts.”
    
    10,20. ויחזק ה' את לב פרעה, “G’d reinforced Pharaoh’s resolution.” It is totally unnatural for a person experiencing the kind of plagues Pharaoh and the Egyptians endured not to suffer a total mental collapse. The Torah had already described how, during the first five plagues, Pharaoh had drawn on his psychological reservoirs of obstinacy to stand fast in face of these plagues. Starting with the sixth plague, pestilence, however, G’d had lent him psychological support as we read for the first time in 9,6. This bears out what the prophet said in Jeremiah 18,6, “O House of Israel, can I not deal with you like this potter?- says the Lord. Just like clay in the hands of the potter so are you in My hands!” The prophet continues: “one moment I may decree that a nation or a kingdom shall be uprooted, etc., but if that nation turns back from wickedness I change My mind, etc.”
    
    10,21. נטה ידך על השמים, “ extend your hand toward (over) the sky.” Verse 22 confirms that this is exactly what Moses did. The unusual preposition in both verses is the word על instead of אל? How could Moses extend his hand “over” the sky?  At the sea (14,16) Moses did extend his arm over the sea, but here this hardly seems possible!  It is possible  to explain that seeing the planets are physical bodies and every normal natural function is an integral part of their composition, that the word על in this context is not to be understood as a physical “above” but as denoting the assumption of sovereignty over something. Moses assumed dominion over the sky, the domain within which the planets are presumed to orbit. All miracles are essentially manifestations of a power above or beyond the natural forces operating in the universe. A careful perusal of all verses in the Torah will show that the expression על השמים, occurs only in connection with two plagues, i.e. hail and darkness. The reason this expression is used there is that though both of these plagues descended from the sky (as distinct to plagues originating in the water or on earth) the word שמים was not to be confused with רקיע, horizon or sky. The power which propelled these plagues into action was not one that is part of the domain “sky.” This is also the reason that when these plagues materialised the Torah employs the kind of expression we find during the story of creation, i.e. ויהי ברד, or ויהי חשך, “there came into being hail,” or “there came into being darkness.” When the manifestation of the other plagues is described the Torah uses words such as והיה instead of ויהי. The letters in the word ויהי are the ones that depict matter coming into existence and that is why Moses with the help of his staff was able to work this kind of miracle. [Kabbalists have demonstrated that there are numerical values in the word מטה and the word א-ד-נ-י which, when added to the letters in the word ויהי, make such manipulations of the laws of nature more plausible. Ed.] You will notice that whereas the plagues of hail and darkness materialised immediately after Moses inclined his staff, the plague of locusts and the splitting of the sea occurred either a day later, after G’d had made a wind blow in a constant direction or at least after a full night of such a wind. These factors plus the use of the expression יד which is a reference to G’d’s יד הגדולה, great punishing hand, explain why during the plague of darkness the Israelites who were wicked (would not abandon idol worship and slaughter the passover lamb) were stricken also. According to many sources only 20% of the Israelites actually qualified for redemption. The others died during the darkness so as not to offer the Egyptians the satisfaction of seeing that Jews had been afflicted also. 
    There are actually three kinds of darkness of which the Torah speaks in this portion. We have here the expressions ויהי חשך, וימש חשך, ויהי חשך אפלה. “darkness will materialise,” “darkness will be tangible” (verse 22) and “there was a thick darkness” (verse 23). Actually these three descriptions of darkness correspond to three other terms for darkness we know from the Torah which are עלטה, אפלה, ערפל. The עלטה was the kind of darkness experienced by Avram during the covenant of the pieces (Genesis 15,17). אפלה is the kind of darkness which occurred in Egypt, whereas ערפל is the kind of darkness which engulfed Moses on his ascent to Mount Sinai (Exodus 20,18). The meaning of the expression וימש חשך is that the darkness will continually deepen. The word is related to אמש, “last night.” The Torah means that this darkness will be deeper than last night’s darkness. Alternatively, the word is related to the expression לא ימיש, “He would not remove (the cloud).” It means that even after the departure of the natural darkness of night, this darkness would not lift. This proves that the plague of darkness commenced in the morning when it was light already. Had It begun at night the Egyptians would simply have thought that this was a night lasting for three days. The miracle would not then have the had the desired effect. This is reflected in  Onkelos’ translation בתר דיעדי קבל לילא, “after it had already almost become daylight, night set in.” This is also how Elihu in Job 34,25-26 describes it, i.e. “truly, He knows their deeds, night is over and they are crushed;” He strikes them down with the wicked where other people can see.” In other words, G’d struck the Egyptians wherever they happened to be be where others can see this. They perished there on the very seats being unable to move as we read in verse 23: “none could even rise from his place for three days.”
    
    Shemot Rabbah 14,1 understands the word ימש as “tangible, something that can be felt and touched. The word would be derived from ממש as in Deut. 28,29. ממשש בצהרים, “groping about at noon (like a blind man)”. This is also what is meant in Psalms 105,28: “He sent darkness, it was very dark, did they not defy His word?” The appropriate nature of this plague may best be explained by means of a parable. A king who was displeased with a number of his subjects told one of his servants to punish 50 of the rebellious citizens. The servant proceeded and punished 100 of them. In other words, the servant used his authority to add something of his own. Here too, G’d had given darkness instruction to envelop the Egyptians. Darkness used the opportunity  to add something of its own, so it intensified what G’d had decreed. Instead of only חשך, “simple darkness,” which if non-stop for three days is pretty bad by itself, 
    “It became חשך אפלה.” Some of our sages debate the origin of this darkness. Whereas Rabbi Yehudah holds that it originated  in celestial regions, Rabbi Nechemyah holds that it originated in gehinom, in hell. Rabbi Yehudah bases his opinion on Psalms 18,12: “Who made darkness His screen (G’d),” whereas Rabbi Nechemyah bases his view on Job 10,22, ”a land whose light is darkness, all gloom and disarray whose light is like darkness.”
    
    Tanchumah Bo 2 as well as Shemot Rabbah 14,2 claim that the plague lasted for a total of seven days. They base this on the verse (22) “there was a thick darkness throughout the land of Egypt for a three-day period.” This is followed by verse 23: “they did not see one another and could not rise from their respective seats for a period of three days.” This verse refers to the second period of three days. It was followed by “and for all the Children of Israel there was light in their dwellings.” This applied to the seventh day. This seventh days was similar to Exodus 14,20 ויהי הענן והחשך ויאר את הלילה, “there was the cloud and the darkness and it lit up the night.” (when the Egyptians pursued the Israelites). The apparent contradiction is resolved by under-standing the darkness as enveloping the Egyptians, whereas the Israelites enjoyed the light in that same place. The same would have happened here. This is also the reason for the  word במושבותם, “in their dwellings,” i.e. in the dwellings in which the Egyptians could not see a thing. The main thrust of this Midrash is to teach us that the darkness was not a kind of solar eclipse. On the contrary, the sun operated completely normally during all these days. In fact, the whole universe operated normally; the palpable darkness was as if each individual Egyptian had been imprisoned all by himself in a black box seeing the atmosphere of Egypt had been darkened. The Israelites did not only benefit by the fact that this change in the atmosphere did not affect the province of Goshen, their principal abode. The author claims that it is a scientific fact that just as a voice penetrates solids in order to reach the ears of the listener, so light, especially light emanating in heaven (sky), does the same. [an interesting thesis of sound and light waves considering he wrote in the 14th century. Ed.] The miracle was that G’d interfered with this system of light reaching the Egyptians. He shut off every Egyptian’s “antenna” for these light waves without interfering with the source of their transmission. Seeing that the Egyptian airspace could not receive these light waves it simply turned a natural black for them. They could not see the stars and the moon either seeing their capacity to receive light waves had been tampered with. Once this stage had been reached, G’d intensified this darkness to the extent that it was felt physically, preventing people from being able to move without “bumping” into darkness at every move they tried to make. The reason all this did not affect the Israelites was that their “antennae” had not been deprived of the ability to absorb light waves.
    
    10,24. רק צאנכם ובקרכם, “only your flocks and your herds shall remain.” Earlier, during the plague of locusts, (verse 11) Pharaoh had demanded that the children and women remain behind. as it was customary only for adult males to engage in the religious rites Moses had been speaking about. He reasoned that if the fathers were forced to leave behind their children they would not flee the country. Now, under the impact of the darkness, he had become willing to allow the children to accompany their fathers.
   גם טפכם ילך עמכם, “your children may go with you also.” Pharaoh still wanted to detain the principal wealth of the Israelites, i.e. their flocks and their herds. He reasoned that even if per chance the Israelites would try to escape by not returning, he would at least become the beneficiary of the wealth they had left behind. This is why Moses replied to this suggestion by saying (verse 24) “you will even add to our wealth by giving us of your own livestock begging us to offer sacrifices on your behalf.” He did not need to add that there could not even be a question of their taking their own flocks and herds with them. Moses made the point sound more palatable by saying they did not know which kind of animal G’d would instruct them to offer as sacrifices. This is Nachmanides’ way of interpreting this dialogue.
    
    10,29. לא אוסיף עוד ראות פניך, “I will not again see your face.” Shemot Rabbah 18,1 understands these words as “I will not again come to you but you will trouble yourself to come to see me.” This is the meaning of (11,8) “all these your servants will come down to me.” He should really have said: “you yourself will come down to me.” However, even at this stage, Moses still preserved the diplomatic niceties by phrasing what he said to Pharaoh in as inoffensive a manner as was possible. He therefore made it appear as if this “climb down” would be initiated by Pharaoh’s servants. The fact is, however, that when the Torah describes what happened (12, 30-31) it is clear that the initiative was Pharaoh’s, “Pharaoh arose during the night, he and all his servants..and he said: ‘rise and leave from the midst of my people, etc., etc.’”
    Seeing Pharaoh had forbidden Moses to return to the palace (compare 11,1 in which the Torah announces “one more plague I will bring upon Pharaoh,” this must have been announced to Pharaoh in his palace by means of a divine vision to Moses inside Pharaoh’s palace. Seeing that G’d did not want to make a liar out of Moses who had announced that he would not come back to see Pharaoh G’d had to inform him (Moses) of the forthcoming death of the firstborn already at this time, before he had a chance to leave the palace. This is also the meaning of Shemot Rabbah 18,1 that “G’d jumped upon him.” G’d “entered” Pharaoh’s palace on account of Moses who had said: “I will not see your face again.” You may search the entire text and you will find that this is the only time G’d spoke to Moses in Pharaoh’s palace. Every other time Moses made statements such as: “when I leave town I will pray to G’d,” implying that he had difficulty communicating with G’d in an impure environment such as Pharaoh’ palace.
    
    11,1. כשלחו כלה גרש יגרש, “when he does send them off, he will expel them.” The word כלה means “in toto,” i.e. including all the flocks and herds and all their moveable belongings. Not a single one of these will be left behind. This corresponds to the message of Ezekiel 39,28 concerning the redemption of the future: “I (G’d) will not leave behind a single one of you.”
    
    11,2. וישאלו איש מאת רעהו, “let them each ask from their fellow Egyptian male, etc.” This “request” was not similar to a man or a woman asking his or her  respective neighbour for some tool on the understanding that after he or she has finished using it it would be  returned it to its owner. Here G’d’s instructions were to ask for the respective items as outright gifts. It was understood that G’d would make the Egyptians feel well disposed toward the Israelites so that they would willingly comply with their requests for such gifts. The last thing G’d had in mind was that the Israelites, at the very moment when their redemption was at hand, would leave behind the impression that they had fooled their neighbours and pretended that they would give back the items in question. According to Jewish law whenever a servant is released from service after he has toiled for the agreed period of time, he is entitled to receive a stake from his erstwhile master to enable him to start his economic independence. This is spelled out in Deut. 15, 13-14: “but when you send him away free, you shall not send him away empty-handed. Furnish him out of your flocks, your threshing floor, and vat, with which the Lord has blessed you.” If this law applies to treatment of a fellow Jewish servant whose wages the master has paid six years in advance, how much more so were the Jewish slaves in Egypt entitled to receive some silver trinkets in compensation for over 200 years of slavery for which no wages had ever been paid.
    We may find the expression רעהו both in the masculine and the feminine form as peculiar when applied to Egyptians who could hardly be described as equal to the Israelites so that this definition would apply. We have to answer that prior to the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai all human beings were treated as equal before the law. Hence the expression רע “fellow human being” was appropriate. Ever since the giving of the Torah Gentiles are not again referred to by that description. Seeing that G’d had offered the Torah to the Gentile nations and they had refused it they no longer qualified as equals. Henceforth Jews were described as brothers and companions of G’d as we know from Psalms 122,8: “for the sake of My brothers and friends, I pray for your well-being.” Our sages in Baba Kama 113 explain the phrase לכל אבדת אחיך (Deut. 22,3) as “your brother, but not a Gentile.” In other words, a Jew does not have to go out of his way to restore lost property to a Gentile seeing he is not his brother anymore. The same law applies to the prohibition of charging or paying interest to others. While the Torah forbids this inasmuch as it writes: “you must not charge interest to your brother” (Deut. 23,20), this excludes those whom the Torah does not recognise as our brothers, i.e. the Gentile.
    
    11,4. כה אמר ה' כחצות הלילה, “thus has the Lord said: ‘around midnight,’ etc.” Actually, G’d had told Moses that the dying of the firstborn would occur precisely at midnight, as the Torah testifies that it took place בחצות הלילה, “at midnight” (12,29). Moses changed the wording to “around midnight.” Berachot 4 explains that Moses did so in order not to give the Egyptian astrologers a chance to call him a liar in the event their calculations of midnight were not precise and they thought that Moses did not know the exact time of midnight.
    The obvious question which arises is that we know that for several plagues past the astrologers and magicians had not dared show their face at Pharaoh’s palace anymore after they had acknowledged that the plagues were G’d’s doing. What would cause them to accuse Moses of being imprecise if the plague did not occur at the time they considered as “midnight?” Had Moses not established his own credibility beyond any doubt during the preceding nine plagues, each one of which had occurred precisely when and how Moses had predicted? These astrologers were well aware that Moses had not done anything on his own but had only announced what G’d was about to do!
    Furthermore, even assuming that the astrologers would accuse Moses of having lied, would this bother him enough to edit what G’d had told him, i.e. “at midnight?” We may have to answer that up until the third plague all the Egyptian astrologers and magicians had indeed thought that Moses had instigated the plagues on his own, not G’d. They had credited him with superior skills and knowledge. Once they had observed the third plague they had revised their attitude and admitted that “a finger” of  G’d was at work. After that they had observed that the plagues had been performed by Moses himself after he had issued warnings. They had also observed that each time the cessation of the plague had occurred after Moses had prayed to G’d to cancel it. Moses’ image as a powerful  prophet had increased from plague to plague. The image of the Egyptian astrologers and magicians had suffered in direct proportion to the image of Moses and G’d having increased in the minds of the Egyptians at large. Seeing this was so, Moses worried that all of this could be undone if at the last plague the Egyptian astrologers would finally be able to accuse him of an inaccuracy. If that were to occur, they would retroactively renounce their new-found belief in G’d and His power. Moses was not prepared to risk this desecration of the name of G’d.
    I believe that a further consideration which compelled Moses to change the word בחצות to כחצות, was the well known fact that according to the astronomers the beginning of a day rotates in the order of the following seven planets commencing with ח'לם כצ'נש, whereas the nights commence according to the pattern כנ'צש חל'ם. [The first set of letters stands for the planets “sun, moon,  Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn. Sunday morning would be under the aegis of the sun; Monday morning under the aegis of the moon, etc., Ed.]  Moses changed the word בחצות to כחצות to create the impression that the plague of dying would commence at the end of the 6th hour of the rule of Jupiter which was perceived to be the omen for life, not death. Had the plague commenced or been predicted to commence at midnight, i.e. at the time that the planet Mars came into its own, the fact that dying would occur then would have been considered far less miraculous. They would have attributed the whole disaster to natural forces. In fact, the plague did begin at that moment as G’d does not bother to interfere with laws of nature unless there is a compelling reason. Whenever He can accomplish His purpose by utilising the existing norms He does so. In this instance He was desirous of utilising one of His regular servants, i.e. the planet Mars in order to kill His enemies. We find something similar in connection with the deluge. The Talmud Berachot 59 explains that in order to orchestrate the deluge G’d took  two stars out of the constellation Pleidas and as a result there developed the deluge. 
    [in other words, G’d used mechanisms existing in nature in order to produce certain hitherto unknown phenomena. Ed.] The plague of the dying of the firstborn would have remained a most powerful plague even if Moses had not changed G’d’s wording seeing that even the scoffers would not have credited Mars with the power to effect more than a few deaths at a time, especially seeing this was not the time of year the influence of this planet was at its height. The demonstration of maybe a million Egyptians dying and all of them being firstborns at that would surely have enhanced G’d’s image rather that diminished it. It would have been demonstrated beyond doubt that such an occurrence could not be credited to horoscopic influences at all. 
    Nonetheless, all the believers in horoscopic influences are convinced that the majority of children born after a nine-month pregnancy owe their live birth to the influence of the planet Jupiter. This prompted Moses to word G’d’s warning in such a way that if the dying occurred at a time which was governed by the planet Jupiter the phenomenon would appear to contradict accepted concepts even more than if he had announced that it would take place when the planet Mars was the dominating planet in the skies. It would prove once and for all that the power over life and death was firmly rooted in G’d’s domain not in a domain which He had delegated to the planetary system. When we read in Job 34,20: “some die suddenly, in the middle of the night people are in turmoil and pass on,” the expression יגועשו used in the verse in Job is similar in meaning to Psalms 18,8 ותגעש ותרעש הארץ, “then the earth quaked and rocked.” The word ויעבורו “and pass on” in that verse in Job referred to the Israelites  to whom Pharaoh had said: “rise and leave my people, etc.” The last words in that same verse in Job: “even great men are removed -not by human hands,” are a reference to the Egyptians who up until that moment had exerted fear upon the Israelites, an emotion which evaporated as if it had never existed without human force accounting for this.
    According to Shemot Rabbah 18,2 the meaning of the word כחצות  is that midnight would have a dual function; death as a form of retribution for the Egyptians, and justice and righteousness for the long suffering Israelites.
   אני יוצא בתוך מצרים, “I will go out amongst Egypt,” Onkelos translates these words as “I will reveal Myself.” Our sages quote Micah 1,3 on this verse “G’d will leave His abode and He will come down and stride on the heights of the earth.” Talmud Yerushalmi Taanit 2,1 suggests that G’d will switch application of one of His attributes for another i.e. He will exit from one attribute and switch to another, in this instance the attribute of Justice.
    
    11,5. ומת כל בכור, “and every firstborn will die.” The meaning is “regardless of whether he is the firstborn of the male (who provided the sperm) or if he is the firstborn of the female.” The curious wording in the Midrash Hagadol means that if one man impregnated 10 women all of whom had previously not given birth, the males born as a result are considered as “firstborn (of) the women.” If the situation is reversed, and a woman gives birth to ten males each by sperm of another male, then such “firstborn” are considered as “firstborn (of) men.” This is what Assaph means in Psalms 78,51: “He struck every firstborn in Egypt, the first fruits of their vigor in the tents of Cham.” We have another verse in Psalms 105,36  where the firstborn are also described as “the first fruit of their vigor.” It appears that the firstborn of “males” are described as ראשית לכל אונם, whereas the firstborn of women are described as ראשית אונים באהלי חם. The reason is that woman is traditionally associated with the word אהל, “tent.” Compare Judges 6,8 הם ומקניהם יעלו ואהליהם, “they and their cattle ascended together with their “tents,” i.e. with their women.
   מבכור פרעה אשר יושב על כסאו עד בכור השפחה, “from the firstborn of Pharaoh who would sit on his throne to the firstborn of the maidservant, etc.” The Torah first mentioned the most aristocratic firstborn and concluded with the most lowly born firstborn who performed the menial task of rotating the millstone so that these convicts should not say that their deity had protected them against this ultimate punishment. Later on, (12,29) when the Torah reports what happened, this lowly born firstborn is described as the “firstborn of the prisoner in the dungeon.” It all amounts to the same thing. [This presumes the question that seeing these slaves could not have enslaved the Israelites, why should they now become victims. Ed.]
    However, I have heard a reason given for the Torah changing the description of the people at the low end of the social scale being that male slaves used to be employed by day to rotate the millstones whereas at night they were brought back to the dungeons. Seeing that when Moses was prophesying what would happen it was daytime, he used the metaphor of the firstborn rotating the millstone. However, seeing the actual happening took place at night, the Torah switched metaphors and referred to the captive in the dungeon, the place where he died.
   וכל בכור בהמה, “and the firstborn of every domestic animal.” If man sinned, what did the animals do that they too had to pay the penalty? The reason the firstborn animals had to die was because the Egyptians had made deities of them. When G’d exacts retribution from a nation, He commences by punishing their livestock first (compare Mechilta Pisscha 13). Our sages Bereshit Rabbah 96,5 explain that just as the worshipers are punished so are those being worshipped.”
    
    11,7. לא יחרץ כלב לשונו, “not a dog will whet his tongue.” Looking at the plain meaning of the text the Torah appears to compare the plague of the dying of the firstborn to dogs. This is to teach us that at the time wicked people suffer damage the righteous are saved from suffering such damage. This concept is spelled out in Psalms 91,6 “a thousand shall fall on your left and ten thousand on your right, but it shall not reach you.”
    A kabbalistic approach: “what does the whetting of a dog’s tongue have to do with the plague of the dying of the firstborn?” It is a well known fact that the dog is a totally materialistically oriented animal which is never satiated. Isaiah 56,11 confirmed this when he said: “moreover the dogs are greedy; they never know satiety.” The greed of the destroyer (Satan) is similarly never satiated. Proverbs 30,15 describes him as הב, הב, “constantly demanding: “give! give!” Seeing that the animal which died of natural causes as well as the one which was torn by wild beasts (נבלה וטרפה) died due to the power of said “destroyer,” the Torah commanded to throw such carcasses to the dogs (compare Exodus 22,30) so that two species of the same category should meet. This is the mystical dimension of our verse here. Seeing that it is the nature of the dog to constantly attack and cause damage, it was appropriate that just as the celestial destroyer (Satan, the angel of death) did not attack the Jewish firstborn so its terrestrial counterpart would not make any threatening noises either. The tongue is characteristic of the original serpent which inflicted its damage upon the world and upon man by the indiscriminate use of its tongue. This is why the tongue of the dog is singled out by the Torah in this connection.
    The most concentrated power of the destroyer is emanated to it by the attribute of Justice which killed all the firstborn of Egypt. This attribute is at its most powerful at midnight. This is why the dying of the firstborn had to occur at midnight. The Torah informs you here by inference that the dogs used to bark halfway through the second משמרת, “watch” (out of a total of three) of the night. In other words, it was customary for the dogs to bark at midnight. This was the time when the angel of death would normally reap its harvest in Egypt. Baba Kama 60 states that when the dogs wail it is a sign that the angel of death has arrived at that time. On the other hand, when the dogs make happy sounds it is proof that the prophet Elijah has arrived in that town (in the absence of bitches). We have a further statement in Berachot 50 that the night watch is to be divided into three sections. During the first watch the donkey brays, a sign of the attribute of Mercy, kindness. (The donkey was never mentioned by name until the advent of Avraham who represents the attribute of loving kindness). During the second watch the dogs bark; this is an allusion to the presence of the attribute of Justice. During the third watch a wife engages in intimate talk with her husband and the infant suckles at the breast of its mother. This is an allusion that this is the time G’d arranges the livelihood for every creature at this hour.
    Solomon alluded to this in his famous poem אשת חיל (Proverbs 31,10-31). He wrote (verse 15) “she rose when it is still night and supplied provisions for her household and the daily fare for her maids.” The “infant” mentioned in Berachot is a reference to the universe at large, i.e. G’d’s “infant.” The “breast of its mother” is a reference to the conversation between wife and husband. Our verse here tells us that at the same hour when the dogs were barking at the Egyptians, not a single one barked at an Israelite. The Torah added: “in order that you shall know that Hashem will have differentiated between Egypt and Israel.”
    
    11,8.צא אתה וכל העם אשר ברגלך , “leave! You and all the people that follow you.” Moses predicted that prior to his and Israel leaving the land of Egypt Pharaoh himself would have to issue the order to do so. Our verse tells us that when this point would be reached the Israelites would cease being subjects of human masters, i.e. Pharaoh, and begin to become subjects of a higher power, i.e. G’d. This is the reason why this verse is invoked to help women about to become mothers who experience difficulty in giving birth. The power of this verse is very strong. The baby struggling to exit from its mother’s womb is considered like a prisoner in a cell in need to be released from its prison in order to enter the world and study Torah. [If I understand it correctly, the whole verse is part of the name of G’d just as the whole Torah is an elongated name of G’d. By isolating this name (verse) and invoking it on behalf of the baby and its mother G’d is likely to respond to the difficulty experienced by both parties concerned. Ed.]
    
    11,9. לא ישמע אליכם פרעה, “Pharaoh is not going to listen to you.” G’d meant that Pharaoh would not even be moved by this warning until the plague would strike him personally.
    
   למען רבות מופתי, “in order to multiply My miracles.” This was a reference to the dying of the firstborn. The reason G’d used the plural, i.e. מופתי, was to include the splitting of the Sea of Reeds which was still to follow.
    
    11,10. ומשה ואהרן עשו את כל המופתים האלה, “Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles.” This refers to the ten plagues which have been enumerated thus far. They have been summarised under the letters דצ'ך עד'ש בא'חב  in the chronological order in which they occurred. They are actually divided into four groups consisting respectively of the four basic raw materials the earth is made of. Blood and Frogs are basically related to water. Actually, seeing that earth had been the most recently created raw material it should have been struck first. Seeing that the earth “drinks” water, G’d decided to produce first plagues which emanated from the water. When water is struck by a plague then indirectly all the four raw materials suffer. The fish in the water which really are an independent detail died as a result of their habitat being stricken. Lice and the wild beasts were manifestations of the earth being struck, the earth being “stronger” (more substantive) than the water. The Torah had reported that earth itself was ruined by the wild beasts roaming all over (8,20). Seeing that Pharaoh remained obstinate, G’d also brought upon him plagues originating in the atmosphere, plagues which attacked people’s bodies. The pestilence attacked primarily the animals, whereas the boils originating in the element fire attacked the humans. The hail and locusts originated in the atmosphere, “air.” The locusts attacked vegetation whereas darkness originated in the atmosphere. The loss of life, i.e. the loss of נשמת רוח חיים occurred as a result of the plague of מכות בכורות.
    When the Torah wrote that Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles, how do we reconcile this with the fact that neither Moses nor Aaron had done anything to bring about the plague of wild beasts, the plague of pestilence, or the dying of the firstborn? The word כל, both here and elsewhere does not really mean “all, each one,” but means “most.” The expression “inclining the hand” occurs in connection with seven of the ten plagues; only the three plagues just mentioned did not involve such use of either Moses’ or Aaron’s hand. Even after all the ten plagues had occurred Pharaoh was still not humbled so that G’d was obliged to continue to strengthen his heart as we know from Pharaoh’s pursuit of the Israelites (14,8).
    
    12,1. ויאמר ה' אל משה ואל אהרן. “G’d spoke to Moses and Aaron.” Even though it appears from the wording of the verse that G’d’s words were addressed to both Moses and Aaron, Moses was the principal recipient of G’d’s words. When the Torah writes in Exodus 20,12: “honour your father and your mother,” the father is the principal subject in that commandment. Seeing that Aaron was involved in performing the miracles the Torah included his name amongst those addressed.
   בארץ מצרים, “in the land of Egypt.” Outside the metropolis, seeing the city was full of abominations preventing a revelation of G’d’s word there. When the Torah has in mind the metropolis, it often adds the word עיר, such as when Moses told Pharaoh that he would leave the עיר, prior to praying to G’d (9,29). In order to reconcile this with the oft quoted statement by our sages that the Shechinah dwelled in Egypt, our sages explained that as long as the land of Israel had not been chosen as the exclusive domain for the Shechinah, all countries were potentially equally fit to receive a communication from G’d by word of mouth (Mechilta 85). After the land of Israel was chosen, all other countries were no longer suited for G’d to address people there. As long as the Temple had not been erected in Jerusalem, the whole city of Jerusalem was fit to receive such communication from G’d. After the Temple had been built even the city itself was no longer a vehicle for such communication by G’d. Only the holy precincts of the Temple qualified for this as we know from Psalms 132,14: “This is My resting-place for all time; here I will dwell, for I desire it.” By the same token, as long as Aaron had not been chosen to be a priest every Israelite was potentially fit to become a priest. As long as David had not been crowned king, any Israelite could have qualified as king as we know from Exodus 19,6: “you shall be for Me a Kingdom of priests, etc.” After the appointment of David as king, all other Israelites were automatically excluded from qualifying for that position. Even while G’d’s word was communicated outside the borders of Israel this occurred only in a place which was pure or situated on a river. This is based on Daniel 8,2: ”and here I was beside the Ulai river.” We have a similar statement by Ezekiel 1,1 who described himself as on the banks of the river Chidekel when receiving a communication from G’d. In Daniel 10,4, Daniel describes himself as on the banks of the river Tigris when receiving a vision. by an angel who addressed him.
    Shemot Rabbah 15,5 quotes Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish as saying that Israel was on a very high level if G’d agreed to manifest Himself in a place full of impurity and abominations for the sake of this people. He explained this phenomenon by means of a parable. A priest had been given some Terumah, a tithe which is holy and not accessible to laymen. This Terumah had fallen into a graveyard (a place inaccessible to a priest by law). The priest pondered his problem saying that he was certainly not permitted to defile himself by entering the cemetery. On the other hand, he was desperately dependent on that Terumah so that he could not forego it. He decided that it was preferable for him to temporarily defile himself and subsequently to purify himself than to die from starvation by foregoing this Terumah. The Jewish people are G’d’s Terumah. (compare Jeremiah 2,3): “Israel is holy, the first of G’d’s harvest.” The Jewish people’s present situation was that they were in a vast cemetery (compare 12,30: “there was not a single house which did not contain a dead body”). If G’d would not contaminate Himself briefly in order to salvage the Jewish people, He would have to forego their existence permanently. Hence He decided to temporarily relax His rule and reveal Himself in a place not normally suitable for such a revelation in order to secure the continued existence of His Terumah, i.e. the Jewish people. After G’d had taken the Israelites out of Egypt, He said to Aaron: “please perform rites of purification for Me.” This is the meaning of Leviticus 16,33 and 16,16: “he shall provide atonement for the Sanctuary,” or “he shall provide atonement upon the Tent of Meeting and the altar.”
    
    12,2. החודש הזה לכם ראש חדשים, “this month shall be for you the beginning of the months, etc.” It is significant that at this juncture G’d did not instruct Moses and Aaron to relay the content of this message to the Jewish people. Surely the word לכם, “for you,” implied that the fixing of the new moon was a commandment applicable to each and every Israelite! Failure of G’d to issue the customary instruction: “say to all the Israelites, etc.,” therefore indicated that the determining of the new moon was something reserved for the elders of the people, a court of experts, and was not something incumbent on the individual Jew. This is why these instructions were addressed to both Moses and Aaron in their capacity as the experts at the time. The word לכם, in this instance means: “to the likes of you, to trained experts.”
    The word החודש הזה is a reference to the month of Nissan. The Torah calls it ראשון, “the first,” both here and again in verse 18. Seeing that the month of Tishrey is the first month in the compilation of years [something we have in common with the rest of mankind, Ed.] the Torah had to add the word לכם, “for you,” to show that Nissan is unique to the Jewish people as the first in our list of months. The implication is that we count these months as a symbol of the month in which we attained our freedom as a nation. It follows that wherever mention is made of the month of Tishrey, the Torah refers to it as the seventh month. This means it is the seventh following Nissan. Incidentally, this is the reason that the Torah has no names for the various months, but refers to them as a ordinal numbers, i.e. “second,” “third,” etc. By doing so the memory of the redemption from Egypt is constantly invoked when we read about any of the festivals which occur during certain months of the year.
    The names of the months such as Nissan, Iyar, Sivan, etc., have been introduced only after the Jewish people were exiled in Babylon (Talmud Yerushalmi Rosh Hashanah 1,2). The reason the Jewish people adopted this change was that we have a prophetic announcement (Jeremiah 16,14-15) “assuredly, a time is coming-declares the Lord- when it shall no longer be said: ‘as the Lord lives Who brought the Israelites out of the land of Egypt,’ but rather, ‘as the Lord lives Who brought the Israelites out of the northland, and out of all the lands to which He had banished them.’” This verse caused the Jews to adopt the names of Babylonian months after they were redeemed from there. Again, you find that the names of the months provide us with a memory of redemption, albeit a partial redemption unlike that from the land of Egypt. We learn from all this that the Torah itself did not give specific names to the months just as it did not assign specific names to the days of the week as is customary amongst the Gentile nations. We refer to the days of the week by their proximity or otherwise to the Sabbath, i.e. “the first day after Sabbath,” “the second day after Sabbath,” etc. We do this in order to maintain the centrality of the Sabbath in our calendar. This is the plain meaning of Exodus 20,8: “remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.” The Torah demands that we remember the Sabbath on a daily basis.
    When the Torah writes here: “this month shall be for you the head of the months,” the meaning is not that we must watch carefully if the new moon is clearly visible and that we are to establish the new moon or extend the last month according to the sighting of the new moon. Determining the need for an extra month does not depend on the sighting of the moon but on calculations. Rabbeinu Chananel states this clearly. [Torah Shlemah by Rabbi M. Kasher pages 46-48] If proof were needed that we base our calendar on astronomical calculations rather than the sighting of the moon, consider the fact that during the Israelites’ wanderings in the desert for 40 years when their encampment was totally enveloped by the ענני הכבוד, G’d’s clouds of distinction, neither the people nor their leaders were able to sight the moon. They did not even see the sun by day either but depended totally on the pillar of cloud or fire to light the way for them. This is confirmed by Nechemyah 9,19: “You in Your abundant compassion did not abandon them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from them to lead them on the way by day, nor the pillar of fire by night to give them light. in the way where to go.” How would the Israelites have been able to fix the date of the new moon unless they had based themselves on their astronomical calculations? Clearly, the principal method of determining the new moon is based on calculations. We have an old-standing tradition that 5 of the 12 months of the year always have 30 days whereas 5 other months always have 29 days. The remaining 2 months fluctuate between 29 and 30 days respectively. In some years both of these months have 30 days, in some years both have 29 days, and in some years one of them has 29 days whereas the other month has 30 days. The two months which are subject to these variations are Cheshvan and Kislev. We have another tradition that the first day of Tishrey is New Year’s day, and that according to a ruling handed down by Moses from Sinai each “month” (lunar orbit) consists of 29 days, 12 hours and 793 parts [the hour is divided into 1080 equal parts]. (Rosh Hashanah 25). All this is based on Chronicles I 12,33: “of the Issacharites, men who knew how to interpret the signs of the times to determine how Israel should act; their chiefs were two hundred, and all their kinsmen followed them.” No other matter requires as much knowledge and insight as determining the times of the calendar, the dates of the festivals based on comparison with the seasons determined by the solar calendar.
    Of course, if the new moon has been sighted everybody knows that a new month has begun, etc. It is easy then to calculate the tenth of the month to determine the day of Yom Kippur and the 15th of the month to determine the first day of Sukkot, etc. The sages needed to know what calculations are required in order to inform the people ahead of time what to expect and in order to check whether sightings of the new moon which had been claimed were in fact possible according to their charts. It is this aspect which the verse from Chronicles dealing with the Issacharites deals with.
    You will note that already during the time of David and Yonathan calculations formed the basis of the determination of the new moon as David said to Yonathan (Samuel I 20,5) “tomorrow, on the new moon I will sit beside the king, etc.” If the new moon had been determined merely by sighting, how did David know it would be observed on the morrow? Perhaps there would not be a sighting of the new moon by then? It is clear then that the date was determined by calculation if sightings failed to confirm these calculations. In fact, from that episode in Samuel I it is clear that already at that time the sages arranged for two consecutive days of new moon being observed seeing that we read in verses 24-27 of the same chapter: “The new moon came and the king sat down to partake of the meal...but David’s place remained vacant....That day however Saul said nothing....But on the day after the new moon, the second day, David’s place was vacant again, etc.” It is clearly impossible to say that the day described as “the second day” refers to another new moon the following month and that this is why they called it החודש השני. Saul asked Yonathan (verse 27) “why did not the son of Yishai come to the meal yesterday or the day before?” The story goes on: “Yonathan rose from his seat angrily and he did not eat on the second day of the new moon.” Clearly the date of the new moon was determined by means of calculations. This system was in effect for 1100 years from the time of Moses until the time of Antignos from Socho who, together with Shimon Hatzadik, was the leader of the Jewish people around the time Ezra and his colleagues came to Eretz Yisrael from Babylon. (Moses died in 2488 after the creation of Adam whereas Antignos lived around 3460 years after the creation of Adam) Two of Antignos’ students, Tzadok and Beissus, were the ones who misunderstood their teacher’s meaning when he exhorted his students not to serve G’d like a servant who serves a human master for the sake of a reward, feeling entitled to it. Antignos urged his students to relate to the service of G’d as does a servant who volunteers to serve his master out of love and not out of a desire for reward. These two students thought that there was no system of reward and punishment in Judaism as a result of which they forsook the path of Torah. A by-product of their heresy was that they raised questions against the system of determining the time of the new moon, claiming that the principal mitzvah in observing the commandment of sanctifying the new moon was the sighting of it, not the calculations on paper. Such a new thesis forced the leading rabbis of that time to respond and to prove to these heretics that their calculations were accurate and more reliable than sightings so that Rabban Gamliel came out publicly saying not to be too concerned about whether an actual sighting had taken place. He claimed to have had a tradition from his grandfather that the month (lunar orbit) is never shorter than 29 days 12 hours and 793 parts. These words of Rabban Gamliel prove that he did not base his calendar on sightings but on astronomical calculations.
    We have an explicit Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 25) which states that “if both the elders of the court and the entire nation had clearly seen the new moon but it became night while the elders examined witnesses who testified to the sighting of the new moon before the elders were able to pronounce the new moon on the day just concluded, they would declare the month to have had 30 days.” This proves that the elders did not rely principally on the sighting. Had they done so, how could they have added another day to the month seeing not only the witnesses but they themselves had sighted the new moon on the previous night? Clearly, if they decided to make that month one of thirty days in spite of the sighting, they must have based themselves on their calculations.
    I can bring you even more compelling evidence. The Mishnah at the end of the second chapter in Rosh Hashanah records that two witnesses appeared claiming to have sighted the new moon at its appropriate time, i.e. the night between the 29th and the 30th of the month. They also claimed that on the following night, i.e. the night of the 31st, the moon had not appeared in the sky. Rabban Gamliel accepted their testimony. If Rabban Gamliel and his colleagues had been basing their declarations of the new moon only on sightings, how could he have accepted such testimony which contradicts all we know about the behaviour of the moon? Surely, the fact that the moon did not appear on the following night meant that the witnesses had lied in the first place! Clearly, Rabban Gamliel relied on his calculations in the first instance and when these proved that the new moon had been due to appear when it did he accepted the visual evidence that it had indeed been sighted on the appropriate night. 
    As to the statement of the sages (folio 24) that Rabban Gamliel had a reproduction of the sky on the wall of his study which he employed to instruct laymen, the meaning is that he wanted to convince the supporters of Tzadok and Beissus  of his absolute competence in astronomical matters from month to month. He wanted to show them beforehand in which manner and at what angle sightings of the moon after the end of the present month would occur. When these students noticed that Rabban Gamliel had correctly predicted where and when in the sky sightings of the new moon would occur, he managed to discredit Tzadok ad Beissus who had tried to undermine the authority of the Jewish Supreme Court. As a result, the allegations against the calendar calculations of the leading elders of the Jewish people ceased. Nonetheless, the practice of encouraging people to come forward as witnesses to new-moon sightings continued but primarily as a reminder of an established custom, not as something of halachic necessity.
    It is unanimously agreed that the authority to determine calendar adjustments is vested in the hands of the Jewish Supreme Court or its equivalent as something handed down from the time of Moses, provided such court is composed of the most knowledgeable and G’d-fearing people of their generation  This is the law which G’d commanded to Moses in our verse here. The words החודש הזה לכם, may therefore be translated as “you have authority to delegate the adjustments which may have to be made to this month.” Thus far the commentary of Rabbeinu Chananel. This authority delegated by G’d to the Rabbinical authorities is of such fundamental significance that we read in Sanhedrin 42 that if the Jewish people had not been granted the opportunity to perform any other commandment except to recite the benediction over the new moon once a month and to thereby welcome the eternal presence of the Shechinah, this would be deemed sufficient for them. They base this on the wording החודש הזה, here and זה אלי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I wish to exalt Him” in Exodus 15,2. What this Midrash is trying to tell us is that the verse here is an explanation of the peculiarly worded text of the benediction recited when blessing the new moon. It is an allusion to כנסת ישראל, the Jewish people as a spiritual concept, so called as it is a crown, sanctified and the exclusive property of the people of Israel, who are referred to as עמוסי בטן, (Isaiah 46,3) “transported by G’d on His arms ever since their inception” (in the house of Lavan). Seeing that he who utters this benediction finds himself in the presence of the Shechinah, he must recite it while standing (not while seated). This ensures that he is conscious of the necessary awe when in the presence of G’d.
    Reciting the benediction over the new moon is equivalent to testifying to the fact that G’d created the universe and all that is in it. This is the principal pillar of our religious faith. Seeing the moon renews itself month after month makes it easy to understand that G’d created one universe after another. Some unidentified sages have said that the black colour we observe on part of the moon serves as a reminder of the Israelites who are in exile and who count their months based on the lunar orbits. Concerning this phenomenon Solomon said (Song of Songs 6,10) יפה כלבנה, ברה כחמה, ”beautiful as the moon, brilliant as the sun.” G’d granted beauty to the moon and brilliance to the sun. The reason is that the moon resembles woman’s lower physiognomy in that it is activated by the male. The moon similarly receives its input from the sun. This is also the meaning of the statement in Ketuvot 59: “woman exists for the sake of beauty” [rather than for the performance of menial labour. Ed.]. Speaking of the sun, however, Solomon used the term  ברה, as its light is clear, distinct. Seeing that Solomon used different adjectives in describing moon and sun it is clear that the moon lacks brilliance. You need not be surprised at the choice of metaphors by Solomon as the Shechinah which accompanies the Jewish people in their exile  and which reflects the strength of the moon is also feeling the pain of the Jewish people in their troubles. We know this from Isaiah 63,9: “In all their troubles He was troubled.”
    Shemot Rabbah 15,26 approaches our verse from a different angle saying that the words: “this month is yours, etc.,” describe G’d’s promise to the Jewish people even before He took them out of Egypt that Jewish sovereignty would not exceed thirty generations corresponding to the number of days in a month.
    I have already written on this subject when I commented on Genesis 38,30: “he called his name Zerach.” Another part of that same Midrash understands the opening words of the verse as meaning that in this world the Jewish people would count according to the moon, i.e. that the moon is given to the Jewish people as a gift in order that they can count their months by means of it. The moon is considered as superior to the sun as it is visible by day and by night, suggesting that the Jewish people have an existence both in this world and in the world to come. The descendants of Esau, however, count in this world by means of the orbits of the sun which has been described in the Torah (Genesis 1,16) as “the great luminary.” In the future, however, this great luminary will be made subservient to those who will be called “small,” by G’d, (compare Jeremiah 49,15) “For I will make you smallest among nations, etc.” [the prophet addresses Edom, the spiritual descendant of Esau]. At that time the (previously) small luminary, i.e. the Jewish people, will become big, the nation whom G’d calls big as we read in Deuteronomy 4,8 “and which is a great nation such as this, etc.” The descendants of those who count according to the sun’s orbits will eventually be judged by means of the sun,  i.e. they will be burned by the fiery heat of the sun as we know from  Maleachi 3,19.
    The entire matter can be understood by means of a parable. A king got engaged to a lady and wrote her a marriage settlement in which he gave her a few relatively minor gifts. Once the marriage was consummated, he wrote her a contract bequeathing to her very large gifts. The relationship between G’d and the Jewish people is somewhat similar. In this world G’d got “engaged” to the Jewish people as we know from Hoseah 2,21: “I  will espouse you forever.” At that stage of our relationship with G’d He gave us only the moon, as we read in our verse “this moon is for you.” However, in the days of the messiah there will occur the consummation of our relationship with G’d. We know this from Isaiah 54,5 “for He who is your mate is the One Who has made you. The Lord G’d of Hosts is His name.” When that time arrives G’d will hand over to Israel all that is spelled out in the second marital agreement.  According to Shemot Rabbah end of chapter 15, this is the meaning of Daniel 12,3 “and the knowledgeable will be radiant like the brightness of the expanse of the sky.”
    We find an interesting halachah in tractate Sofrim 19,10 as well as in the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 9,2) that one does not recite the benediction over the new moon except on the night following the Sabbath when one is still in a state of “fragrance,” i.e. surrounded by the joyful aura of the Sabbath and wearing Sabbath garments. When reciting this benediction one is to stand at attention facing the moon and to jump up and down three times  reciting the formula: “blessed be your Creator, blessed be the One Who sanctifies you. Just as I jump in your direction without being able to touch you (with harmful intent) so those who wish to harm me may jump without achieving their aim. May fear and trepidation overcome all those; since Your arm is mighty may they be struck dumb as stone” (Exodus 15,15).
    
    12,3. בעשור לחדש הזה ויקחו להם, “on the tenth of this month they shall take for themselves, etc.” The instruction was that the lamb should be taken or purchased on the tenth to be sacrificed on the fourteenth. Our verse teaches that a sacrificial animal be checked for blemishes for four days prior to being offered as a sacrifice. This is why it had to be “taken” i.e. set aside four days earlier.
   שה לבית אבות שה לבית, “one lamb per family, or if the family comprised many people one lamb per household.”
   ואם ימעט הבית מהיות משה, “but if the household is too small for one lamb,” i.e. if there would be leftovers from that lamb due to an insufficient number of people sharing it.
   ולקח הוא ושכנו, “then an individual and his neighbour shall take” (a lamb between them). The Torah is concerned with each Israelite’s financial resources. This concern is expressed on four separate occasions, the first one being the Passover legislation. Seeing that leftovers of this lamb had to be burned (could not be saved for the next day), the Torah demonstrated its concern for each Israelite’s financial position even before legislating (verse 10) what was to be done with the leftovers, by allowing two biologically unrelated Israelites to share such a lamb.
    The second instance in which the Torah displays similar concern for our pocketbooks is in Leviticus 7,24 where it states that the fat of an animal which had died (of natural causes) and the fat of an animal that had been torn to death may be put to any use  (other than your eating it).
    A third such instance is found in Deut. 14,21 where the carcass of an animal which died by a cause other than by ritual slaughter may be sold to Gentiles or given as a gift to resident non-Jewish strangers. The fourth instance of legislation designed to ease the financial burden on Israelites is found in Leviticus 14,36 and deals with the contents of a house about to be declared ritually impure. Although it was clear that the priest would condemn the house to be torn down and its contents to be destroyed, as long as the priest has not made his declaration the Torah permits the owner to remove such contents to save them from being destroyed.
    
    12,7. ולקחו מן הדם, “they are to take from its blood,” Nachmanides, in exploring the rationale of this legislation, writes that seeing the zodiac sign of the lamb is at the peak of its power during the month of Nissan as it is the sign symbolising growing vegetation, G’d ordered the lamb to be slaughtered during this month to demonstrate that this animal that they considered their symbol of success could not even protect itself, much less those who worshipped it. Moreover, the death of the lambs proved that the Exodus of the Jewish people did not occur thanks to the mazzal of the lamb (whom the Israelites had served also) but that it had been orchestrated by a higher power, by Hashem.
    
    12,8. צלי אש ומצות, “roasted on the fire together with unleavened bread.” The expression צלי אש used by the Torah here can mean either that the meat is roasted over coals inside a stove or that it is barbecued with a rotating spit over an open fire. The Torah excluded a kind of “roasting” which involved water. Boiling the meat in the ordinary fashion was most certainly out of the question. This is why the verse specifically tells us that even the kind of roasting involving  water was not permissible (verse 9). The repetition of the words כי אם צלי אש meant that it was not to be roasted in a pot. This was exceptional as other meat-offerings were allowed to be prepared for eating in such pots (Zevachim 91). When the sages (Chulin 132) said that the sections of an animal sacrifice given to the priest may be consumed after they have been roasted (apparently excluding boiling), this is based on the word למשחה, “for a distinction,” in Numbers 18,8 and means that seeing kings prefer this method of preparing meat, the priests are  allowed to prepare it in that way. However, if they prefer to boil the meat they are at liberty to do so.
    This appears to raise the problem of Deut. 16, 6-7 where the Torah writes: “there you will slaughter the Passover in the evening when the sun sets on the date (anniversary) you left Egypt. You will boil it and eat it in a place that the Lord your G’d will choose, etc.” There appears to be a contradiction here. Our sages dispose of this by saying that in Deut. the Torah does not refer to “boiling” involving water but “boiling it on actual fire” similar to what we find in connection with the famous Passover celebration during the reign of King Yoshiyahu. Chronicles II 35,13 reports: ויבשלו הפסח באש כמשפט, “they roasted the Passover on fire according to law.” This is clear evidence that the expression בשל, normally translated as “boiling,” need not refer to preparation of food in a pot with water, but is simply a description of making food fit to be eaten. Sometimes this means using different kinds of pots such as are mentioned in that same verse in Chronicles we have quoted; other times it means preparation involving only fire. The author quotes the Spanish word sazonas to describe the meaning of Genesis 40,10 in which the Torah speaks of grapes which had ripened. “Ripening” is a form of “boiling” or “cooking,” i.e. becoming fit to eat. When the Torah emphasises here צלי אש, it excludes the use of a container for preparing this meat.
    A Midrashic approach (Shemot Rabbah 15,13): the symbolic significance of insisting that the Passover be prepared over the fire was to remind the people that G’d had saved Avraham from the fire of Nimrod’s furnace. The symbolic meaning of the unleavened bread to be consumed simultaneously with the meat of the Passover was a reminder of the three cakes of unleavened dough that Sarah baked for the three angels who visited Avraham and told him on that date that Sarah would give birth to Yitzchak within a year. The symbolic meaning of the bitter herbs to be consumed as part of that meal is to remind us that just as the descendants of Avraham had been persecuted in Egypt, so they in turn would persecute the descendants of Esau. The symbolic meaning of the command not to leave over any part of the edible meat until morning is a reminder that not a single soul of the Egyptian firstborns survived that memorable night. The symbolic meaning of “with girded loins and your shoes on your feet” (verse 11), was to depict people who are eager to be on their way to a new destination. It is a fact that as far as the substance of the Passover is concerned the legislation recorded here was to remain in effect for all future generations also.
    
    12,12. ועברתי בארץ מצרים, “and I will go through the land of Egypt, etc.” This whole paragraph is meant to be something that Moses and Aaron were to tell the Israelites. We would therefore have expected the Torah to write at this point ועבר בארץ מצרים, “and He will go through the land of Egypt,” rather than “and I will go through the land of Egypt.” The unusual change in syntax here prompted our sages the Haggadah shel Pessach to say that the emphasis on the ending תי, after the ועבר which we would have expected teaches that G’d meant that He personally and not any agent of His would execute all the firstborns. They phrase it as אני ולא מלאך, אני ולא שרף, אני ולא השליח, אני ה', “I and not an angel; I and not a category of agent known as Saraph; I and not someone whom I usually delegate such a task to; I, all by Myself.” When G’d killed an army of 185,000 Assyrians (Kings II 19,35) many hundreds of years later on the anniversary of that date, He employed an angel to carry out His decree. This time He did not delegate the task.
   והכתי כל בכור, “I will smite every firstborn;” again we have the emphasis on “I, not a saraph.” Not only the dying but the smiting, the plague resulting in death will be inflicted by Me personally. I will not act like a king who delegates unpleasant duties to be performed by underlings. The “saraph” mentioned by our sages are the kind of angels that burned the soldiers sent to capture Elijah and whom he commanded to be burned (compare Kings II 1,10). 
   ובכל אלוהי מצרים אעשה שפטים, “and against all the deities of Egypt I will carry out judgments.” Again G’d employs the pronoun “I” to emphasise that He would not employ any delegate such as the angel Mattatron who normally is in charge of matters pertaining to the terrestrial part of the universe. The meaning of the word “Mattaron” transliterated is מורה דרך, someone teaching the way. A messenger is called Mentor in Greek.
   אני ה', “I the Eternal.” I and no one but I. G’d emphasises His uniqueness, indicating that the reason He will do all this by Himself is to remind us that there is No On like Him.

Nachmanides writes that the emphasis on the words אני ה' is that inasmuch as G’d is supreme and unique there is no one who could interfere with what He sets out to do. Nachmanides wants to explain that had G’d employed any assistants in this plague then the plague would have occurred as an extension of His “intensified,” מתוחה, attribute of Justice. If this had been the case His delegates would not have been able to distinguish between Jewish and Egyptian firstborns seeing that from the vantage point of that attribute they had not deserved to be saved. This is why G’d had no choice but to carry out this plague unassisted without delegates. The aspect of G’d which carried out this plague was the Shechinah which is comprised of a mixture of the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. This is the meaning of what the sages referred to as “not by means of a messenger.” In other words, G’d performed the plague all by Himself. This is reflected in the use of the word אנכי for the name of G’d in connection with this plague. That term is an allusion to the Shechinah.  We refer, of course, to the warning: הנה אנכי הורג את בכורך (Exodus 4,23) “Here I am going to kill your firstborn.” G’d used the same attribute describing Himself there as He had  with Yaakov in Genesis 46,4 when He told him that He (His Shechinah) would accompany him down to Egypt and would also accompany him on the way back from there. G’d had already used that name אנכי describing Himself in Genesis 15,14 when He told Avraham about the distant future when his descendants would be enslaved prior to their redemption. It meant already at that time that the attribute which would exact retribution from the nation enslaving Avraham’s descendants would be the one known as אנכי. This is also what is meant in 12,27 “when He smote the Egyptians and He saved our houses.”
    Rashi, quoting Mechilta, explains the meaning of “on all the deities of Egypt I shall execute judgments” as that if these idols were made of wood, the wood would rot, whereas if they had been made of metal the metal would melt.” [seeing that one cannot kill what has never been alive, the Mechilta wanted to illustrate what the words “judgments” when applied to idols could possibly mean. Ed.]
    When the Torah gets around to reporting the carrying out of this plague in verse 29, the killing of the firstborn humans and animals is mentioned whereas there is no mention of the destruction of the idols. The reason is that the Egyptians had been alerted to the dying of the firstborn during that night and they therefore found out about it during the night seeing they were checking if this disaster was actually happening. They did not find out about the destruction of their idols until the morning when they visited their temples. We find that something similar occurred after the Philistines had captured the Holy Ark (Samuel I 5,3). We read there: ”Early the next day, the people of Ashdod found Dagon lying face down on the ground in front of the Ark of the Lord.” In the following verse we are told: “after they had picked up Dagon and put him back in his place the next morning they again found him lying prone on the ground in front of the Ark of the Lord. The head and both hands of Dagon had been cut off, lying on the threshold. Only Dagon’s trunk was left intact.” This is when it dawned on the Philistines that the plague inflicted on them as well as on their deities had been caused by the G’d of heaven. This is what the prophet Jeremiah 10,11 had in mind when he said: “Thus shall you say to them: ‘Let the gods, who did not make heaven and earth, perish from the earth and from under the heaven.’”
    
    12,13. וראיתי את הדם ופסחתי עליכם, “when I see the blood I shall pass over you.” It was not the blood itself which would keep the plague away; nor was it the absence of the blood which would cause the plague to strike. He who had complete faith in the Lord and no longer feared Pharaoh and his decrees and had demonstrated this by publicly slaughtering an Egyptian deity and smearing its blood on his door posts and lintel had thereby demonstrated that he was a righteous individual and deserved to be spared.
    Mechilta Parshat 7, commenting on this verse, asks why the Torah should write that G‘d had “to see” the blood seeing that He sees everything even in the dark without having to pass over these houses. We have at least two verses in Scripture testifying to this, i.e. Daniel 2,22: “He knows all that goes on in the dark;” and Psalms 139,12: “darkness is not dark for You.” In view of this what news does the Torah tell us when it writes: “it will be when I see, etc.?” They answer that G’d’s memory of the blood of the binding of Yitzchak will be “triggered” by the sight. At that time (after Avraham had sacrificed the ram Genesis 22,14) he had called that site: “The eternal G’d will see.”
    
    12,15. שבעת ימים מצות תאכלו, “you will eat unleavened bread for seven days.” The Torah commanded that unleavened bread be eaten for the seven days of the Matzot festival and that the first and last day be observed as “holy convocations,’ i.e. that on those days there is a work prohibition. The first day is holy as it commemorates the beginning of the redemption, the last day as it represents its conclusion. You are aware already that the seven days symbolise the six directions plus G’d all of whom partake in G’d’s and Israel’s joy. The involvement of G’d and His emanations in this joy is the reason we have been warned in Nechemyah concerning the need to rejoice on a festival viz.: “Go eat choice foods and drink sweet drinks and send portions to whoever has nothing prepared, for the day is holy to our Lord.  Do not be sad for the rejoicing in the Lord is the source of your strength.”
    
    12,17. ושמרתם את המצות, “guard the unleavened bread (flour) from the time it is being harvested (against it becoming moist).” You are to watch it again at the time of kneading the dough so that it will not become chametz (leavened).  Our sages (Mechilta 9)  read the word המצות as if it had both been spelled with the vowel patach under the letter מ, and had again been spelled with the vowel chirik under the letter מ. The message is that just as one does not let a commandment (mitzvah) become soured through procrastinating in its performance, so one must not allow the dough for the unleavened bread to stand around too long for the same reason.
    
    12,21. משכו וקחו לכם, “draw forth or purchase for yourselves.”  A Midrash writes that “as a result of your drawing forth the lamb to perform My commandment, I (G’d) in turn will draw forth your enemies to the Sea of Reeds and drown them therein. The same merit will also result (eventually) in My drowning the army of Siserah in the river Kishon by drawing them forth to their destruction.” (Judges 4,7). An alternate approach:  Seeing that the descent of your forefathers to Egypt was set in motion by משיכה, i.e. (Genesis 37,28) “they (the Midianites) drew forth and pulled up Joseph from the pit” and it has been said concerning them (Isaiah 5,18) “ah, those who haul sins with cords of falsehood,” the punishment when it comes was described by using the same verb, i.e. (Isaiah, Nechemyah 9,30) ותמשוך עליהם שנים רבות....ותתנם ביד עמי הארצות,  “You dragged on within them (bore with them) for many years.....so You delivered them into the hands of the peoples of the land.” On the one hand, Israel has been called עם ממושך וממורט, “a people thrust forth and away” when they are sinful, (Isaiah 18,2) whereas when they return in penitence they are described as משכני אחריך נרוצה, ”draw me after You, let us run” (Song of Songs 1,4). We find the verb משך applied to the Jewish people also in Hoseah 11,4: בחבלי אדם אמשכם בעבותות אהבה, “I drew them with human ties, with cords of love.”
   למשפחותיכם, “according to your families.” This wording teaches that one is obligated to assemble one’s relatives around him in order to celebrate festivals together. Similarly, G’d has assured us that when the redemption will occur there will be a mutual drawing together of family members as the prophet (Jeremiah 30,25) has said: “at that time- declares the Lord- I will be G’d to all the clans of Israel, and they shall all be My people.”
    
    12,23. וראה את הדם על המשקוף ועל שתי המזוזות, and when He sees the blood on the lintel and on the two upright door-posts, etc.” Seeing that Israel was the vehicle by means of which G’d’s greatness was demonstrated at the time of the Exodus, they were commanded to perform a number of very visible acts in connection with this commandment. All the acts in question were designed to discredit the wicked king and the faulty religious orientation of the Egyptians. The public nature of this commandment was to instill in the Egyptians a belief in G’d when they would see how their deity had been debased. The Israelites were ordered to slaughter (publicly) the lamb, (Egyptian deity) to roast it openly on the fire (not conceal it in a pot). Even passers-by would not only observe the preparation of this meat but if they were too far away to see it they would smell its fragrance. The lamb’s blood was to be displayed openly on the door of every Jewish dwelling. This was a warning that the attribute of Justice had been extended fully against the Egyptians. This has been spelled out in Amos 9,1: “strike the capitals so that the thresholds quake and  make an end of the first of them all.” This is the plain meaning of our verse.
    A kabbalistic approach to our verse: This verse comprises an allusion to the letters in the Holy Name of G’d  and it has been mentioned earlier in reverse order (the order in which one builds) i.e. “the two upright doorposts and the lintel” (verse 7). [The author does not explain the allusion. I wonder if he refers to the 26 letters in the instruction והגעתם אל המשקוף ואל שתי המזוזות which equal the numerical value in the tetragram? Ed.] Here the final stage of a building, the roof, or in this instance the lintel, has been mentioned first. This affords you an opportunity to understand the mystical dimension of Proverbs 8,34: “happy is the man who listens to Me; who comes to My gates early daily; waiting at the doorposts of My gates.” It also affords us an opportunity to understand what Rav Chisda said in Berachot 8 that a person should make a point of entering through two doors to the  Synagogue. The Talmud finds it difficult to accept this at face value and concludes that what Rav Chisda meant was that one should step sufficiently far inside the Synagogue before commencing one’s prayer so that one could have walked through at least two doors. If one is framed between two doors and the two doors in their appearance resemble the letters  in the name of G’d then G’d views Himself as it were and will not harm the individual who by his presence helps make up His name. The word אות, or לאות in verse 23 must be understood as “letter,” or “letters.” The mystical meaning both here and in the statement of Rav Chisda is that if one surrounds oneself with the appropriate symbols portraying G’d’s Holy Name this acts as protection against the attribute of Justice. [the lintel is considered as a ו and the two upright posts as two lettersה , respectively]
   ופסח ה' על הפתח, “and G’d will skip that entrance” ולא יתן למשחית לבא and will not allow the destroyer to enter through it, seeing he has sealed it with His seal. According to the aforesaid there were four altars corresponding to the four letters in the tetragram. This corresponds to what we have been taught in Mechilta Pisscha section 6 that our forefathers in Egypt had 4 altars. They were: the lintel, the two upright posts and the threshold. The threshold was considered a “small and round vessel.” The four cups of wine we drink at the Seder celebration symbolise these four altars. The first cup, the one drunk during kiddush symbolised the letter י which is holy. The second cup is drunk as a memento of the haggadah, the story of all the miracles, and symbolises the letter ה  from which all the miracles emanated. The third cup is drunk in connection with grace corresponding to the letter ו which is reminiscent of השמים, heaven, in the verse ואתה תשמע השמים, “and You are listening in heaven” (Kings I 8,32). This is the source of all our food. as G’d said in Exodus 16,4: “here I will make bread rain down for you from heaven.” The fourth cup over which we recite the verse שפוך חמתך אל הגויים, “pour out Your wrath against the nations which refuse to acknowledge you, etc.,” symbolises the last letter ה in the tetragram which is a clear reference to the attribute of Justice.
    It is also possible to simply view blood as something symbolising either life or death in our verse. It spelled death for our enemies, i.e. the Egyptian firstborn, and life, i.e. survival for the Israelites. We know from Leviticus 17,11 that blood is the life-blood of man and beast. Seeing that for the Egyptians it had become a symbol of death, i.e. that they would be deprived of that vital blood, the Israelites had to symbolise that in their houses blood would be a symbol of life rather than death. The Torah therefore said that where the symbol of such blood was visible the angel of death here called המשחית, “the destroyer,” would have no access. We must not understand the משחית here in the usual sense, seeing that G’d personally performed the killing of the Egyptian firstborn as we explained at length. Moreover, the Torah wrote ופסח ה', that G’d personally would “pass over” the houses of the Jewish people displaying the blood of the Passover lamb. At that hour, G’d would not permit the angel of death to enter the פתח, entrance of any Jewish home even to carry out its normal duties unrelated to the firstborn. 
    The matter can be compared to Samuel II 24,16 where we are told that G’d stayed the hand of the angel of death (while He made a pestilence rage) saying to him: “enough! Stay your hand.” The message of our verse is that although G’d personally carried out the slaying of the firstborn the angel of death was in attendance together with its variegated powers. All of its powers are derived from the attribute of Justice. It is similar to a king moving from one place to another taking vengeance of his enemies. The king does not travel unattended but has his entourage which is schooled in this task with him. This entourage was not allowed to do anything on its own on that fateful night even to people who had previously been slated to be their victims on that night. G’d personally denied them their usual function on that night. On that night G’d wanted to carry out His vengeance on all the Egyptian firstborn personally. This is why the angel of death was not allowed to kill anyone else amongst the Egyptians on that night either. 
    On the other hand, no decree had been issued to the angel of death not to kill any Jew, seeing that G’d was not going to do it and it would not have interfered with G’d’s plans. The Jewish firstborn therefore were not in danger from G’d but they were in danger from the angel of death. Had these Jews not displayed the sign of the blood they could have fallen victim to destructive forces activated by the angel of death. It was therefore necessary that they display the blood not because G’d needed to see it but so that the angel of death who had not received a blanket prohibition not to be active on that night would see it and respect it. This is the meaning of the words אל בתיכם, “into your houses.”
    
    12,29. וה' הכה כל בכור בארץ מצרים, “and G’d slew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, etc.” G’d carried out His retribution on the Egyptians according to the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, tit for tat, the punishment being fitted to the crime committed. This is why the 10 plagues were summed up in the abbreviated form of דצ'ך עד'ש באח'ב. The Egyptians’ principal source of faith was the dependability of the river Nile as their water supply, as the lifeline. It irrigated all their fields and they had made the Israelites slave in order to draw the water from the river. G’d therefore turned the river into blood. Seeing that the Egyptians used to awaken their Jewish slaves in the middle of the night and impose most onerous duties on them, the river was told to produce frogs in swarms which would invade the Egyptian houses and cause misery and revulsion for the Egyptians. The frogs even invaded the entrails of the Egyptians causing them distress (Shemot Rabbah 10,6). Seeing that the Egyptians had prevented the Israelites from bathing and washing themselves, the third plague, כנים, lice, was meant to demonstrate to the Egyptians what it means to be denied water to wash yourself and for one’s body to be infested with lice and other insects The Egyptians would demand from their Jewish slaves to go out into the forest and hunt wild animals for them, a dangerous undertaking. They experienced what it means to be surrounded  by wild animals who do not respect civilisation when G’d let loose the fourth plague, the invasion of their cities by wild beasts. The Egyptians had forced the Israelites to look after their livestock. G’d therefore afflicted the livestock with pestilence so that they would realise they had had no right to force the Israelites to perform such duties. The Egyptians had made the Israelites carry hot water for them to their bath houses. In retaliation, G’d made their skin break out in boils to remind them that they had not had the right to impose these kinds of duties on the Israelites. In retaliation for the Egyptians stoning Israelites, G’d brought on the plague of hailstones. In retribution for the Egyptians having forced the Israelites to work their vineyards, G’d made the locust ruin the vineyards. Seeing the Egyptians frequently put innocent Israelites in dark prisons G’d brought on the plague of darkness. Seeing they entertained plans of killing the Israelites who have been described as G’d’s firstborn (4,22), G’d punished them by killing their firstborn instead. [The various accusations leveled against the Egyptians by our author are all supported by Midrashim. Ed.]
    Tanchuma Bo 4 writes: “praised be the Lord, the King of Kings, who brought all these plagues on Pharaoh and his army in a manner similar to human kings when they go to war. Kings first try to deny their opponents their water supply. G’d similarly commenced His judgments by denying Pharaoh and his people the use of their source of water. Many Egyptians started dying from thirst during those seven days. This is the true meaning of (Exodus 7,24) “for they were unable to drink from the waters of the river.”  Kings usually follow up by creating deafening noises to frighten their opponents as described in Nachum 3,2: “galloping steed and bounding chariot”. These sounds frighten those who are exposed to them. G’d did this when He orchestrated the plague of frogs  which were very vociferous whistling, etc. Next a king usually employs archers who shoot their arrows at the enemy. G’d used the lice to have a similar effect on the Egyptians bitten by them.” The Midrash continues to describe how the various plagues corresponded to what occurs in warfare between armies on earth.
    All the plagues G’d brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt He will bring upon the Edomites at the time the final redemption is at hand. We base this on Isaiah 23,5: “When the Egyptians heard it they quailed as when they heard about Tyre.” Every time the word צור is spelled defectively in Scripture such as here (צר) it is a reference to the kingdom of Edom and not to Tyre. There was blood in Egypt; there will be blood when G’d smites Edom (Yoel 3,3). [The author continues quoting the Tanchuma on this subject. Ed.]
    12,33. ותחזק מצרים על העם, “Egypt imposed itself strongly on the people, etc.”  After they had been struck by ten plagues they were forced to dismiss them against their will. Not only that, but the Israelites also took all the Egyptians’ money. This is the meaning of verse 36: “they emptied out Egypt.” This has been confirmed by Midrash Mishley (27,2). When Solomon speaks (Proverbs 27,17) about “as iron sharpens iron, so a man sharpens the wit of his friend,” the words “iron sharpens iron” refer to Moses the righteous and Pharaoh the wicked respectively. They were opposing each other with words. When Moses entered Pharaoh’s palace, Pharaoh asked him: “who has sent you?” Moses answered: “the G’d of the Hebrews has sent me to you.” Pharaoh countered: “what did he tell you to say?” Moses: “let go of My people so that they will serve Me.” Pharaoh: “Is there then a deity in the world whom I did not know? By all that’s holy, all the deities in the world have sent me letters but your God has not sent me any letter at all.” Seeing that he did not find the name of the G’d of the Hebrews recorded anywhere, he continued: “did I not tell you that I do not know of such a god?” He then sent for his wise men and asked them if they had ever heard the name of a god of the Hebrews. His sages answered that they had indeed heard that once there was a such a god descended from primeval wise kings as referred to in Isaiah 19,11: “utter fools are the nobles of Tzoan, the sages of Pharaoh have made absurd predictions.” Thereupon Pharaoh said to his wise men: “you are the fools. You call yourselves wise and me the son of the wise! I will dispose of your so-called wisdom.” Pharaoh based himself on Isaiah 29,14 “and the wisdom of its wise men shall fail.” Moses countered: “you claim that you do not know the god of the Hebrews. In the end you will get to know Him. You said that you will not dismiss the Israelites. In the end you will most certainly dismiss them against your will instead of willingly.” Let me illustrate what happened by means of a parable. The present situation is comparable  to a king who had said to his servant; “go and bring me a certain fish from the market.” The servant went and brought back a smelly fish. Thereupon the king decreed a choice of either of three  penalties on this negligent servant. 1) He suggested that the servant himself eat that fish. 2) If he did not like this he could be whipped with a hundred lashes. 3) As a third alternative he was willing to accept 100 silver pieces as payment of a financial fine. The servant started to eat the fish. Before he had finished eating it (forcing himself) he said that he would rather submit to 100 lashes of the whip. By the time he had absorbed 50 lashes he volunteered to pay the fine instead of being whipped some more. This is precisely what G’d did to the Egyptians. They absorbed the plagues, then they did let the Israelites go, and on top of it all they paid the financial penalty when the Israelites took their money. What caused them to suffer all these degradations?  Their obstinacy in refusing to acknowledge the existence of G’d.  Pharaoh’s obstinacy was countered by Moses’ obstinacy. This is what Solomon had in mind when he spoke of iron sharpening iron.
    
    12,34. טרם יחמץ, “before it could become leavened.”  Something similar will occur in the future. This is what Hoseah 7,4 meant when he said: “who desists from the kneading of the dough to its leavening.”
   משארותם, their kneading bowls.” This is a reference to the leftovers of the previous night’s meal of unleaveneed bread and bitter herbs.(Rashi). Others say it refers to the leftovers of the passover lamb. The Torah had instructed: “do not leave over from it until the morning.”
   על שכמם, “on their shoulder.” They had many animals (which could have served as beasts of burden) as the Torah wrote in verse 38 “and much livestock.” They carried the dough personally to demonstrate their love for the fulfillment of G’d’s commandment.
    
    12,35. כלי כסף וכלי זהב ושמלות, “silver trinkets, gold trinkets and garments.” What is mentioned later is more valuable. Gold is mentioned after silver as it is more valuable. The garments were mentioned last as they were the most valuable items, [if only because they were of immediate use. Ed.] (based on Mechilta). We have a parallel in Genesis 12,1 where G’d tells Avraham to leave 1) your country, 2) your birthplace, 3) your parental home. The last-mentioned one was closest to him, hence the most valuable association.
    
    12,37. כשש מאות אלף רגלי הגברים, “approximately six hundred thousand men on foot.” The wording indicates that there were not quite 600.000 such men seeing the Torah does not give a precise count of how many there were or by how many the number was short of 600.000. It would appear that they were only one man short of that number. The Torah did not want to spell out the number 600.000 when in fact they were short by one. I have found this explanation in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 39. According to the wording there “when G’d realised that they were short by only a single man to make up the required number, He took the place of the missing man thus completing the required quorum. In this manner G’d fulfilled what He said to Yaakov in Genesis 46,4 “I am also going to bring you up out of there.”
    
    12,39. וגם צדה לא עשו להם, “nor had they made provisions for themselves.” The verse is a compliment to the Jewish people who believed in G’d and Moses His servant (14,31). They did not ask how they could be expected to move into the great and terrible desert without even having made provisions for themselves. This was the ultimate expression of faith in G’d. G’d praised them for this act of faith still over 800 years later when Jeremiah publicly recited G’d’s appreciation of that act by the Israelites in Jeremiah 2,2,  when he was told to say in G’d’s name: “I accounted to you as a favour the devotion of your youth, your love as a bride- how you followed Me into the wilderness, into a land not sown.”
    
    12,40. ומושב בני ישראל אשר ישבו במצרים, “and the habitation of the Children of Israel during which they dwelled in Egypt, etc.” We find three separate sets of numbers for the ending of the exile and subsequent departure from Egypt. They are either 400 years, 430 years,  or 210 years. The 400 years are calculated from the time Avraham’s descendants became strangers and experienced various problems either within the land of Canaan or outside of it. This was the fulfillment of the prophecy in Genesis 15,13: “they will serve them or even oppress them for 400 years.” These 400 years include both periods of being strangers and periods of being slaves. The 430 years are calculated since the birth of Yitzchack. [this is hard to understand though it appears in various manuscripts. Ed.] The 210 years refer to the length of the Jews’ stay in Egypt proper. 
    You will note that the Bible also gives three dates for the ending of the exile in the future (Daniel). The dates mentioned there are 1150 (years) 1290 (years) 1335 (years). We read in Daniel 8,13-14: “Then I heard a holy being speaking, and another holy being said to whoever it was who was speaking, ‘how long will what was seen in the vision last- the regular offerings be forsaken because of transgression, the sanctuary be surrendered and the heavenly host be trampled?’ He answered me: ‘for twenty-three hundred evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary shall be cleansed.’” The days and nights were calculated separately so that the number corresponds to the number 1150 mentioned earlier. “Days and nights” are years. We also have a verse (Daniel 12,11) “from the time the regular offering is abolished, and an appalling abomination is set up- it will be a thousand and two hundred and ninety days.” Immediately afterwards it is written: “happy the man who waits and reaches one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days.” The reason G’d mentioned three different “ends” of the exile in Egypt all of which corresponded to he truth was to make it easier for us to bear the long exile we find ourselves in nowadays. We must believe that the three separate dates given in the Book of Daniel are also all true, though we have not yet figured out precisely how to understand each number. We may be certain of one thing. If we deserve it the redemption will occur on the earliest of the three dates mentioned, if not on the middle one or the last one. It is impossible for the redemption to occur later than the last date described in Daniel. Thus wrote Rabbeinu Chananel.
    
    12,48. וכל ערל לא יאכל בו, “and no uncircumcised male must eat of it” (the Passover lamb). This verse proves that Moses circumcised all the Israelites before they left Egypt. Concerning this circumcision our sages (Mechilta 8) state that G’d gave the Jewish people two commandments by the merit of which they were redeemed. They were the blood of circumcision and the blood of the Passover. Ezekiel immortalised this when he wrote: ואעבור עליך ואראך מתבוססת בדמיך ואמר לך בדמיך חיי, ואומר לך בדמיך חיי, “then I saw you wallowing in your blood; I said to you: “live because of your blood!” I said to you: “live through your blood!” (Ezekiel 16,6) This is why the Torah writes immediately after the prohibition of uncircumcised males participating in the eating of the Passover that “all the Israelites did as Hashem had commanded Moses and Aaron, so they did” (verse 50). Earlier,  in verse 28  when the Torah had also stated that the Israelites did what they had been commanded by Moses and Aaron, the word “all” could not be written as many of them at the time were ritually unclean and could not have eaten the Passover on that account. We have further evidence that the Israelites who participated in the Exodus had all been circumcised in Joshua 5,5 “for all the Israelites who left Egypt had been circumcised.”
    
    13,1. וידבר ה' אל משה לאמור, “G’d spoke to Moses for him to communicate.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word לאמור means that Moses was to relay the instructions received from G’d to the people. Alternatively, the word could mean that in addition to what the Torah has  spelled out clearly for all to read and understand there are hidden meanings to be deciphered by those who apply themselves to Torah-study in depth. The נגלה, the revealed part, are the details of the commandment. The נסתר, the mystical, hidden aspect of this portion, is that which not everybody can grasp even if he tries. There have always been aspects of Torah not accessible to the average person. This is what David said (Psalms 62,12) “G’d has said one thing; yet I have heard two.” A single communication may contain more than one message. Solomon echoed the same sentiment when he said: “a word spoken properly is like golden apples set in silver” (Proverbs 25,11). In this verse Solomon compared the matters which are revealed to silver, whereas matters concealed he likened to gold, i.e. they had first been overlaid, made invisible by silver.
    The meaning of our verse as well as most verses which commence in a similar form is: G’d told Moses the commandment and implied that he should tell the Israelites about it. In addition, לאמור, he told Moses to reveal to the people the more profound aspects of the commandment, aspects which do not meet the eye of the reader.
    Nachmanides writes in his commentary on Exodus 6,10 (where the verse commences in the same manner as here) “the word אמירה refers to a complete utterance, meaning that an אמירה נראית, ‘a superficial utterance’” is not sufficient. [Nachmanides tries to justify why sometimes G’d added “say to the Children of Israel,” whereas other times He contents Himself with the word לאמור alone. Ed] Seeing that the quality of G’d’s communications to Moses was so superior and clearer than His communications to lesser prophets, G’d was able to say to Moses: “make the matter clear to your listeners the Jewish people.” Other prophets (Numbers 12,8) with whom G’d Himself spoke in riddles were not able to clarify matters to the people in the degree Moses was able to clarify it for them.
    
    A kabbalistic approach: The words וידבר ה' אל משה reflect the inner force,  the concealed force, the word לאמור is a reference to the fact that this force had become manifest by means of the Shechinah. This is the meaning of the words in Exodus 24,12 אשר כתבתי להורותם, “which I wrote to teach them.” The word להורתם is written defective, without the letter ו which should be part of the plural ending, thus making it similar to Song of Songs 3,4 ואל חדר הורתי, “into the bedroom of my parents.” This is merely a euphemism for the acquisition of information reserved for the intimates of G’d. 
    You are aware already that the expression דבור is a deeper form of communication than אמירה. Whereas  אמירה describes the oral Torah, דבור describes the written Torah [with its multifaceted ways of interpretations. Ed.] The experts of Kabbalah were thoroughly familiar with this. This is what prompted Eycha Rabbah to translate the words בצע אמרתו In Lamentations 2,17 as בזע פרפורין שלו, “He tore His purple curtain (allowed the Temple curtain to be destroyed).” [The standard translation of the words is: “He carried out His decree.” Ed.] We have to ask ourselves what made the author of this Midrash translate these words in this fashion? The word אמרא, as cloak, i.e. or better “a fringed garment,” is well known. In this instance the word פרפורין may be understood as a euphemism for the edge of such a cloak. Our sages understood the verse in Lamentations as explaining the reason why the Temple was destroyed. First the Jews had despised the תורת ה' צבאות  (Isaiah 5,24). This was a reference to the written Torah. Then  (same verse)  ואת קדוש ישראל נאצו, “and the Holy One of Israel they spurned.” This is a reference to the oral Torah.
    To get back to our verse here. The word ויאמר or לאמור is derived from אמרא, the edge of a cloak a person wears on his left side. We have a verse in Samuel I 28,14 illustrating this: “he is wrapped in a cloak.” We also have a verse symbolically depicting G’d Himself as wrapped in such a cloak, i.e. עוטה אור כשלמה, “He wraps light around Himself as a man would wrap a cloak around himself” (Psalms 104,2). The cloak referred to in that verse is the attribute of Justice. On the other hand, the word דבור, and therefore וידבר, when employed by the Torah is derived from the word דבורה, the bee, which though providing honey, i.e. sweetness, also harbours a deadly sting. The bee therefore symbolises an attribute of G’d which combines both the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. The oral Torah is emanated from that attribute, seeing it is a derivative of the written Torah and the written Torah itself is based on the combination of the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy.
    
    13,2. קדש לי כל בכור פטר כל רחם, “sanctify for Me every firstborn, the first issue of every womb.” The wording we would have expected here is קדש לי כל בכור בבני ישראל באדם ובבהמה, “sanctify for Me every Jewish firstborn amongst humans and domestic beast,” seeing this would be the logical way of thanking G’d for sparing the firstborn Jews and their livestock. After all, the Egyptian firstborn killed included firstborn of father and mother. Why then does the Torah restrict this legislation to the first issue of a womb, i.e. the firstborn of the mother? In fact, in Egypt not only biological firstborns were smitten but, in the absence of an actual firstborn, the oldest in the house. Why else would there not have been a single house without a dead body on that night?
    The reason the Torah did not command sanctification of the firstborn of the father is simply that there always exists some slight degree of doubt about the paternity of a child whereas no such doubt exists concerning its maternity. The same rule applies to the firstborn of the livestock as we read in verse 12: “you shall set apart every first issue of the womb to G’d and of every first issue that is dropped by the livestock that belong to you, the males to Hashem.” As a result of this legislation we find that Isaiah 49,15 draws a comparison between G’d’s love for Israel to a father’s love for his son when he said: “can a woman forget her baby or disown the child in her womb?” The prophet suggests that it is impossible for a mother not to have pity on her child. He did not say: “can a father forget his son?” 
    My teacher Rabbi Shlomoh (Rashba) of blessed memory commented that this verse in Isaiah wants to teach us two things. 1) Contrary to the doubt about paternity we mentioned earlier, there is no doubt about G’d considering Himself the father of the Jewish people [Hoseah 2,1 describing the Jewish people as the children of the living G’d. Ed.] seeing the prophet continues “even if the mother might forget her child G’d would never forget Israel.” This thought is confirmed by Eytan in Psalms 89, 27-28 “You are my Father, my G’d, the Rock of my deliverance;” (G’d responds) “I too will appoint him first-born.” 2) just as it is impossible for a mother to exchange her son for another so it is impossible for G’d to exchange the Jewish nation for another. The prophet (G’d) promised: “also these will not be forgotten.” Whereas G’d may “forget” the sin of the golden calf which the Israelites had addressed as “these are your gods O Israel” (Exodus 32,4), G’d will nonetheless not forget the Jewish people as His own as He would not forget their attitude at Mount Sinai when He had introduced Himself to the Jewish people with the words: “I am the Lord your G’d” (20,2). 
    Our sages in the Midrash  (Shemot Rabbah 18,3) confirmed this sentiment when they stated that the plague of the killing of the firstborn in Egypt included the females from the palace of Pharaoh with the exception of Pharaoh’s firstborn daughter Batya, the one who had saved Moses at the time. Moses himself had acted as her counsel of defense at the heavenly court. This is one of the meanings of: “she saw him that he was good” (Exodus 2,2). Solomon (Proverbs 31,18) said concerning this Batya that what made her “good” was ”she sees her business thrive, her light never goes out at night.” The “light” of which Solomon spoke was Batya’s soul, and the “night” was the night during which G’d smote the firstborn.
    
    13,3. כי בחוזק יד הוציא ה' אתכם מזה ולא יאכל חמץ, “for with a strong hand G’d removed you from this (place) and therefore chametz may not be eaten.”  What does the eating of חמץ have to do with the “strong hand” which G’d employed at the time of the Exodus? The verse simply wants to tell us that חמץ is a symbol of the attribute of Justice. Seeing that it was necessary for Israel to invoke G’d’s attribute of Justice against the Egyptians in order for themt to be redeemed, G’d forbade them the consumption of חמץ at the time when we commemorate the Exodus so that we would steer clear of putting our faith in the attribute of Justice as an attribute which acts on its own. Were we to do this we would be guilty of heresy. It would have been easy to conclude that G’d invoked only the attribute of Justice as both He and His heavenly tribunal co-operated in the downfall of the Egyptians. Compare Rashi (based on ancient manuscript of Tanchuma Bo 17). This is also why when G’d created the world the Torah first writes: “at the beginning G’d created heaven and earth” (Genesis 1,1), whereas later (Genesis 2,4) the Torah speaks of: “on the day the Lord G’d made earth and heaven.” [The second formulation includes G’d’s heavenly tribunal. Ed.] This is also the deeper meaning of Isaiah 48,13: “also My hand founded earth, and My right hand spread out the skies.” G’d’s “hand” and G’d’s “right hand” are mentioned separately. Also the word אף is an indication that some other force cooperated with G’d at a certain stage after the beginning. It indicates that not only the “hand” was involved in the creation. It was therefore necessary at this juncture for the Torah to tell us that also ה' was involved in the Exodus, not only the יד, i.e. the attribute of Justice. To remind us of this for all future time, the consumption of חמץ is forbidden on these seven days on which we commemorate the Exodus and the fact that it involved the downfall of our oppressors. This is the mystical dimension of the prohibition of eating חמץ. This explains why the Torah reserves the karet penalty for anyone who deliberately violates this commandment. Eating חמץ on Passover is equivalent to a serious act of heresy, denial of Jewish history; as such the person who does so has read himself out of his people, so to speak. This is why G’d removes him from the Jewish people at death, (12,15) i.e. in compliance with the sinner’s wishes 
   זכור את היום הזה, “to remember this day.” Remembering the day we came out of Egypt is a positive commandment which is applicable daily all year round (hence the infinitive). Our sages  (Berachot 12) say that the words “in order that you may remember the day you left Egypt כל ימי חייך, as long as you live,” are a reference to the nights, hence the word כל,”the entire.” This is why we recite the portion dealing with ציצית which is a commandment not applicable at night, in our nightly recital of the קריאת שמע. The last verse in that paragraph speaks of the Exodus and the need to remember it. The words כל ימי are therefore best translated as “the whole days, etc.” instead of as “all the days, etc.” Our sages elaborate (folio 21) further that after the קריאת שמע at night we are to recite the paragraph commencing with the words אמת ואמונה, “true and trustworthy,” whereas in the morning the parallel paragraph commences with the words אמת ויציב, “true and firm.” In order to remember the Exodus by day and by night we must relate to these two aspects of it., i.e. to the attribute of Justice as well as to the attribute of Mercy, both of whom were invoked to orchestrate the Exodus/redemption. The words חוזק יד  refer to the attribute of Justice, whereas the words הוציא ה' refer to the attribute of Mercy. When Moses prayed after the sin of the golden calf (Exodus 32,11), he referred to both of these attributes when he said  אשר הוצאת מארץ מצרים בכח גדול וביד החזקה,“whom You took out of the land of Egypt with great force and a strong hand.” The point Moses made was that G’d had not only invoked “the strong hand”, i.e. Justice,” but also ”great force,” i.e. the attribute of Mercy.
    
    13,4. בחודש האביב, “in the month of spring.” The Torah deetrmined here that the festival of Passover must always occur in the spring, i.e. the time of the barley harvest [in those parts of the world. Ed.]; the stalk of the barley is known as אביב, derived from the word אב, “father.” It is so called as it “begets” the kernels of grain we calll wheat. It is well known that all the festivals mentioned in the Torah are related to certain seasons. Shavuot, Pentecost, is to occur during the season when wheat is harvested as the Torah writes: “and the festival of cutting when you reap the first of your labours” (Exodus 23,16). Tabernacles is to occur as a harvest festival, “the time of ingathering,” i.e. at the end of the summer. This is also the reason the sages decreed that when concluding the benediction dealing with the respective pligrimage festivals we sign with the words: “Who sanctifies Israel and the seasons.” We might have expected the formula to be “Who sanctifies Israel and the festivals,” paraphrasing the wording in the Torah where these festivals are all called מועדי ה' “the festivals of the Lord.” The reason the sages changed the formula was to remind us that he dates of these festivals are all dependent on certain seasons. Another reason we call the month of Nissan “spring” is because spring is the “father” of the 12 months in the calendar. It is also dominated by the zodiac sign of the ram, the “father” of all the twelve zodiac signs.
    According to Mechilta Pisscha 16  the month of spring is the one in which מוציא אסירים בכושרות, “G’d releases prisoners when they are in chains.” (Psalms 68,7) The word בכושרות may be understood as “in a suitable (כשר) month.” Rabbi Yochanan understands the word as a combination of בכי ושירות, “weeping and  songs of jubilation.” On the one hand, there was not a single Egyptian house in which there was not at least one dead, causing weeping, whereas on the other hand, the Israelites broke out in joyful song as described in Psalms 118,15 קול רנה וישועה באהלי צדיקים, “the tents of the victorious resound with the joyous shouts of deliverance.”
    
    13,5. והיה כי יביאך ה', “It will be when the Lord brings you, etc.”  This is already the commencement of the next paragraph which starts in verse 11. The first time the word יביאך is spelled plene, with the letter י in the middle; the second time, (verse 11) that letter י is missing. The first arrival in the land of Israel took place under the leadership of Joshua who fought ten wars (battles) before taking full possession. They were: Jericho, Ai, Giveon, Makkedah, Libnah, Lachish, Eglonah, Chevronah, Dvirah, Mey Marom. (they appear in Joshua 6,20; 8,24; 10,8; 10,28; 10,29; 10,31; 10,34; 10,38; 11,1) The letter י then is an allusion to these “ten=י wars.”
   אשר נשבע לאבותיך, “which He had promised to your forefathers on oath.” The oath had been given to the patriarchs as the prophet  said in Micah 7,20: “which You have sworn to our forefathers in days of yore.” The second time reference is made  to the Holy Land, the word יבאך is spelled defectively, with the letter י in the centre missing. This is an allusion to Israel being gathered in from exile when no wars of conquest will be needed for them to resettle in the land. The repeated mention of G’d’s oath in that verse is also a reminder that the wonderful predictions  and words of comfort by our prophets consoling us about our misfortunes and promising a better future will all be fulfilled. In verse eleven we find the additional words ונתנה לך, “and He will give it to you.” The message is that at that time the land will become a permanent gift to us never again to be taken away from us. The Torah speaks of a period which we have never experienced up until this date.
   אל ארץ הכנעני, “to the land of the Canaanite, etc.” The land of Israel is here described as “the land of the Canaanite, seeing that Canaan was a cursed slave and it is legally impossible for such a slave to have title to any land. A slave can never take over property that belongs or belonged to his master. Seeing that the land of Israel by rights was given to the Jewish people, in the absence of the Jewish people G’d had to give it (temporarily) to such a cursed slave nation in order to ensure they could not establish legal title to that land while Israel was not around. It was similar to a king who has a minor son and who temporarily hands over his country to a regent pending his son becoming of age.
    
    13,7. מצות יאכל את שבעת היםים,“unleavened bread shall be eaten during the duration of these seven days.” The expression את שבעת הימים is the same as if the Torah had written בשבעת הימים “on these seven days.” We find something similar in Chronicles II 30,22  ויאכלו את זבחי המועד שבעת ימים, “they ate of the sacrifices of the festival during the seven days.” Our sages there mention that the word את is meant to include the last eight hours of the 14th of the month, or if they were outside the boundaries of Eretz Yisrael that they observed an eight’s day of Passover. [Rabbi Chavell, basing himself on Torat Chayim, claims that the fact that apparently matzah was permitted already two hours before noon on the fourteenth of Nissan is proof that chametz was already forbidden. Ed.]
    
    13,8. בעבור זה עשה ה' לי, “on account of ‘this’ G’d has done for me.” The plain meaning of the verse is that “seeing that G’d has done all this for me,  I will serve Him, etc.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The verse tells us that the fact that I was able to leave Egypt was all for the sake of His glory and His Name. It is somewhat similar to what Moses exclaimed in the song after crossing the Sea of Reeds: זה קלי ואנוהו, a complimentary reference to the שכינה including G’d’s Highest Presence. The meaning is that the שכינה in Israel is not merely something needed for the ordinary Israelite, but it is a phenomenon necessary even in celestial circles. This is what Joshua had in mind when he said (Joshua 7,9, after the Israelites’ humiliating defeat at Ai) “and what are You going to do בעבור שמך הגדול in order to bolster Your great name?” When the Torah immediately carries on (verse 9) by writing “this shall be a sign on your hand and a remembrance between your eyes,” the idea is that the concept the Torah has revealed to us here must be commemorated by us in a tangible form, i.e. by means of the phylacteries. The word  והיה is an instruction to ensure that this will be realised. We have something similar in Genesis 41,47 ותעש הארץ which Onkelos translates as וכנשו “they are to gather in.” In our situation the Torah means: “He has gathered me up for the sake of His  attributes.”
    
    13,9. הוציאך ה' ממצרים, “G’d has taken you out of Egypt.”  In verse 14 the Torah writes: “G’d has taken us out of Egypt. This is to teach us that the redemption of the fathers was the redemption of the sons, the next and subsequent generations. This is precisely what we say annually in the Haggadah shel Pessach “He, G’d, did not only redeem our ancestors but He redeemed us, this very generation, also at the same time together with them.” We cite the verse Deut 6,23 in support of this where Moses, quoting the fathers of later generations, said: “and He took us out of there in order to bring us, to give us the land which He had sworn to our forefathers.”
    
    13,10. ושמרת את החוקה הזאת למועדה מימים ימימה, “You shall observe this decree at its designated time from year to year.” The words מימים ימימה mean “annually.” We find the expression מימים ימימה used in the sense of “years” also in Samuel I 1,3 where it describes Elkanah’s annual pilgrimage to the Temple at Shiloh. The same expression is also found in Judges 21,19 where it describes an annual pilgrimage to Shiloh being used to provide the surviving members of the tribe of Binyamin with Jewish girls for marriage. A third time the same expression is used is in connection with the annual pilgrimage to (the grave of?) Yiphtach’s daughter to commemorate what had happened to her. (Judges 11,40). Rabbeinu Chananel writes that although the Torah has warned many times about observance of the Passover, this verse is not one of these occasions and it comes to tell us only that commencing with that year the date and season of the Passover festival are to be constant. This is again proof that the date was calculated and that sighting the new moon was not the crucial issue in determining the time of the festival.
    A Midrashic approach (Pessikta Zutrata) based on the word למועדה: ”there are designated periods when a person is to wear phylacteries and there are designated periods when he is not to wear such phylacteries.” The Sabbaths and festivals are exempt from the requirement of phylacteries seeing that the days themselves are an אות, “sign, reminder” of the historical facts the phylacteries are to remind us of. The repetition מימים ימימה refers to the day as opposed to the night. This teaches that we are not to wear phylacteries at night. An alternative meaning: the words מימים ימימה teach that we are to examine the phylacteries once a year (every twelve months) to ensure that they are in good condition. This is based on the use of the word ימים in Leviticus 25,29 ימים תהיה גאולתו, “it (the house) may be redeemed until the end of twelve months.” Just as the word ימים represents a deadline in that instance it also signifies a deadline in our verse.
    
    13,12. והעברת כל פטר רחם לה', “you will transfer every firstborn of the womb to Hashem.” The Torah employs the term העברה in this instance to indicate that the status of being something secular has been removed from such firstborn seeing it had already been designated as sacred while inside the רחם אמו, the womb of its mother.
    
    13,13. וכל פטר חמור, “and every firstborn donkey, etc.” This legislation is restricted to the donkey, the only impure domestic animal whose firstborn male issue is not of secular status (as opposed to horses and camels, also widely considered as domestic beasts). Pessikta Zutrata on our verse explains that the reason is that the Egyptians have been compared to donkeys by the prophet Ezekiel (23,20) who wrote “their flesh (male organ) is the flesh of donkeys.” An additional reason is the tradition that even the poorest of the Israelites left Egypt with ninety donkeys’ loads of silver and gold. To commemorate the immense wealth the Israelites took out of Egypt the Torah legislated that the beasts which carried that wealth be treated as in a class by themselves. The firstborn males of such donkeys needed to be redeemed before they could be used for profane purposes. Equating donkeys with Egyptians reminds one of the plague of the dying of the firstborn Egyptians.
    
    13,16. והיה לאות על ידכה, “it shall be a sign on your hand.” According to the plain meaning of the text the letter ה which the Torah appended here at the end of the word ידכה is an allusion to the five “houses,” capsules, in which the respective scriptural verses in the phylacteries are “housed.” [the phylacteries worn on the head have four such housings, the ones worn on the arm has one]. The phylacteries worn on the arm are called אות, sign,  as the Torah wrote “it shall be a sign for you on your hand” (verse 9), whereas the phylacteries worn on the head are called זכרון, “remembrance,” as we know from the same verse.
    You should appreciate that something which is described as אות is meant to be remembered on an ongoing basis, hence the description of זכרון as well as the description אות for describing the phylacteries and their purpose. This is why our sages (Menachot 36) ruled that one is to put on the phylacteries of the hand before the phylacteries of the head so that the אות will become a זכרון. We follow the sequence in which these two phylacteries are mentioned in the Torah.
   ולטוטפת בין עיניך, “and as ornaments between your eyes.” When removing the phylacteries they are removed in the reverse order of how they were put on. If one were to first take off the phylacteries of his arm just as he had put them on first, how could the phylacteries on the head still serve as זכרון seeing we have explained that there could not be a זכרון unless there was an אות which the זכרון would commemorate? This is why the אות aspect of the phylacteries must be both first and last.
    Our sages in Menachot 36 explained it as follows: “when removing the phylacteries the one on the head must be removed first as the Torah speaks of והיו לטוטפת בין עיניך, they shall be as ornaments between your eyes. As long as they are between your eyes, i.e. plural, two, they are ornaments. As long as the phylacteries of the head are between your eyes the phylacteries are an ornament. Leaving them all by themselves deprives them of being fit to be described as “ornaments.”
    A Midrashic approach (based on Menachot 37): the letter ה at the end of the word ידכה means that the phylacteries are to worn on the “weaker” hand [a play on words יד כהה, “the weak hand”], the left arm. Generally speaking a man’s left arm is not as strong as his right arm.
    A kabbalistic approach:  The additional letter ה at the end of the word ידכה was “borrowed” from the tetragram, i.e. from the last letter ה in the name י-ה-ו-ה. It symbolises the attribute of Justice as practiced in the terrestrial world. It is the type of wisdom given to Solomon [who asked to be a competent judge for the people of Israel] in the dream when G’d allowed him to make a wish (Kings I 3,9). He spoke of his wish to possess a לב שומע, “a heart which is able to listen.” This is the reason that the phylacteries of the arm are to be worn on the left arm, the arm closest to the heart. The attribute which Solomon wished for is also known as כלה. The text of the phylacteries of the hand is written on a single roll of parchment and has a single housing, as opposed to the four “housings” of the phylacteries on the head. There is a mystical dimension to this in Song of Songs 4,9 where the same Solomon describes this attribute as אחתי כלה, usually translated as “my own, my bride.” The closeness to the point of a shared identity between Israel (Solomon) and the attribute of wisdom is alluded to by the word כלה as כלולה ב'לב, “included in the 32 paths of בינה, the ways to acquire wisdom.” [the oldest kabbalistic text, the ספר היצירה, is based on this concept. Ed.] The attribute כלה granted to Solomon enables the student to make a useful combination of these 32 paths of understanding, insight.
    In order to teach that this letter ה at the end of the word ידכה has symbolic significance, the paragraph והיה כי יביאך contains five letters ה each of which is equipped with a תג, [a crown on top of a letter, usually reserved for the letters  ש ע ט נ ז ג ץ You will not find these תגים on the corresponding letters in the Torah scroll. They are written only in the parchment which is part of the phylacteries of the hand. Ed.]  The respective letters with these “crowns” are: the ה in ונתנה לך; the two letters ה in הקשה, the ה in ויהרוג, and the ה in ידכה. All of the words in question which have this ”decorated” letter ה are references to G’d’s attribute of Justice.
    Having put on the phylacteries on the arm, one proceeds to put on the phylacteries of the head. The phylactery of the head is divided into four housings closely stuck together and containing the four paragraphs of the Torah in which the subject of phylacteries is mentioned in separate housings, each on its own parchment. They are in the sequence: 1) קדש לי כל בכור, 2) והיה כי יביאך, 3) שמע, 4) והיה אם שמוע. The paragraph קדש לי כל בכור corresponds to the emanation (attribute) חכמה, which is also known as ראשית, i.e. ראשית חכמה יראת ה'  (Psalms 111). The word קדש, “sanctify” is a clear allusion to this. We have other verses containing the word קדש which are always understood as a reference to his attribute of חכמה. ---
    The second paragraph והיה כי יביאך, which deals with the Exodus is understood to refer to the attribute בינה, The attributes חכמה,בינה,גדולה,גבורה were prominently involved in the Exodus and are therefore represented in the phylacteries. This is reflected also in the four-armed letter ש [as opposed to the usual three-armed ש. Ed.] which is embossed on the housing of the phylactery of the head. The emanation (attribute) תפארת is represented by the phylacteries themselves rather than by the Torah sections written inside them. All this is part of the mystical dimension of what the Talmud says in Berachot 6 that “G’d Himself puts on phylacteries.” The emanations (attributes) נצח והוד are represented by the respective “heads” of the letter שין which is embossed on the phylactery of the head. The three “extremities” רישי'ן i.e. ראשין (upper ends of the letter ש), symbolise the three emanations נצח הוד יסוד. (in the usual three-armed ש).  The additional arm and its head is considered the קשר, the “connection“ to the lowest emanation מלכות which links the emanations (attributes) to the terrestrial world the one known as אחרונה, “the last one, the hindmost one. This is also the mystical dimension of G’d saying to Moses (Exodus 33,23) וראית את אחורי “you will only see the hindmost aspect of Me.” What G’d did show Moses was the קשר של תפילין, the “knot, tie” of the phylacteries, i.e. the point at which G’d the transcendent becomes immanent, i.e. manifest, in the terrestrial part of His universe. (Berachot 7).
    Seeing that the straps of the phylacteries  surround the head of the wearer this is perceived as an allusion to the continuous link between the manifest part of G’d’s largesse all the way to that point of the קשר. In view of the fact that the straps at the same time extend down to the level of one’s navel, it is an allusion to the fact that at the other end these emanations extend till the קו האמצעי, emanation תפארת, the central emanation (dividing line between what is perceived on the left and what is perceived on the right of the diagram of these 10 emanations) Seeing that these straps have to be black, a decree dating back to Moses for which we have not been told a reason, this is proof of the profound mystical meaning concealed within the whole commandment of the phylacteries and its details. The reason the second phylactery has to be placed on the head is that this is the seat of the power of the soul. Whatever has been written inside the phylactery on the head has also been written inside the phylactery of the hand, except that it has been written on a single piece of parchment and in an undivided housing. This is to teach that the lowest emanation מלכות, also known as אחרונה, is contained within it, and that it on the other hand contains all the higher attributes (emanations). The קשר, i.e. the shape of the knot in the strap symbolises the צדיק; the reason it is worn on the left arm is that in that way it is opposite the right side of G’d whom we are to face at all times.
    You must appreciate that the commandment of phylacteries are really two separate commandments though they (both) are part of the same syndrome. The proof that they are two commandments lies in the fact that they are not interdependent as are for instance the ארבעה מינים, the four plants on Tabernacles. When the Etrog is missing for instance, one cannot recite a benediction over the remaining 3 plants and vice versa. In the case of the phylacteries, however, absence of either the phylactery of the head or the phylactery of the arm does not prevent one from putting on the other  (Menachot 38) and reciting a benediction over performance of the commandment. Moreover, seeing that both phylacteries represent the same idea, one must not engage in conversation between putting on the one and the other. This is what is meant in Sotah 44 that if one engages in conversation between putting on one phylactery and the other,  this rates as the kind of sin on account of which a soldier is sent home rather than participating in an expansionist war [to protect him from the angel of death who is always around in places of danger waiting to pounce on the guilty. Ed.]
    Seeing that both phylacteries represent the same idea it would have been logical to assume that halachah would treat them as interdependent on one another just as they do the Lulav and the Etrog. The fact that nonetheless they are treated differently halachically has been explained in terms of the Talmud Berachot saying that G’d Himself puts on phylacteries. The source of this statement is explained in the Sefer Habahir of Rabbi Nechunyah ben HaKanah in the form of a parable. The matter is compared to a king who owns a precious ornament which he sometimes wears on his head and on other occasions he wears it on his arm. This is the reason that the two phylacteries cannot be treated as if they were interdependent since we try to emulate G’d and how He treats His phylacteries. You may also conclude from the above that putting on the phylactery on the left arm is an allusion to the attribute of Justice which receives its input from the left.
    In this respect there is a parallel with the Etrog which is also held in the left hand. On the other hand, I have seen an opinion expressed by a prominent Kabbalist according to which the holding of the Etrog in the left hand and the putting on of the phylactery on the left arm cannot be compared. He claims that the fact that the Etrog is held in the left hand is because the left hand is appropriate for this seeing that the right hand holds the other three plants which have been tied together. The reason the phylactery of the hand is worn on the left arm, however, is in order for it to be opposite the right side of G’d. It has been said of G’d מימינו אש דת למו, “with His right hand He presented the fiery Torah to them.” (Deut. 33,2). The scholar in question quotes as further support for his view Psalms 45,10: ”the consort stands on your right hand decked in gold of Ophir.” 
    You will note that the phylactery of the head contains G’d’s name 21 times so that between the two phylacteries G’d’s name appears 42 times corresponding to the 42-lettered name of G’d. Some people, examining the subject of the phylacteries still further, believe that just as the Shechinah is portrayed as resting on the four animals based on two cherubs depicted in Ezekiel’s visions in Ezekiel chapter 1 and chapter 10, so the phylacteries are a symbol of the Shechinah resting on the Israelites who put on the phylacteries which contain four sections of the Torah on its two major organs (heart and brain). The brain and the heart are perceived as flanking such a person from two opposite sides, as we read in Exodus 25,19 (in connection with the lid of the Holy Ark) כרוב אחד מקצה מזה וכרוב אחד מקצה מזה, “one cherub at one extreme and one cherub at the end from the other extreme.” Our sages (Menachot 43) say that whoever has phylacteries on his head, on his arm and fringes, ציצית, on his garment can be certain that he will not commit a sin (major one) as we have been assured in Kohelet 4,12 that “the threefold thread will not easily be severed.” Rabbi Shimon ben Levi in Menachot 44 states that anyone who regularly wears phylacteries will live long as we have a verse (Isaiah 38,16). Those who have the name א-ד-נ-י on them (on their bodies) and whose insides are filled with that spirit ‘You will add more life to me.’”
    
    
   ויהי  בשלח  פרעה
    
    
   מצרף לכסף וכור לזהב ובוחן לבות ה', “the crucible is for silver, the furnace for gold, but G’d examines the hearts.” (Proverbs 17,3) In this verse Solomon warns man to refine his thoughts and to improve his character traits. Seeing that the heart is the most important one of our organs and all other organs depend on it and it is situated at the centre of the body, it governs the other parts of the body, guides them and inspires them with its energy. All other organs of the body are subservient to the heart. Symbolically speaking, the heart is comparable to the king of a country who resides in its centre, supervises all the more peripheral parts of the country, and who issues decrees telling his subjects how to conduct themselves.
     Seeing that all other organs depend on the heart for their continued existence, G’d, who is the source of life to all His creatures is also referred to as “heart.” This is the meaning of Psalms 73,26: “the Rock of my heart and the Lord is forever my portion.” Just as the human heart exercises its power and influence on other organs of the body so G’d exerts influence on all parts of His universe to the farthest corners of it. This is confirmed in Exodus 8,18: “for I the Lord am active in the midst of the earth.”
    Similarly, the most important element in relating to Torah and how one observes it is the heart. The entire written Torah is bracketed between the letters of the word לב, heart, i.e. between the letter  in ב-ראשית at the beginning and the letter ל in ישרא-ל at the end. This symbolises that the Torah itself was taken from the attribute (emanation) חכמה which has לב, 32 paths, (as we pointed out earlier in our discussion of the symbolisms of the phylacteries). Seeing that all man’s actions are so inextricably intertwined with the heart, Solomon warns that the character traits of the heart are of the utmost importance and he warns that all the thoughts man considers as private, i.e. secrets of his heart, are in fact known to G’d as if they were public, seeing that He examines every heart to determine whose heart is good and whose is not. This then is the meaning of the verse we quoted at the beginning of our commentary. Just as the silversmith and the goldsmith must examine the purity of the silver and gold he works with and wants to fashion into jewelry by using the tools used by the jeweler to refine silver and gold respectively, so G’d employs His own tools to examine the purity of man’s hearts. In language familiar to the silversmith and goldsmith these tools are known as crucible and furnace respectively. We learn from this verse that when the heart is good it is comparable to pure silver or pure gold. Eventually, such a good heart will result in the owner performing good deeds. Conversely, if the heart is defective, the owner will commit sins sooner or later just as impure silver will not stand up for long when put to the use for which it had been intended.
    The expression בוחן לבות, “He examines hearts,” also includes a reference by Solomon to the day of judgment on which G’d decides who is to participate in the resurrection. Solomon speaks of people who fall into the category of בינונים, being neither wicked nor righteous; their merits and debits are in balance and G’d needs to find if such people, or their souls had been guilty of severe sins which would preclude them from participating in a future life on earth. If, during their life on earth, these people had not committed heretical sins involving their bodies such as deliberately failing to put on phylacteries, they will be inscribed as צדיקים גמורים, perfectly righteous people whose participation in eternal life is assured, seeing we accept the view of the school of Hillel (Rosh Hashanah 17). That school interpreted the words ורב חסד in Exodus 34,6 to mean that when engaged in judging, G’d has a tendency, an inclination, to find according to the principles of the attribute of Mercy. If however, amongst the sins of such a בינוני there are heretical sins committed with his body, it is impossible for such a soul to escape at least a temporary abode in gehinom, in purgatory, even according to the lenient view taken by the school of Hillel. The crucibles and furnaces mentioned by Solomon are the period in gehinom during which such souls are being cleansed of the stains on their souls. The word כור is a reference to the fires of Hades, the instrument which removes all dross. Proof that Solomon speaks of the בינונים, the people whose sins and merits were in balance, is the expression בוחן, “examines.” The righteous and the wicked do not need such an examination; G’d knows immediately which category they belong to. The former qualified for immediate eternal life whereas the latter have already forfeited it.
    Another concept which is included in Solomon’s description of בוחן לבות, is that G’d makes such hearts submit to tests. Not only does He not examine them for His own benefit, but He subjects them to tests to demonstrate to their peers that these people deserve the fate that awaits them. If such people are found worthy of an hereafter the fact has to be demonstrated to their peers. The scriptural verse relating to this is Zecharyah 13,9: “and I will smelt them as one smelts silver and test them as one tests gold.” it is well known that G’d only tests the righteous as David said in Psalms 11,5: “the Lord seeks out the righteous man to test him.” The matter can best be understood by a parable. A potter who sells his wares does not demonstrate the worth and quality of his inferior products but he demonstrates the quality of his finest products.” These tests and examinations are not needed to demonstrate anything to G’d Who know it all. He knows what goes on in the heart of each of His creatures. This is why Solomon speaks of G’d being an “Examiner of hearts.” He confirms this also in Proverbs 15,11: “Hell and destruction are in front of G‘d; how much more the hearts of men.” The logic of this verse is simple. If G’d can see what goes on within the bowels of the earth, how could He fail to be aware of what goes on in the hearts of men above the earth? After all the heart is the abode of G’d’s own soul, the part of man which has been emanated from the celestial regions! If, in spite of all these considerations, G’d does subject men to tests it can only be in order to demonstrate to other creatures who are unable  to look into a person’s heart and can judge only by what their eyes behold. We know that man is limited in his perceptions to what his eyes behold from Samuel I 16,7: “man sees only what is visible, but the Lord sees into the heart.” Once the righteous has been tested and his potential goodness has become manifest so that he was able to translate pure thoughts and intentions into actions, such actions are a sanctification of the name of the Lord. This was the type of test G’d subjected Avraham to when the Torah wrote (Genesis 22,1) “and G’d tested Avraham.” The whole purpose of the test was to demonstrate the quality of Avraham’s service to G’d to those around him. When G’d said to Avraham at the conclusion of the test:: “for now I know that you are G’d-fearing, etc.,” the meaning is that “now G’d had been able to demonstrate to one and all how G’d-fearing Avraham was.”
    When the Jewish people left Egypt and G’d performed innumerable miracles for them in the desert, most of these miracles were designed to  be tests. When G’d split the sea for them to enter into, He did not show them a path which led from one side to the other; rather He split the sea a little at a time, keeping them anxious all the time, wondering if G’d would continue to dry out that path until they came to the other bank. The Israelites saw the sea in front of them all the time they were traversing it. This is what David meant when he said (Psalms 114,3) “the sea saw and fled.” Something similar occurred with the manna. G’d never supplied more than enough for one day or one day plus the Sabbath  (Exodus 16,4). Desert travelers would normally carry a supply of several weeks’ provisions with them. G’d acted as He did in order to instill the habit of faith in the people. The meaning of faith is to make oneself dependent on G’d’s largesse. He wanted to know if they were going to criticise His way of doing things. This is why when Pharaoh finally released the Israelites G’d made them travel through the desert. This was all designed to test if their hearts were pure, if they trusted G’d or felt they knew better than He what was good for them (Yuma 67). G’d could have let the people travel a closer route through civilised parts of the world, through the land of the Philistines, However, He wanted to strengthen their faith in Him through letting them travel through inhospitable country and looking after them.
    
    13,17. ויהי בשלח פרעה את העם ולא נחם אלוה-ים דרך ארץ פלשתים כי קרוב הוא, כי אמר אלוה-ים פן ינחם העם בראותם מלחמה ושבו מצרימה. “It was when Pharaoh sent off the Children of Israel that G’d did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, although it was near, for G’d said: ‘perhaps the people will reconsider when they see war and return to Egypt.’” The words: “perhaps the people will reconsider” are hard to understand; do we not believe that there is no such thing as the word “perhaps” in G’d’s vocabulary? Does He not know all in advance? Clearly G’d knew for certain how the Israelites would react when they saw they had to fight the Philistines! The meaning of the words פן ינחם העם, therefore must be: “so that the people will not reconsider.” Indeed our sages (Eyruvin 96) are on record that wherever the expression פן or the word ואל, occurs in the Bible the meaning is “so that not.” Example: (Genesis 3,22) ועתה פן ישלח ידו ולקח גם מעץ החיים, “and now so that he will not also stretch out his hand and take from the tree of life, etc.” G’d meant it was not appropriate to give Adam an opportunity to take from the fruit of the tree of life and to nullify G’d’s decree that he had become mortal by eating from it. Similarly, here: G‘d led the people through the desert instead of through the land of the Philistines in order not to grant them an opportunity to regret having left Egypt.
   בראותם מלחמה, “when they would see warfare.” Even though they experienced warfare in the desert such as when the Amalekites attacked them a few weeks after the Exodus, the fight against Amalek did not evoke a desire to return to Egypt. After all, Israel had not been called upon by G’d to invade (or traverse) a neighbouring country, something they would have found hard to justify. [I suppose the peace-treaty between Avraham- Yitzchak- Avimelech was still in effect anyway. Ed.] The Amalekites had attacked them in No-man’s land without provocation. The Amalekites by definition were attacking G’d through attacking His people; they had heard about all the miracles G’d had performed for the Israelites when He struck down the Egyptians. They were not willing to allow the G’d of Israel to have a monopoly of power on this earth. We have a comment by the Midrash (Mechilta Beshalach Petichata [introduction]) that if, seeing that after the Israelites had taken a devious and difficult route through the desert they nevertheless said (Numbers 14,4) in the second year of their journey: “let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt,” imagine what would have happened if they would have had to confront the Philistines at the beginning of their journey on the way to the land of the Canaanites.
    Rabbeinu Chananel wrote that G’d had a different reason for leading the Israelites through the desert. He needed an excuse for demonstrating miracles for the people. Had G’d led the Jewish people by the most direct route and had influenced the Philistines to let them travel through their country unmolested, this would have been such a minor miracle that it would not have impressed the people with an appreciation of how G’d had exerted Himself on their behalf. G’d’s desire to demonstrate His power and ability to triumph over what appeared to be insurmountable difficulties made it necessary for Him to lead the people through an inhospitable desert. By leading the people through the desert G’d forced Himself to come up with the heavenly manna as the solution to their food problems, with the extraction of water from a rock and the traveling well as the solution to their water problems, with the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire as the solution to problems of an inhospitable climate, etc., etc. The further the Israelites traveled from civilisation the greater were the miracles required to keep them alive and well.
    It is characteristic of G’d’s השגחה פרטית, benevolent providence for the righteous, that He performs miracles within miracles. We find, for instance, that when Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah were thrown into a fiery furnace by Nebuchadnezzar because they refused to accept him as a deity and to bow before his golden image, G’d could have saved them by the simple expedient of extinguishing the fire in that furnace (Daniel 3,27). Instead,  G’d’ troubled Himself not only to allow these men to walk around within that flaming kiln as if they and their garments were totally oblivious to the infernal heat, but He visibly increased the heat and the fire within that kiln; He showed Nebuchadnezzar a vision of three unbound men enjoying themselves within that flaming kiln totally unperturbed by what Nebuchadnezzar thought he had accomplished. Nebuchadnezzar was enabled to look through opaque thick walls, another miracle. When G’d saved Daniel from the den of lions (Daniel 6,23), He also could have done so by means of lesser miracles such as simply killing the lions in that den. Instead, G’d chose to leave the lions alive but to prevent them from harming Daniel. In other words, the miracle within the miracle was that G’d interfered with the lions’ instincts in order to demonstrate His power. 
    We find something similar in the Book of Judges when Gideon was commanded to fight the Midianites. Seeing that the Midianites were described as “as numerous as the sand of the sea,” (Judges 7,12) G’d could have allowed ten or twenty thousand men to fight them and their victory would surely have been credited to G’d seeing that even such a number of men would have been greatly outnumbered by their opponents. However, G’d chose to allow only three hundred men to go to war against Midian thus increasing the miracle and as a result His reputation. The prophet states that G’d wanted to ensure that no Israelite would be able to take credit for the victory (Judges 7,2). Actually, in response to the call that the faint-hearted Israelites should return home, ten thousand remained after twenty-two thousand had departed. G’d told Gideon specifically that the remaining ten thousand men were still far too numerous to fight against Midian! (7,4). They were to be tested by the manner in which they would lap up water to drink from a pond or river. The people who lapped up water like a dog were chosen as soldiers in G’d’s army, whereas those that drank like human beings, i.e. bringing the water to their mouths instead were sent home! (7,7).
    This was characteristic. of the way G’d dealt with the Israelites in the desert. They were to be raised gradually to a level of trust and faith in G’d so that they would be ready to receive the Torah. This is why G’d parted the waters of the Sea of Reeds only a little at a time. This is why even at Marah where G’d had showed Moses how to make sweet water which had become bitter sweet again, G’d went to the trouble of first miraculously making that water bitter and then performing a second miracle all in order to teach the Israelites a lesson in faith (compare Mechilta Parshah 1 on Exodus 15,22, opinion of Rabbi Joshua). G’d followed the same principle when making a daily miracle in raining down manna from the heaven when He could have contented Himself with the performance of such a miracle once a week or even once a month. When the Israelites had still questioned G’d’s providence even after the miracle at Marah, the attack by Amalek which followed promptly was also a miracle designed to teach the Israelites the lesson that faith was needed to survive. [seeing the Israelites had been wrapped in the clouds of glory, it required a miracle for Amalek to locate them. Ed.] The lesson at that time was that failure to study Torah when one has the time leads to all kinds of disasters.
    Solomon refers to this need for faith in Proverbs 22,19 when he says: “so that you may put your trust in the Lord, I have instructed you today, even you.” Solomon is telling his readers that whatever they have read so far in his book is meant to be of help to them in strengthening this vital element of Judaism within them. By saying “you too,” he invites the reader to attain the same level of faith in G’d that he himself felt he had acquired.
    A Midrashic approach: The Torah in its opening words of this portion wants to remind us that the very mouth who had said: “I will not dismiss the Children of Israel,” and “I will certainly not let the children go with you,” was the same man who was forced at the end to beg them to leave his country. Nonetheless, G’d rewarded the Egyptians even for this reluctant utterance by their king when the Torah commanded the Jewish people (Deut. 23,8) “do not despise the Egyptian for you were a stranger in their land.” The same mouth which had said: “ G’d is the righteous one and I and my people are the sinners,” was rewarded by the  Torah in being accorded a funeral, as we  know from Exodus 15,12 נטית ימינך תבלעמו ארץ, “when You inclined Your right hand the earth swallowed him, “ [although they had been drowned in the sea. Ed.]
    
    13,18.וחמושים עלו בני ישראל , “the Israelites were armed when they came out of Egypt.”  The plain meaning of the words is that when the Israelites left Egypt they were like the vanguard of an army preparing for battle. This was contrary to the rule that the Jewish people are not like the Gentile nations in that they have to make only the first motions of doing things in a regular manner before miraculous forces intervene to help them. (Compare Nachmanides on Numbers 13,2). For instance, we find that although G’d commanded Joshua (Joshua 8,2) to prepare an ambush against the people of Ai, we could ask that if the people of Israel, and especially their leader Joshua, were such experts in invoking miracles to help them, why did they need to lay an ambush, something perfectly natural? The answer is that G’d wants us to do whatever is possible in a natural way, following accepted norms. Anything beyond that we have to leave to celestial forces. Solomon confirms this principle in Proverbs 21,31: “the horse is readied for the day of battle; but victory comes from the Lord.” In other words, men have to do their share before G’d will do His share. This is why it was essential that the Israelites take weapons with them when they left Egypt.
    A Midrashic approach: (Tanchuma Beshalach 1) The word חמושים means “one out of five.” Four fifths of the Jewish people died during the plague of darkness so as not to give the Egyptians the satisfaction of knowing that these Israelites had not been found worthy of redemption. Some say that the word חמושים refers to one in fifty Israelites only being redeemed. Some even claim that only one out of 500 Israelites was found worthy of redemption.
    It may pay to make the following calculation. In 14,7 the Torah speaks of שלישים being on each of the chariots which pursued the Israelites. Some say this means that for every Israelite at least three Egyptians were in pursuit. Others claim that thirty Egyptians were in pursuit of each Israelite. Still others (all using the word שלישים) argue that 300 Egyptians pursued each Israelite (on each chariot?). The commentators who understood the word חמושים as referring to the number five also consider the word שלישים as referring to the number three. Those who consider the word חמושים as a reference to five hundred, obviously are the ones who also considered the word שלישים as referring to three hundred. The words על כלו at the end of 14,7 are understood as referring to “each Israelite,” not to “each chariot” According to the first opinion then there had been three million male adult Israelites in the service of the Egyptians prior to the plague of darkness. Assuming three hundred Egyptians pursued each Israelite the number of Egyptians drowned at the sea would have amounted to nine hundred million as they had thought that three million Jews had left their country (not knowing that most had died). In fact we do find a Midrash Hagadol according to which when G’d descended to Egypt nine hundred million angels of destruction descended with Him. Most of the sages are agreed that the Egyptians who went in pursuit of the Israelites numbered ninety million regardless of whether they held that one out of five Israelites left Egypt or one out o fifty or one out of five hundred. They all arrived at the number by combining it with the word שלישים. It is agreed that G’d dispatched nine hundred million destructive angels against that force, i.e. one angel against one thousand Egyptians. This is the meaning of this Midrash. You will observe that the word chamushim though read as if it were spelled  חמושים, is actually spelled without the letter ו, i.e. חמשים “fifty.” This teaches that Torah which was given to the Jewish people on the fiftieth day after the Exodus was the purpose for which they left the bondage and Egypt. (compare Zohar volume 2 page 46). Furthermore, there is the fact that the Exodus has been mentioned in the written Torah a total of fifty times.
    13,19.  ויקח משה את עצמות יוסף, “Moses took the remains of Joseph, etc.” While the Israelites were still preoccupied with material concerns such as demanding silver and gold from the Egyptians, Moses was preoccupied with nobler matters, needs of the soul, by performing the commandment of seeing to it that Joseph would eventually be interred in Eretz Yisrael. This was in accordance with Proverbs 10,8 quoted in Sotah 13, that “he whose heart is wise accepts commands.” Joseph had acquired the merit of having brought his father Yaakov to burial in Eretz Yisrael; as a result he received the distinction of having his own remains taken out of Egypt by someone greater than him, by Moses. In return for having performed this commandment Moses himself was interred by someone greater than he himself, by the Almighty personally, as we know from Deut. 34,6: “He (G’d) buried him in the valley, etc.” I have discussed this matter in connection with Joseph’s death (Genesis 50,28). We have also found a Bereshit Rabbah 87,10 that Moses needed to take Joseph with him as otherwise he could not have split the Sea of Reeds. This miracle occurred as a compensation for Joseph who at the time had fled from the presence of his master Potiphar’s wife, placing himself in a most embarrassing situation by leaving his garments inside the house (Genesis 39,12). The Torah describes his departure there as וינס ויצא החוצה, “he fled-and went outside.” We find the same word וינס applied to the motion of the Sea when G’d (Moses) parted it (Psalms 114,3 ) הים ראה וינס, “the Sea saw and fled.” What did the Sea see which made it retreat? “It saw the remains of Joseph.” We find another similarity of expression between what happened to the brothers and Joseph and to something which happened at the Sea. In Genesis 50,21 when Joseph tries to calm his brothers’ fears that now that Yaakov was dead he would revenge himself on them, וינחם אותם וידבר על לבם, “he comforted them and spoke to their heart.” A the splitting of the Sea we find the expression  (Exodus 15,8) בלב ים, “in the heart of the Sea.”
    
    
    13,21. וה' הולך לפניהם יומם, “and G’d would walk in front of them by day, etc.” Seeing that the term “walking” cannot truly be applied to G’d, the plain meaning of this verse is that the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night which had taken up position in front of the Jewish people to show them the way, served as a sign for them that G’d in His capacity as Hashem was accompanying them every step of the way. These two pillars acted as their eyes in the desert and as protection against the dangers lurking in the desert. When the Torah quotes G’d (Exodus 19,4) saying: “I carried you on the wings of eagles,” the reference is to these pillars of cloud and fire mentioned in our verse. Seeing that these pillars were designed to save the Israelites, they became the instruments by means of which the Egyptians were judged, as we read in 14,24: “He looked down upon the  camp of Egypt through a pillar of fire and cloud and He confounded the camp of Egypt.” This prompted our sages (Mechilta 14,29)  to comment on the words והמים להם חמה, “the waters of the Sea were for them (the Israelites) a wall, chomah,” to change the vowel pattern and to add that for the Egyptians these same waters proved to be a cheymah, i.e. an expression of G’d’s anger at them. Midrash Tehillim, 22,2 quotes a similar interpretation when explaining  the verse א-לי א-לי למה עזבתני, the Midrash says that what was “light” for Israel (King Chizkiyahu) proved to be destructive fire for Sancheriv, King of Assyria. It is described graphically there that the prophet Isaiah and King Chizkiyahu sat down in the Holy Temple and that a fire erupted between them which consumed Sancheriv and his army.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words (especially the letter ו introducing the word י-ה-ו-ה at the beginning of a verse), are an allusion to G’d acting in unison with His heavenly tribunal. G’d resided within the pillar of cloud which traveled ahead of the Israelites by day, whereas His heavenly tribunal has its abode within the pillar of fire and traveled ahead of the camp of the Israelites at night. This is the meaning of “He and His heavenly tribunal,” i.e. the Shechinah and the attribute of Mercy. This is also the meaning of such expressions as (Isaiah 63, 12) זרוע תפארתו, as well as the word ימינך in 15,6. In all those instances the same instrument G’d employed to save the Jewish people He employed to simultaneously destroy its adversaries. This is the mystical dimension of the line in the Haggadah shel Pessach בנגפו את מצרים ואת בתינו הציל, “when He smote Egypt while saving our houses.” The verse  (Numbers 14,14) כי עין בעין נראה אתה ה' ועננך עמד עליהם וגו', “that You Hashem appeared eye to eye Your cloud stands over them, etc.” is to be understood in the same way.
   ללכת יומם ולילה, “to travel by day and by night.” According to the plain meaning of the text the verse tells us that the Israelites were so eager to arrive at the destination where they would receive the Torah on the fiftieth day that they traveled both by day and by night. This was in contrast with other travelers who are tired by nightfall so that they interrupt their journey even when they are in inhospitable surroundings.
    A Midrashic approach: They traveled by day and by night as the Torah they were to receive was something that applied and was to be studied both by day and by night (compare Joshua 1,8). 
    A kabbalistic approach: The reason the Torah wrote ללכת יומם ולילה, was to tell us that they strove to emulate the two attributes called “day” and “night.” The whole line is to inform us that these two attributes were ever-present. If the Torah had wanted to describe their mode of  travel, i.e. that the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire respectively traveled both by day and at night the wording would have been ללכת ביום ובלילה. The reason they traveled both by day and by night was to get them used to accept these two attributes as facts of life. [Rabbi Chavell refers to a commentary by Nachmanides at the beginning of the third chapter of Job in this connection]. As a result of the above-mentioned  considerations the Israelites were forced to travel by day and by night. 
    The meaning of the words לנחותם הדרך is precisely this, i.e. to teach them a way of life, not as we might think, “to show them the route.” The words להאיר להם, normally translated as “to provide physical light for them by both day and night,” [which are superfluous as we all know that this was their purpose, Ed.], must therefore be understood in spiritual terms, i.e. ‘to enlighten them” through the attributes called “day” and the attribute called “night.”’
    In order to understand the whole concept better, consider Proverbs 24,21 ירא את ה' בני ומלך, ”Fear the Lord my son and King;” The Israelites were praised  by Jeremiah (2,2) who said to them that G’d still remembered “the devotion of your youth, your love as a כלולותיך (pl) bride, when you followed Me in the wilderness.” The prophet mentioned two separate qualities (attributes)  when mentioning כלולות, i.e. יום and לילה. The choice of the word כלולות which is a doubling of כל, means that these two attributes are interdependent, do not exist one without the other. The prophet referred to two good attributes of the Jewish people which enabled G’d to redeem them at the time. One of the most important aspects of the Exodus was the honour and glory the Israelites experienced in the manner in which they were redeemed.
    An additional reason for the Torah describing the Exodus as if the Jewish people were traveling both by day and by night, was to give Pharaoh the impression that they were fleeing. This in turn would persuade him to mount  pursuit. Coupled with the fact that his spies told him that the Israelites were moving very erratically, turning around at Baal Tzefon, he became convinced that he would prevail against them. This gave G’d a chance to drown the Egyptians in the Sea of Reeds. It was a perfect illustration of what Chanah said in her prayer (Samuel I 2,3) “by Him actions are calculated.”
    
    13,22. לא ימיש עמוד ענן יומם, “the pillar of cloud would not depart by day, etc.” The reason the Torah repeats this is to teach that the two pillars were complementary to each other as explained by the sages in Shabbat 23.
    
    14,2. וישובו ויחנו פי החירות, “they turned around and encamped at Pi Hachirot. G’d ordered the Israelites to turn around  facing Egypt at Pithom renamed Pi Hachirot, seeing that this was the place where they had become free (from slave labour) according to Rashi. The Torah added the words “in front of Baal Tzefon,” as a further means of identification because that idol had survived destruction. All of these details were important to help Pharaoh persuade himself that the Israelites were worth pursuing. When the Torah reports that G’d said to Moses: “I will strengthen the heart of Pharaoh so that he will pursue them” (verse 4), He referred to three causes which would determine Pharaoh’s course of action. 1) Their non-stop day and night travel which would persuade Pharaoh that they were in fact escaping, not following his instructions. 2) Their turnabout convinced Pharaoh that the people were completely lost in the desert. 3) that they should make camp near Baal Tzefon which would give Pharaoh the impression that this deity had impeded the Israelites’ ability to journey forward. The term ”בעל something or other,“ is usually associated with a deity such as  בעל זבוב, אלוהי עקרן, בעל פעור, and others. G’d allowed this deity to survive in order to mislead Pharaoh. This is an illustration of Job 12,23: “He causes nations to deceive themselves resulting in their destruction.” The additional words (verse 3) נכחו תחנו על הים, ”opposite it you are to make camp,” was to give Pharaoh the impression that this deity had used the desert to encircle the Israelites, to make them prisoner. This verse contains an allusion to what the Israelites would observe later at the sea. 
    
    14,4. ויעשו כן, “they did so.” The Torah compliments the Israelites for obeying what seemed an irrational command, i.e. making camp facing their erstwhile enemies and masters. They could have questioned such an order but did not do so. (Rashi).
    
    14,5. ויגד למלך מצרים, “The king of Egypt had been informed, etc.” Seeing that  the end of the three days which was the period of time Moses had said they would be gone had passed and they had not returned, Pharaoh was told that obviously they had fled. Pharaoh had sent along spies. When, after non-stop marches, the Israelites made camp on the eve of the 17th-18th of Nissan, these spies returned to the capital and reported to Pharaoh on the Israelites’ movements. The Egyptians organised their pursuit, mobilising their forces on the 19th and the 20th, catching up with the Israelites at Pi Hachirot by nightfall on the twentieth. The night of the 20th-21st there was a stand off, i.e. the two camps did not come closer together (verse 20). 
    A Midrashic approach: The words “Pharaoh was told” mean that the prophecy (decree) made to Avraham in Genesis 15,13 that his descendants would be slaves in a country where they were strangers for 400 years had not been fulfilled as only 210 years had elapsed since the time the Israelites had come to Egypt. It therefore became clear to him that the people had fled.
    
    14,7. ויקח שש מאות רכב, “He took six hundred chariots, etc.” Rashi queries where these chariots, or better their horses came from seeing that the Torah had told us in 9,3-6 that all the domestic beasts of Egypt died during the plague of pestilence. Moreover, the Israelites had said that they would take all their livestock with them (10,26) so that Pharaoh could not have requisitioned animals belonging to the Israelites. Rashi, i.e. Mechilta, concludes that these animals must have belonged to the people described in 9,20 as having feared the word of G’d, i.e. the warning preceding the plague, and who had therefore taken their livestock indoors. This would demonstrate that G’d-fearing Egyptians could become a source of trouble for the Jews. It teaches the truth of  what Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai is quoted as saying in Massechet Sofrim chapter 15 that the best of the Egyptians were killed at the Sea and that the best of the snakes ought still to have their heads smashed. The statement is traced to our verse here. The meaning of the statement is that only in time of war is it permissible to kill such Egyptians seeing that by making war against you they have revealed their true attitude. Under such conditions we may apply the advice or instruction of Sanhedrin 72 that when someone signals that he is going to kill us we may take preemptive action and kill him first. During times of peace, however, it is not permissible to kill such people. We know this because even the seven Canaanite nations concerning whom the Torah demanded that we exterminate males, females and children (Deut. 20,16) unless they vacate the land of Canaan, were given an offer to emigrate before the Jewish people went to war against them. 
    On the other hand, when the hostility of such nations or individuals is directed against G’d Himself, such as the hostility of the Egyptians, it is permitted to kill such people even in times of peace (with the Jewish people) as this is considered a holy war, a war on behalf of G’d. Once the Egyptians had observed the killing of the firstborn, a punishment performed by G’d personally, not by agents of His who operate within nature all the time, their intent in pursuing the Jewish people was clearly directed against G’d. This is what prompted G’d to say to Moses (14,14): “G’d will fight on your behalf, you just remain silent.” G’d had become  obligated to drown those people.
   ושלישים על כלו, “with captains on all of them.” As per Onkelos, i.e. skilled warriors on each chariot. An alternative meaning could be that Pharaoh divided his army into three groups; this would account for the fact that we read about three separate parts of Pharaoh’s army drowning. The Torah mentions separately: “all the army of Pharaoh who had entered the Sea behind the Israelites” (14,28); in 15,4 the Torah speaks of the chariots being drowned in the Sea; in 15,19 the Torah adds that Pharaoh’s horse and its riders with its chariots had entered the Sea, etc.
    
    14,10. ופרעה הקריב, “and Pharaoh had approached.”  The unusual, transitive form of the verb instead of the intransitive קרב, tells us that Pharaoh had “sacrificed himself” (compare Rashi). 
    A Midrashic approach (Mechilta Beshalach 2) The word הקריב means that he became the architect of his own destruction because he offered a sacrifice to Baal Tzefon when he saw the Israelites encamped in front of that idol and he believed that the idol’s power had prevented the Israelites from continuing their flight. An alternative explanation: the intransitive form הקריב, “brought close,” means that Pharaoh’s conduct brought Israel closer to G’d, i.e. made them repent so that they would be worthy of being saved. This is in line with what the Talmud Sanhedrin 97 said about Haman, i.e. that G’d orchestrated the threat of an anti-Semite such as Haman in order to cause the Jews of his time to return to Him in penitence. This latter comment explains why the Torah continues with
   וישאו בני ישראל את עיניהם...ויצעקו בני ישראל אל ה', “the Children of Israel raised their eyes....and they cried out to Hashem.” The Torah tells us that they fell back on a tried remedy, i.e. prayer,  which had helped their forefathers in times of distress. We know that Avraham prayed from Genesis 19,27 where the Torah describes him as rising early in the morning “to the place, etc.” The words “to the place” are a euphemism for someone directing his prayer to G’d. We find similarly that Yitzchak was praying in Genesis 24,43 where the Torah describes him as coming from a שיחה, i.e. a prayer-session. We find that the Torah describes Yaakov as having prayed at the place where he had the dream of the ladder (Genesis 8,11). The reason the Jewish people have been compared to a worm (Isaiah 41,14 “do not fear worm Yaakov, etc.”) is that just as a worm has no strength of its own other than that of its mouth with which it is able to defeat the mighty cedars, so the strength of the Jewish people is their mouth, i.e. the power of their prayers. Prayer is something soft which has the power to break something hard. The Gentiles have been compared to cedars as we know from Ezekiel 31,3: “here Assyria used to be a cedar in Lebanon,” etc., etc. In verse 12 the prophet describes how this magnificent tree was cut down.”  Psalms 29,8  also describes the forests being stripped bare (by the worms). Israel’s victories are due to prayer and Torah. We base this on Deut. 4,29: “when you will seek out the Lord your G’d from there (your state of distress) you will find Him.” We have a similar message in Psalms 20,8: “they (call) on chariots, they (call) on horses, but we call on the name of the Lord our G’d.” 
   והנה מצרים נוסע אחריהם, “and behold Egypt was traveling behind them.” According to the rules of grammar we would have expected a plural form here, i.e. נוסעים. According to the plain meaning the use by the Torah of the singular נוסע is meant to describe that all the Egyptians were united in this hostile pursuit of the Israelites.
    According to a Midrashic approach the use of the word נוסע indicates that the Israelites became aware of the guardian angel of Egypt pursuing them from his celestial domain and that he was about to assist the terrestrial Egyptians. The name of this celestial representative of Egypt was עזא. I have found this name in a Midrash called Vayosha: “Azza is the name of the guardian angel of Egypt.”
    
    14,11. המבלי אין קברים במצרים , “are there perhaps not sufficient graves in Egypt?” Nachmanides wonders aloud how it is possible that people who raise their hands and voices in prayer to G’d for help could at one and the same time become guilty of such sarcastic comments as the ones attributed to them here by the Torah? Moreover, how could they say at the same time: “it is better for us to have to serve the Egyptians in  Egypt than to die in the desert?” In view of his formidable question our sages’ statement (Mechilta section 2) that at that time there were four groups of Israelites each of whom responded differently to their dilemma is proven correct. Group number one engaged in prayer. This group is referred to in our text as בני ישראל, “the Children of Israel  cried out in prayer to Hashem.” These were the elite of the people. They had been described as “raising their eyes...and crying out to G’d.” The second group denied that Moses was indeed G’d’s prophet and did not choose to pray for salvation. Concerning this group the psalmist wrote (Psalms 106,7) “they rebelled at the sea, at the Sea of Reeds.”
    A different wording of this event is presented by the same section of the Mechilta on the words (verse 13 התיצבו, “stand firm”). There were four groups. The first group preferred death to captivity or death at the hands of the Egyptians. They wanted to drown themselves in the sea. This was the group to whom Moses said: “stand firm! Behold the salvation which will emanate from Hashem!” This was the group about which the psalmist had said that they rebelled. The second group wanted to return to Egypt. Concerning this group the Torah (Moses) gave the assurance that the Israelites would never again see the Egyptians pose a threat to them as they did at that moment (verse 13). The third group wanted to join battle with the Egyptians. Moses told them not to bother, that “Hashem will fight on your behalf.” The fourth group were those who relied on praying to G’d as we read: “The Children of Israel cried out (prayed) to Hashem.” Moses told them to be silent (verse 14).
    Onkelos translates the word ויצעקו as וזעיקו, that their outcry was one of accusation. [We find in Mechilta that these people complained that not only did they already mourn the 80% of their brethren who had died during the plague of darkness, but now even they were threatened; this is why they said it would have been better for them to have remained in Egypt in the first place. Ed]. We have the expression זעקה in that sense in Samuel II 13,19 when Tamar yelled after having been raped by her half-brother Amnon. The expression ויזעק also occurs in Judges 4,10 when it describes Barak as issuing a call for mobilisation of several tribes. We also find the expression in Nechemyah 9,9 “You heard their outcry at the Sea of Reeds.” Our sages understood it as an expression of prayer as I explained already.
    
    14,14. ה' ילחם לכם, “Hashem will fight on your behalf!”  It is known in kabbalistic circles that the attribute of Justice fights wars and dries out the sea. Why then did Moses mention the attribute Hashem in this verse? It was to teach that even in the execution of this great miracle the attribute of Hashem was also involved. At first glance it appears as if the attribute of Justice was stretched out over the Egyptians from one end of the sky to the other (figuratively speaking) and was bent on their total destruction as we know from verse 28 that “not one of them survived.” Nonetheless we find an involvement of the attribute of Mercy such as the fact that these people were interred (compare 15,12 תבלעמו ארץ), i.e. that the earth covered their remains. They did not simply disintegrate as did the people who died during the deluge.” Whenever the Torah speaks of G’d’s “right hand,” such as in Exodus 15,6 this is a reference to the attribute of Mercy. What was true in the past will also hold true in the future after the final war of Gog and Magog of which we are told that “G’d goes out and battles all these nations assembled against the Jewish people” (compare Zecharyah 14,3). No doubt that verse speaks of the attribute of Justice. In spite of this, we find  even there an involvement of the attribute of Mercy as the prophet describes in detail the interment of the remains of the fallen Gentiles in that war (Ezekiel 39,11). “It will be on that day that I (Hashem) shall assign to Gog a burial, etc. etc.”
    The Midrashic approach on the words: “G’d will fight on your behalf, you be silent,” is: seeing that although G’d personally killed all the Egyptians’ firstborn they still pursue you, it is clear that they mean to attack Me, not you. Hence I will fight them, not you. It is not your battle at all.
   ואתם תחרישו, and you must remain silent so that the attribute of Justice will not unload itself upon you, seeing you have been just as sinful as they, having worshipped idols, etc.
    
    14,15. מה תצעק אלי, “why are you crying out to Me?” According to the plain meaning of these words the word אלי means that the matter does not depend on G’d at all but on Israel.
   דבר אל בני ישראל ויסעו, “speak firmly to the Children of Israel and they will march forward.” G’d hinted that as soon as the Israelites would move forward the sea would part for them to let them through. They only needed to demonstrate a little faith by moving forward.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word אלי in this verse is equivalent to the word לי which we find in connection with Terumah, the gift intended for G’d, i.e. the donations for the Tabernacle. We read in the ספר הבהיר of Rabbi Nechunyah ben Hakanah (item 103 edition of Margulies) that the words ויקחו לי תרומה should be understood as ויקחו ל-י תרומה, “they are to take a gift intended for the י.” The idea is that every prayer must be addressed exclusively to the י, to Hashem. It is in this sense that G’d said to Moses: ”speak to the Children of Israel ויסעו they are to journey from below to above and the sea will part as a result.” They were to call on their reserves of faith and elevate themselves to the level י. Whereas the address for their attention was G’d in His capacity as the attribute of Mercy, the attribute they wanted Him to activate was His attribute of Justice. Moses did as G’d said and informed them of the great miracle which was about to occur whereupon the Israelites started marching forward.
    In Sotah 37 we are told that the tribe of Yehudah sanctified the name of the Lord by being the first one to enter the sea. Midrash Tehillim 114 on the words היתה יהודה לקדשו, “Yehudah became His holy one,” deduces this from these words of the psalmist. This is also what is meant by the words: “the sea saw and fled” (Psalms 114,3). What did the sea see? It observed Nachshon ben Aminadav, the prince of the tribe of Yehudah, enter it, followed by the other tribes who drew encouragement from Nachshon’s behaviour. In fact, they now each wanted to be first to wade through the bed of the sea. According to Psalms 68,28: “there is little Binyamin who rules them.” The word רדם in this verse which means “rules them,” should be  read as two words, i.e. רד ים, “descended into the sea.” According to that tradition the brother tribes Yehudah, Naftali, and Zevulun stoned the Binyaminites for having arrogated to themselves the right to be the first ones to enter the sea. This is based on Psalms 68,28 where the Midrash understands the word רגמתם, as “they stoned them.” The Midrash claims that the reason that the prince of Yehudah was called נחשון, was in recognition of his pre-empting the other Israelites in descending into the sea, i.e. he was a נחשול, “a gale smiting the sea.”
    
    14,16. ואתה הרם את מטך ונטה את ידך, “as for you, raise your staff and incline your hand.” We must not understand this verse as an instruction to Moses to raise his staff above the sea. After all, the Torah does not report Moses as raising his staff over the sea. He only raised his hand over the sea (verse 21). The meaning of the words “raise your staff” is that Moses was to divest himself of the staff. You find confirmation of this in Shemot Rabbah 21,9 where the Midrash quotes the Egyptians as saying that Moses’ entire strength lay in his staff, that he was unable to do anything without it. There were also some Israelites who did not believe that Moses would be able to perform such a miracle without the aid of his staff. G’d therefore told him to get rid of the staff and to perform the miracle with his hand. This is why we read subsequently that the people had faith in G’d and His servant Moses, seeing that he had been able to perform such a miracle merely with his hand (verse 31). Whereas previously the Torah had stated that the people did have faith in Moses (4,31), this faith had been shaken in the interval. It was therefore necessary for the Torah to write in connection with the splitting of the Sea  that their faith in Moses had been completely restored.
    
    14,20. ולא קרב זה אל זה כל הלילה, “and one did not come closer to the other all night long.” The Israelites had begun their descent into the sea during the night. When the Torah (verse 19) had reported that the angel of G’d had moved from before the people to behind the people, this was at the beginning of the night. The meaning of all this is that the attribute of Justice described there as מלאך האלו-הים as well as in some other instances in the Bible, is not described as מלאך אלו-הים, but as מלאך האלו-הים. 
    Nachmanides says that it is possible that the word מלאך in this case is not a possessive but an explanation. In other words, the Torah explains that the agent (angel) mentioned now moved to the rear of the Jewish people in a pillar of fire so that in addition to the pillar of fire now at their rear the pillar of cloud which used to be in front during the day also moved to the rear at this time so that two pillars separated the Egyptians from the Israelites. When the morning watch commenced the Egyptians became victims of G’d’s judgment. The word אשמורת הבוקר is an allusion to this. Onkelos translates this word as והוה במטרת צפרא, an allusion to the agent Mattatron who has been entrusted by G’d to run the universe along the lines of natural laws.
    The order of the various forces was as follows: 1) The camp of Israel was in front; 2) behind it and close to them the pillar of fire. 3) behind the pillar of fire was the pillar of cloud. 4) behind the pillar of cloud came the camp of the Egyptians. This means that two separate columns divided the Israelites from the Egyptians. The words ויהי הענן והחשך mean that the Israelites had light as the pillar of fire which was positioned immediately behind them provided light for them, i.e. ויאר את הלילה, it lit up the night; the Egyptians did not benefit from this light as the pillar of cloud was positioned between them and the pillar of fire. The words “they did not approach one another” mean that they could not approach one another due to the two columns (pillars) separating the two camps from one another. Nonetheless, the Egyptians could see the Israelites as they saw the pillar of fire through the pillar of cloud. When one sits in the dark one can see light even if the light is distant. Israel, however, could not see the Egyptians  as people bathed in light cannot see those who sit surrounded by darkness. It was therefore most important for the pillar of fire  which normally had traveled in front of the Israelites to have taken up a position behind them. Had it continued to be in front of them and to light up the way for them like on the preceding nights the Israelites would have been invisible to the Egyptians and they therefore would not have followed them.
    A Midrashic view of the words: “they did not approach each other all night long,” i.e. “the celestial beings did not engage in song.” In chapter 42 of Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer we find the comment: “do not read as if it said ולא קרא זה אל זה  but  ולא קרב זה אל זה כל הלילה, a play on words such as וקרא זה אל זה ואמר קדוש, “each one called to the other saying: “holy, holy holy.”
    
    14,21. ויבקעו המים, “the waters were split.”  The meaning is “the waters remained split after separating.” The splitting of the waters occurred first, followed by the strong easterly wind which was designed to get rid of the wetness of the bed of the sea enabling it to become dry land, חרבה. This process was parallel to the one described in 16,20: “it became worm-eaten and stank.” The meaning there is also that after it (the manna) had begun to stink, worms began to eat from the foul-smelling mass.
    A Midrashic approach based on Mechilta: the words “the waters split” (instead of the sea split) mean that the waters throughout the universe split at that time. The reason we must understand the words in that way is because had it been a local phenomenon only the Torah should have written ויבקעו מימיו, “its waters split.”
    There is another dimension to the splitting of the sea which will make you understand that it was essential that all the water in the world be split at that time and that a total change in the behaviour of natural law occur at that time. Our sages (Avot 5,3) have accepted as axiomatic that at the time when this miracle occurred there occurred altogether ten miracles simultaneously. All of these miracles may be derived from the wording of this paragraph. 1) The first one is that the waters were split (into a number of fissures, separate paths) as is evident from the simple reading of the text. 2) after the waters were split they became like a “hat,” like the shape of a roof stretched out from the top, with normal water to the left and to the right. The path was in the centre. This is the meaning of the words והמים להם חומה מימינם ומשמאלם, “and the waters were a wall for them to their right and to their left.” 3) the ground under the sea did not remain like the river bed of rivers which run dry in the summer, etc. i.e. muddy, but turned into solid dry ground. This is why the Torah wrote: “they walked on dry land” (verse 29). 4) the path traveled by the Egyptians had remained wet, like mud, loam. This is what is meant by “they were mired in the Sea of Reeds” (15,4). The word טביעה is always a reference to someone sinking into mud. We have another example of this in Psalms 69,3: טבעתי ביון מצולה ואין מעמד, “I am sinking in the slimy deep and find no foothold.” Jeremiah 38,6 means the same thing. This disaster which struck the Egyptians was a great miracle and this is why it is considered one of the ten miracles which were performed for the Israelites at the sea. Chabakuk 3,15 describes graphically how G’d performed this miracle saying: “You will make Your steeds tread the sea, stirring the mighty waters.” 5) the fifth miracle was the fact that all these waters froze (solidified). This is the meaning of the words “the deep froze (congealed)” (15,8). The word is taken from Job 10,10 וכגבינה תקפיאני, “You congealed me like cheese.” The water became hard as stone. This is spelled out in 15,5: “they went down into the depths like a stone. The Torah means that just as the depths are hard as stones so the waters became hard as stone. This causes one to break one’s head on impact as mentioned by David in Psalms 74,13: “who smashed the head of the monsters in the water.” Unless the water had become hard as stone this is hard to understand. 6) the waters did not solidify into one giant chunk such as an iceberg, but into many smaller blocks. This is the meaning of the wordsנצבו כמו נד , “they stood arranged like a wall” (15,8). The waters were arranged like blocks of stone one upon the other forming a wall. David explained the term in greater detail when he said (Psalms 74,13) “it was You who smashed into pieces the sea with Your might.” 7) the sea parted into 12 parts to provide 12 lanes, one each for the tribes. This is based on the word זה in זה אל-י ואנוהו “this is my Lord and I wish to exalt Him.” The numerical value of the word זה=12 (15,2). David also speaks of G’d having divided the sea into numerous sections (Psalms 136,10). 8) “the waters even when congealed remained transparent like glass,” so that the “bricks” we just mentioned were like clear bricks so that members of one tribe could see the members of the next tribe in the adjoining lane. This is the meaning of the words קפאו תהומות בלב ים, “the deep waters congealed in the heart of the sea” (15,8). The word appears also in Zecharyah 14,6 where it appears to mean “freezing time,” neither cold nor sunshine, a suspension of normal changes from night to day. [The author understands it also there as relating to the transparency of  ice. Ed.] 9) G’d extracted sweet waters for drinking by the Israelites from the salty sea water. This is the meaning of the word נוזלים, (15,8) where Moses describes this sweet water as dripping forth from the blocks of frozen sea-water. The expression נוזלים occurs in Song of Songs 4,15 as an attribute of מים חיים, pure spring-water gushing forth from the mountains of Lebanon. 10) This sweet water froze again as soon as the Israelites had made use of it for their needs. This explains the peculiar sequence in 15,8: “straight as a wall stood the running water, the deep waters congealed in the heart of the sea.” The verse tells us that something which had been dripping, running, subsequently froze in the middle of the sea. This concludes the list of the ten miracles G’d performed at the Sea.
    You should realise that the three verses (14,19-21) each consist of 72 letters amounting to a total of 216 letters. Each of these verses therefore is an allusion to the great 72-lettered name of G’d. The 72-lettered name of G’d represents the fourth attribute (emanation) of חסד, “loving kindness.” When you arrange the three verses instead of sequentially, above one another, the second one in reverse order, each vertical column will give you a three-lettered name of G’d. Examples: when you place the word ויסע (verse 19) above the word הלילה in the second verse but above the word ויט in verse 21, then the vertical reading from the top down of the first letter will be והו. The second name would be ילי. The 37th such acrostic spells אני. (compare Rashi on Sukkah 45A).  Each unit of three letters is a name of G’d. The middle row, i.e. verse 20 which would be arranged backwards instead of forwards, represents the attribute (emanation) גבורה, whereas verse 21 which is arranged from right to left again represents the attribute (emanation) תפארת. Each unit of three letters which is a name of G’d, together forms the 72-lettered name of G’d when you put them end to end in the order I just described. The number three, which appears in 72 such names of G’d, is representative of the three “celestial patriarchs,” a concept parallel to the three terrestrial patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov.
    Although the Torah does not spell out either in the command or in the report of the crossing that the sea which the Israelites crossed was the Sea of Reeds, it is clear from Moses’ song of thanksgiving (15,,4) that if the Egyptians drowned in that sea this must have been the sea that the Israelites crossed. Furthermore, we read immediately afterwards that Moses made the Israelites journey from the “Sea of Reeds” (15,22). This sea is called ים האחרון by G’d when He showed Moses the territory of the land of Israel in Deut. 34,2. The reason it is so called [i.e. the word סוף which also means “end”, i.e. אחרון= “last, final” Ed.] is that it is the furthest boundary of the land of Israel. David also refers to it by the name ים סוף in Psalms 106,9: “He sent His blast against ים סוף, it became dry.” However, there is also an attribute of G’d which is known as ים, as David mentions elsewhere in verse 7 of that Psalm. It appears that he meant that this attribute called ים was invoked by G’d in order to make the Israelites able to cross the ים. When we understand the word ים as having two meanings, then we can also understand Psalms 106 7 וימרו על-ים בים-סוף,  as “they rebelled against the attribute of G’d called ים at the Sea of Reeds.” According to the Zohar, the word סוף ים is a name for the “highest, the most distant  sea,” a spiritual concept. [The author does not mention the word Zohar, as it was not at his disposal. Ed.]
    
    14,22. ויבאו בני ישראל בתוך הים ביבשה, ”the Children of Israel came into the sea when it was dry land.” The plain meaning of these words is that the place which had previously been sea was now dry land.
    A Midrashic view: (Shemot Rabbah 21,10) “if they came into the sea, why does the Torah write: “they came unto dry land?” If they came unto dry land why does the Torah call it “sea?” The verse teaches that the sea was not split for them until they had set foot in it while it was still sea up to the level of the nostrils (to demonstrate their faith). Immediately after they had done this the sea was converted to dry land. Rabbi Nehorai said: “a Jewish mother holding her son by her hand would wade into the sea while her son was crying. His mother took an apple or pomegranate out of the sea and gave it to her son to stop him crying. He based himself on Psalms 106,9: “He led them through the deep as through a wilderness.” The reason the psalmist draws this comparison with the desert is to tell you that just as the Israelites were not short of anything while G’d led them through the desert, they were not short of anything when He led them through the sea. This is confirmed by Deut. 2,7: “for forty years  your G’d was with you; you did not lack a thing.” Just as they lacked nothing there, they lacked nothing in the depths of the sea.
   והמים להם חומה מימינם ומשמאלם, “and the waters were a wall for them to their right and to their left.” This proves that the path was in the centre seeing there was water on both sides as well as above them 
    A Midrash understands the word והמים as a reference to Torah which has also been compared to water. The meaning would be that because of the Torah which the Israelites were about to receive and which they would be eager to receive, this Torah now acted as a shield for them to their right and to their left. At the same time, this Torah would be an instrument of destruction for the Egyptians. This is the reason the word חומה, “wall,” is spelled defective, i.e. without the letter ו is so that it can be read חמה, “anger.” What proved a protective wall for the Israelites represented a few hours later G’d’s anger and the death of the Egyptians. The words מימינם ומשמאלם may also be understood as references to the merit of Torah and phylacteries respectively. The Torah is described as “the right side of G’d,” i.e. מימינו אש דת למו, (Deut. 33, 2). The phylacteries which are worn on our left arm  provide the merit thanks to which the waters formed a wall on the left of the Israelites.
    
    14,25. ויסר את אופן מרכבותיו, “He (G’d) removed the wheels of their chariots.” According to the plain meaning of the text, seeing that G’d looked down upon the Egyptians through the pillar of fire, the heat of that fire burned every wooden part of the Egyptians’ chariots. As a result they lost all their effectiveness. A scientific approach: “the word אופן is the same as גלגל, “wheel.” We find in Ezekiel 10,13 that the אופנים are equated with גלגלים. In that context neither אופן or גלגל is a physical wheel; it is a reference to celestial forces which cause the orbits of planets, etc., i.e. “the wheels which make the universe go round.” G’d removed one of such “wheels” [hence the singular, Ed] so that the Egyptians were stymied. 
    Targum Yonathan ben Uziel on Ezekiel 1,15  translates the word אופן in  והנה אופן אחד בארץ, as “גלגלא,” wheel. The author quotes additional verses on the word אופן. The point that he makes is it that just as we have a rule (Shemot Rabbah 21,5) that G’d does not punish a nation here on earth until He has first dealt with its celestial representative, so here too, the physical chariots did not disintegrate until after G’d had dealt a blow to their celestial counterparts. Hence the Torah used the word אופן to describe His interference with the Egyptians’ celestial assistants. Immediately afterwards the wheels of their chariots on the terrestrial plane moved only “with extreme sluggishness.“ According to the Midrash the specific planet, i.e. its orbit, was the planet Mars under whose auspices wars are fought. The word אופן is spelled defective with the letter ו missing so that we have the word אפן. The numerical value of the three letters of אפן equals 131, i.e. the same as סמא'ל, Satan, the angel of death. In other words, removal of the letter ו from the Egyptians’ chariots spelled death for them. You will observe that the forces represented by the chariots, both terrestrial and celestial, are already alluded to in their respective names.
    This is important so that we should not confuse the issue by thinking that the Egyptians’ mazzal, horoscope, had decreed this death upon them at that time. The Egyptians mazzal, i.e. the name of the celestial representative of Egypt is עזא as we have explained on a previous occasion (end of verse 10) when we discussed who was journeying in the lead behind the Israelites. There is a play on words there as the guardian angel or “celestial representative” of a nation is named similarly to the nation it represents as we know from Genesis 12,6 “והכנעני אז בארץ;” compare what we wrote there.
    
    14,27. לפנות בוקר לאיתנו, “towards morning, to its original state.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word לאיתנו, means “to its original power.” The word appears in a similar sense in Numbers 24,21 where it means  “a strong dwelling.” 
    A Midrashic approach (Mechilta): the word לאיתנו means the same as לתנאו, “to its (contractual) condition.” Genesis 1,9 where the Torah writes ותראה היבשה, “so that the dry land shall become visible,” hints at the same thing, i.e. the dry land shall become visible in the water. [It would appear that when the universe was described prior to the earth becoming visible as והארץ היתה תהו ובהו at the very beginning of Genesis, this was a temporary condition which was reversed on the third day. Ed.]
    According to another Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 5,4) G’d had made an agreement with the water at the time of creation  that it would submit to being split when the Israelites would need to cross it on foot. This tradition is based on Isaiah 45,12: “it was I Who made the earth... My own hands stretched out the heavens and commanded their host. As soon as the heavens had been stretched across the firmament and all their hosts, I commanded the sea to split on account of the Israelites. I commanded sun and moon to obey Joshua’s command (Joshua 10,12) to temporarily arrest their orbits, etc. I commanded heaven and earth to remain silent when Moses would begin his speech in Deut. 32,1 and I commanded the ravens to carry bread and meat to the prophet Elijah (Kings I 17,8). I commanded the fire (heat) not to harm Chanayah, Mishael, and Azaryah (Daniel 3,27). I ordered the lions not to harm Daniel (Daniel 6,23). I ordered the whale to spit out Jonah (Jonah 2,11).” Thus far the Midrash. This Midrash is at pains to prove that all the miracles which interfere with the normal functioning of the universe which have been activated by various prophets or by G’d directly, had been provided for within the framework of the six days of creation during which G’d established the laws of nature. There has never been something which could be termed “a new act of creation” after G’d had completed the universe on the eve of the first Sabbath.
    This is also the whole point of the Mishnah in Avot 5,6 which tells of the 10 miracles for which G’d laid the basis at dusk on the first Sabbath eve. When the Mishnah speaks about Bileam’s (talking) ass having been created during the last few minutes prior to the commencement of the first Sabbath, this means that at that time G’d had made provision for this miraculous phenomenon to occur when needed. The same applies to the earth swallowing Korach and supporters at Moses’ command (Numbers 16,31). When the sages spoke about the ten miracles having been נבראו, “created” at that time, they meant that the creative power for these phenomena to materialise at one time or another was part of the process of the six days of G’d’s creative activity at that time. in other words: “the miracle itself was part of nature,” though only G’d and His inert creatures involved were aware of it. That which the sages referred to as a תנאי, “a condition” which G’d imposed on such creatures of His as the water, etc., was in fact a condition that such “miracles” would be part of what is טבע, “nature,” according to G’d’s definition of this term. When we speak of something “supernatural” occurring, this is a subjective truth applicable only to the beholder of that phenomenon, not to its Creator. Whenever such miracles occur this does not mean that G’d made a sudden revision in His plans for the world and was forced to adopt measures He had not previously thought of, but that the time had arrived at that moment to activate plans He had made already during the six days of creation.
   ומצרים נסים לקראתו, “and the Egyptians were fleeing towards it.” We would have expected the Torah to write that the Egyptians were fleeing מפניו, “on its account,” or “from it.” However, the meaning of the words is that they were fleeing on account of the sea in order to escape it. The water kept coming at them in spite of their attempts to run away from it. This is what the Torah means when it wrote: ”G’d poured the Egyptians into the sea.” Our sages understood this verse as “He poured them into the sea as one pours meat into a pot.”
    
    14,28. הבאים אחריהם בים, “who were coming behind them in the sea.” The rule for writing a Sefer Torah stipulates that six words must be written at the beginning of a page. The easy way to remember these six words is by their respective first letters, הי'ה שמ'ו. The words in question are ב-ראשית, י-הודה (אתה יודוך)-באים (אחריהם) ש-מור ושמעת מ-וצא (שפתיך) ו-אעידה (בם) .ה- It is possible that the reason that just these six words need to be written at the beginning of a page is that they contain an allusion to a renewal of the whole process of creation which the Exodus of the Jewish people from Egypt represented. G’d was “riding in the highest heaven, בערבות.” The two words formed by the acrostic of the six words we mentioned are taken from Psalms 68,5: שירו לאלו-הים זמרו שמו סלו לרוכב בערבות ביה שמו ועלזו לפניו, “Sing to G’d, chant Hymns in His name; extol Him Who rides the clouds.” It is interesting to observe how the allusion in the letter ה of the acrostic בי''ה ties in with what Moses sang in his song עזי וזמרת יה. This is why he repeated the words מי כמוכה ה' twice. The letter ה in the word ביה in Psalms (68,5) and the extra letter ה at the end of the word כמוכ-ה (15,11) allude to the first and last letter ה in the tetragram respectively. The first one is at the same time the last one in the list of the ten emanations, a reference to the attribute of Justice, referred to in מי כמוכה באלם, i.e. a defective spelling of אלהים in 15,11. Moses referred to the מלאך האלו-הים who had taken up position behind the Israelites. We have discussed this in detail on 14,19. He is referred to here also as הבאים אחריהם בים, meaning that G’d’s salvation of the Israelites at the sea occurred by means of that attribute, that angel.
    According to our sages in Menachot 29 the word ב-הבראם in Genesis 2,4 is equivalent to the Torah having written ב-ה בראם, that G’d created the universe with the letter ה of the tetragram. Another explanation is that the re-arrangement of the word בהבראם results in the word באברהם, meaning that the merit of Avraham (in the future) was responsible for G’d creating the world. [Just as the eventual existence of Yaakov was the reason G’d saved Avraham from Nimrod’s furnace (compare Isaiah 29,22) although Yaakov had not yet been born, so G’d found it worthwhile to create the world in order for a human being of Avraham’s calibre to come into existence. Ed.] You will find that in the previously mentioned six words of the Torah which must always be written at the beginning of a page, the second letter in each of the first five of these words when read as an acrostic forms the name אברהם. The sixth word, i.e. ואעידה is used to symbolise the 6 directions in the universe, i.e. north, south, east, west, up, and down. In other words: these six directions came into existence due to the merit of Avraham. The entire concept is a brilliant illustration of the words of the psalmist (Psalms 89,3) עולם חסד יבנה, that the whole universe was founded on the concept of חסד, i.e. Avraham’s outstanding virtue.
    
    14,31. וירא ישראל את היד הגדולה, “Israel saw (experienced) the great hand, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word יד is a euphemism for retribution. We had numerous examples of this, the first one being Exodus 9,3: “here the hand of G’d will be extended against your livestock, etc.”
    According to the Midrash (Mechilta Beshalach 6) the words את היד הגדולה are the source for the sages claiming that while G’d performed 10 plagues in Egypt, He performed 50 plagues by the Sea of Reeds. (opinion of Rabbi Yossi Haglili mentioned in Haggadah shel Pessach). Seeing that in connection with the ten plagues we find that the sorcerers acknowledged the “finger” of G’d at work, it stands to reason that when G’d’s hand is mentioned as having become manifest that five times as many plagues must have occurred. 
    A kabbalistic approach to the words את היד הגדולה: this is a reference to the second letter ה in the tetragram. It is the “weak” attribute of Justice which operates on earth and is best known as the emanation מלכות. It orchestrated the splitting of the sea and this is the reason why we recite in our prayers: מלכותך ראו בניך בוקע ים לפני משה זה אלי ענו הודו והמליכו, “Your emanation מלכות Your Children have seen at work as it split the sea in front of Moses; this is my G’d; answer, give thanks and enthrone Him!” This line in our prayers is an allusion to the verse זה א-לי ואנוהו. We are aware that after the Israelites had crossed the sea they sang a song of thanksgiving.
    The meaning of the additional adjective הגדולה, “the great one,” when the Torah described G’d’s hand, is that in its capacity of being “great,” i.e. enlarged, it  (the attribute of Justice) draws also on the attribute חסד, i.e. loving kindness, Mercy. This is also the reason that in the context of the שירה, this hand is described as ימינך, “Your right hand.”
    It is important to understand the translation of Onkelos  who renders את היד הגדולה, as ית גבורתא ידא רבתא, seeing that he adds the word גבורתא to his translation. He wanted to illustrate that the attribute of Justice which is part of the hand was what administered the punishment, whereas the attribute of Mercy which was co-opted was not in order to soften the Egyptians’ punishment but in order to save the Israelites.
    Nachmanides writes as follows in his commentary on this verse:  According to דרך האמת  we have to conclude that what is known as היד הגדולה was revealed to the Israelites while they were at the sea. This is a reference to the manifestation of G’d’s attribute of Justice at work against Egypt. The expression is not dissimilar to Deut. 4,36: “and on earth He has shown you His great fire.” This is a reference to His right hand which smashed the enemy (15,15,6). At that point this fire was described as G’d’s “arm” of which the prophet wrote (Isaiah 51,9) עורי עורי לבשי עוז זרוע ה’, ”Awake, awake! Put on the strength of Your arm O Lord;” “are not You the One who dried out the sea. Nothing is concealed from You” (verse 10). We have explained the words לבשי עז in our commentary on Genesis 49,24 מידי אביר יעקב.
   וייראו העם ויאמינו, “The people were afraid and they believed.” Fear and Faith are the cornerstones of the entire Torah. Rabbeinu Chananel writes in this connection that faith may be divided into four parts. 1) Faith in the Lord; this is meant when we read in Chronicles II 20,20 (King Yehoshaphat speaking)  “Trust firmly in the Lord your G’d and you will stand firm.” 2) Faith in the prophets. This is what is meant when the Torah wrote here “they believed in G’d and in His servant Moses.” In order to demonstrate this faith in G’d’s prophets we are obligated to obey the prophets’ instructions. 3) one must have faith in the existence of life after death on earth. This is part of the belief in reward and punishment for performance of the commandments of the Torah. David referred to this when he said (Psalms 27,13) “Had I not had the assurance that I would enjoy the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, etc.” 4) The belief in the coming of the Messiah. This too is an important cornerstone of Torah philosophy. This is confirmed in Isaiah 28,16: “Assuredly, thus said the Lord G’d; ‘Behold I will found in Zion, stone by stone, a tower of precious cornerstones exceedingly firm; he who trusts need not fear.” Everybody who has faith will will be credited with many merits. We know this already from Avraham who was the source of all the faithful. G’d credited him for his trust when the Torah wrote (Genesis 15,6) “he had faith in G’d and He (G’d) considered this as an act of righteousness on his part.” Amongst other advantages accruing to the faithful is the promise that they will experience a return to Gan Eden as we have been told by Isaiah 26,2: “open the gates, and let a righteous nation enter; a nation that keps faith.” This is a reference to life in the hereafter. We have a further verse in Chabakuk 2,4: “the just will live by his faith.” 
    Anyone who does not have faith in these cornerstones of Judaism belongs to the group of people of whom Eliphaz said in Job 15,22: “he is never sure he will come back from the dark; a sword stares him in the face.” Such people will not share in the life in the hereafter nor will they take part in the redemption. We base this on Ezekiel 20,38: “I will remove from you those that rebel and transgress against Me.” It is also written in Psalms 31,24: “the Lord guards the faithful but more than requites him who acts arrogantly.” The meaning is that whereas G’d protects those that have faith, He will punish the faithless because the root of their lack of faith is their arrogance. They will not participate in the life of the future as it is written (Chabakuk 2,4) “the haughtiness  is blown up, not upright; but the righteous will live by his faith.” Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel
    Seeing that faith is the foundation of the whole Torah, our sages have decreed the response אמן on numerous occasions within the prayer service in order for the participants to express their faith in what the reader proclaims. The word אמן is rooted in the expression אמונה, “faith, loyalty.” The word also means that he who says it acknowledges and agrees with the statements concerning which he says אמן. Our sages laid so much stress on this verbal  response that we find a statement in Nazir 15 that “he who answers with the word אמן is greater than he who uttered the words to which אמן is the response.” In order to explain this apparently baffling statement, we must remember that he who answers אמן when he heard the benediction read by the Chazzan in fact acknowledges that the real source of the blessing is G’d, not the Chazzan or priest, and that by saying אמן he validates the Chazzan’z statement. It is similar to sealing a document with a signature. Until it was sealed it lacked legal status. Even if we grant that the Chazzan was the first witness to this document, until it had been countersigned by a second witness it was not valid.
    Our sages have written at length about the manner in which the word  אמן is to be enunciated. They said that it must not be spoken in clipped tones, not in a hurry, it must not be spoken so that the last letter is not clearly audible but one must take his time over saying that word. They were so concerned with ensuring that we take these rules seriously that they threatened that if someone said the word before having heard the whole benediction (an “orphaned אמן”), that such a person or his children might themselves become orphans. They have similarly threatened heavenly retaliation for other infractions of the rules about the proper enunciation and timing of saying the word אמן. Ben Azzai promised long life to those who make a point of saying the word אמן by taking their time over it. (compare Berachot 16 on all this). [The author proceeds to explain some of the defective ways of pronouncing אמן. I decided to omit this. Ed.]
    I have so far explained the word אמן in terms of it being rooted in the word אמונה. Apart from the fact that the word symbolises תפארת and כבוד, there is an additional mystical dimension to this word. It contains within itself a “panorama” of the ten emanations including both the tetragram and its substitute (א-ד-נ-י) seeing it commences with the letter א, which symbolises the hightest of these emanations, i.e. כתר. This emanation is the source  of all the blessings up until the letter מ which symbolises תשובה, repentance, as well as the fact that G’d is מלך העולם the King of the universe. [A king, by definition is masculine. Ed.] The letter ן which adjoins the letter מ alludes to the fact that G’d combines within Himself both the masculine and feminine attributes. The allusion is found in the fact that the letter נ appears sometimes as כפופה, “bent over”, suggesting something feminine, and sometimes upright, at the end of a word, suggesting something masculine. As soon as the path of the blessings (which emanated at the top of the emanations כתר), had  reached the level of  the letter ן and what it represents, it expands to the world of disembodied spirits, after which it descends to our terrestrial universe. Seeing the blessing had commenced its descent from the region represented by the letter א and had continued from there much as the waters from a natural spring continue to flow downwards, irrigating all the areas which are in need of irrigation on their way, so the person responding with the word אמן  has the gates of Gan Eden opened for him. This is the meaning of Isaiah 26,2: “open the gates and let a righteous nation enter, a nation that keeps faith.” The word is spelled אמונים, and the sages suggest that it be read אמנים instead, without the letter ו, i.e. suggesting that those who respond with the word אמן have demonstrated their faith, אמונה. In other words the reward for faith follows in its footsteps (Isaiah 40,10).
    The word אמן is an acrostic consisting of the respective first letters of the words אל מלך נאמן, “G’d is a faithful and dependable G’d.”  It is noteworthy that the word נאמן contains both types of the letter נ which we mentioned before, i.e. the “bent” one and the “straight” one. (in the words of Rashi on Genesis 21,34 “that the verse did not intend to put the lid on information (conceal it), but on the contrary to reveal information).” The “straight” ן in the word אמן embodies both the masculine and the feminine element seeing that the bent נ represents the feminine element and the upright ן the masculine element, there was room for only one such letter in the acrostic. You should also remember that the letter א is called אמן (compare Zohar) as the emanation חכמה is also known as אמון. This is the mystical dimension of Proverbs 8,30 ואהיה אצלו אמון, “I was with him keeping faith.” [The reference is to Torah whose wisdom has been used by G’d in creating the universe. Ed.] חכמה and כתר are in fact inseparable, seeing that this is the domain where blessing originates,  based on Psalms 134,2 שאו ידיכם קודש וברכו את ה', “lift your hands towards the sanctuary and bless the Lord.” The psalmist addresses the חכמה, as קדש. As a result  the statement that he who responds with the word אמן is greater even than the one inviting such a response makes perfect sense.
    All this is applicable outside the confines of the Holy Temple. In the Temple itself the formula אמן was not used (Berachot 63). The reason was that within the precincts of the Temple the priests would pronounce the tetragram in accordance with its spelling, not as a כנוי, i.e. as א-ד-נ-י, as was the case outside the holy precincts. Seeing that the first two letters of the tetragram, i.e. the letters י-ה symbolised the source from which the blessing emanates there was no point in adding the word אמן which does so only indirectly, i.e. by means of the letter א which symbolised the כנוי. 
    When someone consciously repeats the word אמן he will acquire two worlds as indicated by David at the end of Psalm 72 וברוך שם כבודו לעולם וימלא כבודו את כל הארץ אמן ואמן, “Blessed is His glorious name forever; His glory fills the universe, Amen, Amen.” We find the same theme repeated at the end of  Psalm 89 ברוך ה' לעולם אמן ואמן, “Blessed be the Lord forever, Amen and Amen.” Anyone saying אמן in this fashion has truly honoured the Lord. Concerning such people we are told in Samuel I 2,30  (in the name of G’d) “for I honour those who honour Me.”
    People who are negligent in saying the word אמן properly and with the proper thoughts are guilty of blaspheming the name of the Lord. Concerning such people G’d said: ובוזי יקלו, (end of the verse quoted from Samuel). According to our tradition such people are consigned to the lowest of the seven sections of gehinom, a section from which there is no escape. That part of gehinom is known as ארץ עיפתה in Job 10,22. [We know of seven different names for gehinom; each one describes a different layer. compare Eyruvin 19 and Sotah 10. Ed.]. The author identifies ארץ עיפתה with שאול תחתית (Deut. 32,22), i.e. “the lowest depths” from which there is no return. Apparently, the word שאול is one compartment and תחתית is the name of another such compartment. This must be the meaning of Proverbs 15,11: שאול ואבדון נגד ה', “hell and destruction are in front of G’d.” Anyone descending to that level will not ascend again. Concerning people who make light of the saying of אמן, Jeremiah 2,13 said: “they have abandoned Me, the source of living waters.” In other words, by failing to say Amen, or worse, they have deprived themselves of the source of life. Wherein consists their penalty? The prophet continues: “they dig for themselves broken cisterns, cisterns which are unable to hold water.” The repetition by the prophet of the word בארות, cisterns, is an allusion to the twofold penalty these people are going to experience. Whatever G’d does is based on the principle of “measure for measure,” whether it pertains to the handing out of reward or to the decreeing  of punishment. 
    
    15,1. אז ישיר משה ובני ישראל, “Then Moses and the Children of Israel sang, etc.” The word ישיר is a present tense. Mechilta Shirah, section two points out that the Torah did not write שר which would have been the appropriate past tense. The tense used by the Torah here is proof that the resurrection of the dead in the future is a Biblical promise.
    The Mechilta also mentions that the word אז is sometimes used in the future tense and sometimes in the past tense. Examples of the word occurring in the past tense are Genesis 4,26, Exodus 4,26, Numbers 21,17, Joshua 10,12 and others. At the same time there are numerous examples of the word אז referring to future events such as in Isaiah 60,5 אז תראי ונהרת, Isaiah 58,8 אז יבקע כשחר אורך, Isaiah 35,6 אז ידלג כאיל and many others. Moses reasoned that since he had used the word  אזwhen he had criticised G’d’s apparent indifference to Pharaoh’s additional decrees worsening the condition of the Jewish slaves (Exodus 4,10), it was now up to him to make amends by using the same word in exalting Him. The word אז, i.e. 1+7, is an allusion to  the Unique One who reigns supreme above the seven heavens.
    According to a Midrash Tanchuma on Genesis 4,26 the Israelites reasoned that seeing that word had been used when G’d punished mankind for the first time collectively when He caused one third of the dry land mass to be inundated in response to the idolatry introduced by the generation of Enosh, it was appropriate to use the same word at a time when G’d’s sovereignty on earth had been demonstrated by means of the water which had been made to retreat even from its own habitat. 
    The words  משה ובני ישראל לאמור, teach that Moses and the Children of Israel had the good fortune to personally use this formula of exalting G’d, i.e. praising the attribute called זאת לה'. This was like the bride who applauds her husband the King and says: שיר השירים אשר לשלמה.  [this mystical approach is based on the apparent redundancy otherwise of the extra words את השירה הזאת. Ed.] The author promises to deal with this in greater detail in Numbers 21,19.
   ויאמרו לאמור, “they said as follows:” the reason the word אמירה is repeated here is to make it parallel the previous duplication of the word שירה. One look at the entire song will convince you that repeating words is the salient feature of the syntax of this entire song. It is impossible not to notice that either the same words are repeated or that the same meanings are expressed in different verbs and adjectives.
    We find something similar in Hallel, i.e. the combination of psalms arranged by our sages to be recited on festivals. Examples are: Psalms 118,5 מן המצר קראתי י-ה ענני במרחב י-ה, all the way till  verse 24. David repeats himself albeit using different words. The few lines in which David did not repeat himself (from verse 21-24) the sages have ordered us to repeat verbatim in order to maintain the rhythm of the whole chapter. The reason these praises of G’d are repeated altogether is to show that when G’d orchestrated this event there were forces within forces at work. Moses praised both the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice which combined to achieve the results which triggered this whole song of thanksgiving. As an example of the truth of this statement simply look at the words אשירה לה' “I will sing to Hashem” (the attribute of Mercy), followed by עזי וזמרת י-ה, “my strength and might is י-ה,” i.e. the attribute of Justice. When Moses adds in verse three ה' שמו, that His name is Hashem;” there is no dichotomy. Even though on occasion it appears as if two different powers are at work this is not so. Two forces, both part of the same power, are at work. This theme of alternating references to the attribute of Justice on the one hand and the attribute of Mercy on the other recurs again and again such as in verse six  where the word ימינך refers to the attribute of Justice whereas the words מי כמוכה באלם ה' are clearly addressed to the attribute of Mercy. In verse seventeen the words עד יעבור עמך ה' are clearly addressed to the attribute of Mercy, i.e. Hashem, whereas the words מקדש  א-ד-י-נ clearly speak of the attribute of Justice.
    Another approach to the words ויאמרו לאמור: “they enunciated every word clearly.” This would be analogous to Exodus 17,4 ויצעק משה  אל ה' לאמור, “Moses cried out to G‘d saying, etc.” What need was there for the word לאמור, seeing surely Moses did not mean for G’d to pass along what he said to anyone else? It meant that he formulated his words very precisely. Similarly, here. The Israelites formulated every word precisely. This verse contains the important lesson that when praying we must formulate every word very clearly so as not to leave room for misunderstanding. I have found support for this in Mechilta Shirah, section one, where Rabbi Nechemyah is quoted as saying that the Holy Spirit rested on all the Children of Israel at that time; This enabled them to recite the שירה as if it were the קריאת שמע which every normal person recites by carefully enunciating every word.
    A Midrashic approach: the word ויאמרו refers to infants reciting the שירה. The word לאמור is a reference to the unborn children within the wombs of their mothers. This is in line with Sotah 30 where we are told: “how did the Israelites recite the שירה?” Answer; a slightly older infant while he was lying on his mother’s knees; a still younger infant while he was nursing at his mother’s breast. As soon as the infant lying on his mother’s knees became aware of the presence of the Shechinah he raised his neck, whereas the suckling infant let go of his mother’s nipple and both recited: זה אלי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d let me exalt Him.” The Midrash is based on Psalms 8,3 מפי עוללים ויונקים, “from the mouths of infants and sucklings.” Even embryos in the wombs of their mothers said the שירה as we know from Psalms 68,27: “in assemblies bless G’d, the Lord, O you who are the fountain of Israel.” [the words ברכו...ממקור were a call to unborn babies. compare Midrash Tehillim there. Ed.]
   כי גאה גאה, “for He has triumphed gloriously;” seeing that amongst all the animals none is as arrogant in its posture as the horse, and therefore anyone riding it is even more arrogant, the Torah described here that G’d surpasses both horses and rider in His exalted position.
    A Midrashic (ancient Tanchuma manuscript) view: of the two words גאה גאה: there are four creatures which are known for their arrogance; the lion amongst the free-roaming beasts; the ox amongst the domestic beasts, the eagle amongst the birds; man surpasses them all in arrogance. The reason for this is that G’d gave man dominion over all the other creatures in the terrestrial universe when He said (Genesis 1,28) “and have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, and all the living things which move on earth.” What did G’d do? He had likenesses of all these four “arrogant” creatures made as part of His throne as we know from Ezekiel I,10: “Each of them had a human face at the front; each of the four had the face of a lion on the right, each of the four had the face of an ox on the left; each of them had the face of an eagle at the back.“ The reason for this was that G’d had said: “seeing these creatures display arrogance and consider themselves as superior I have to demonstrate My superiority to them.” This is why we read here that the Jewish people acknowledged this when they described G’d as superior to all who deem themselves superior.
    A further comment in Mechilta Shirah, 2: the words כי גאה גאה are a reminder that anyone who dares act arrogantly in the knowledge that there is a G’d who is superior to him will be punished. A number of examples are listed there. 1) The Egyptians expressed their arrogance by boasting of their unfailing water supply, the river Nile. Hence G’d punished them through water. The generation of the deluge boasted that they did not need rain (a symbol of blessing from heaven) as they depended on the mist rising from the earth (compare Genesis 2,6). As a result of this boast G’d punished them by water (40 days unceasing rain, plus the opening of subterranean sources of water gushing forth, Genesis 7,11). The people of Sodom, etc., boasted of their wealth and the gold and silver they had amassed. They were so arrogant that they legislated against anyone staying in their cities overnight so that they should not have to share their wealth with any traveler. As a result of this insufferable behaviour G’d wiped out both them and their belongings. This is the meaning of Job 28,4: “they open up a shaft far from where men live, in places forgotten by wayfarers, destitute of men, far removed.” We also read in Job 12,5: ”in the thought of the complacent; there is contempt for calamity; it is ready for those whose foot slips.”  Ezekiel 16,49 describes the sin of the people of Sodom in the following words: “only this was the sin of your sister Sodom: arrogance! She and her daughters had plenty of bread and untroubled tranquillity; yet she did not support the poor and the needy.” Pharaoh boasted of the might of his chariots as we read in 13,14: “he took 600 choice chariots.” As a result of his reliance and boast of the invincibility of these chariots, G’d punished him by means of these very chariots as we read in 15,4. Siserah also was proud of his iron chariots (horse-drawn tanks), as reported in Judges 4,13. G’d punished him by means of these chariots as we know from Judges 5,20. Samson who had boasted of getting what was “good in his eyes,” was punished by being deprived of his eyesight (Judges 14,3 and 16,1). He had committed a sin at Azzah by sleeping with a harlot (Judges 16,1). He was taken prisoner at Azzah and humbled (Judges 16,21). Avshalom used to boast of his hair only to be eventually caught by it which led to his violent death (Samuel II 18,9). Sancheriv, King of Assyria used to boast of his chariots  (Isaiah 37,24). In the end G’d sent an angel to destroy his entire military encampment (Kings II 19,35). Nebuchadnezzar had also boasted saying that he would ascend to the clouds and match the Most High (Isaiah 14,14). G’d dealt with him by consigning him to the deepest part of gehinom (Isaiah 14,15). He said to him: “you elevated yourself above mankind, I will separate you from mankind by placing you far below” (Compare Daniel 4,22). The Torah wrote in our verse גאה גאה to teach us this lesson.
   סוס ורוכבו רמה בים, “He flung horse and its rider into the sea.” The Torah describes them all in the singular as in G’d’s eyes they were no more of a challenge to Him than a single horse and rider. We find this thought repeated in Deut. 20,1 where the Torah speaks about Israel going to war against its enemies. The Israelites are not to be afraid of the enemy’s cavalry any more than they would be of a single horse and its rider.  The expression סוס ורוכבו, “horse and its rider,” describes the inseparable relationship between the warrior and his steed. Keeping this in mind, Moses said of G’d: רמה בים, “He flung them upwards into the sea,” to portray that their making war had been an act of rebellion against G’d who is high up in heaven. This is also why the Torah says: ירה בים, “He poured out into the sea,” (verse 4) to reflect that “what goes up must come down again,” i.e. that the arrogance of the Egyptians was suitably rewarded. Shemot Rabbah, 23,14  quotes the rider as saying to his horse: “yesterday I dragged you towards the river Nile but you did not follow me; now you are dragging me towards the sea?” The horse answered its rider: רמה בים, i.e. ראה מה בים, “I can see the Supreme One (G’d) in the sea.” 
    
    15,2. עזי וזמרת י-ה, “G’d’s might and vengeance was my salvation.” When Moses referred to G’d by the term עזי, he paraphrased what is written in Psalms 68,29: צוך אלו-היך עזך, “your G’d has ordained might for you.” The words זמרת י-ה are related to Samuel II 23,1 ונעים זמירות ישראל, “the favorite of the songs of Israel.” This term also occurs in Psalms, 47,7 זמרו לאלו-הים זמרו, “Sing, O sing to G’d; O sing.”
   ויהי לי לישועה, “G’d became my salvation.” The reason the redemption from Egypt is always referred to as ישועה, is because it was followed by another exile. The redemption of the future which will not be followed by another exile, will become known as ישועות, (plural). This is why we have David (Psalms 53,7) express his hope for מי יתן מציון ישועות ישראל, “O that the deliverance  of Israel might come from Zion!” On another occasion the final redemption is called תשועת עולמים, in Isaiah 45,17: ישראל נושע בה' תשועת עולמים, “But Israel has won through the Lord triumph everlasting.” In a parallel sense the “song” Moses sang at the Sea of Reeds is known as שירה, “a song (feminine),” whereas the song that will be sung after the final redemption will be known as שיר, “a song (masculine),” reflecting the permanent nature of that redemption; compare Isaiah 26,1 ביום ההוא יושר השיר הזה,”On that day this song which will be sung will be masculine.”
   זה אלי ואנוהו, “this is my G’d and I want to exalt Him.”  According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of ואנוהו is “I wish to build a residence for Him.” This is why Moses continues in verse 13 speaking about נוה קדשך, “Your holy abode.” The Holy Temple has also bee called נוה in  Jeremiah 31,22.
    A Midrashic (Mechilta Shirah 3) approach to our verse: The word אנוהו refers to exalting G’d’s name before all the other nations. The point is to get the nations of the world to acknowledge that there is no G’d comparable to the Lord our G’d. Whereas previously such statements had a somewhat hollow ring, at the Sea of Reeds such a statement had been vindicated for all the world to see. Our sages (Mechilta Beshalach 2) also confirmed this when they said that any lowly maid saw visions at the Sea of Reeds which even the prophet Ezekiel had not been granted. The words אלו-הי אבי וארוממנהו mean that “I want to aggrandise the Lord who has already been the G’d of my father.” 
    
    15,3. ה' איש מלחמה, “Hashem is a master of war.” Seeing that Moses had told the people earlier that “Hashem will fight on your behalf,” they now confirmed to him: “G’d is a master of war.” In order to prevent someone making the mistake of thinking G’d employs conventional weapons when He carries on warfare, they added ה' שמו, “His name is Hashem.” It suffices for G’d to invoke His name and He does not have to engage in tiring and bothersome activity to prevail over His adversaries. We have a parallel line in Jeremiah 32,18: “O great and mighty G’d whose name is the Lord of Hosts.” When Jeremiah describes G’d as the Creator of the universe in Jeremiah 33,2, he also writes: “the Lord Who is shaping it (the universe) to bring it about, Whose name is “the Lord.” [Just as creating the universe did not entail toil and fatigue, neither will restoration of the Jewish state.] 
    A different approach: the word ואנוהו may be understood as אני והוא, meaning אדמה לו, “I wish to emulate Him.” The idea is similar to that expressed in Deut. 28,9 והלכת בדרכיו, “and you go in His ways.” Our sages (Shabbat 133) elaborated on this: “just as He displays patience and is long-suffering (man’s errors) so you shall be patient and long-suffering. Just as He clothes the naked so you shall clothe the naked. Just as He buries the dead, so you shall bury the dead.” The point of this Midrash is to demonstrate that just as G’d was involved in our redemption He is also part of our exile experience, suffering alongside with us. Proof that He participated in our exile is provided by the assurance in Genesis  46,4: “I will go down with you to Egypt.” Our sages used this verse to say that the Shechinah was exiled together with the Jewish people (Megillah 29). We also have a verse in Exodus 1,1 that G’d kept His promise when the Torah wrote the extra word את in that verse to show that G’d had gone down to Egypt together with Yaakov and his family. When we read in Exodus 12,37 that “the Israelites journeyed from Raamses, etc., this is followed in 14,19 where the Torah writes that “an angel of G’d traveled with them.” This illustrates that the Shechinah left Egypt together with them. When David wrote in Psalms 60,7 הושיעה ימינך וענני, “deliver with Your right hand and answer me,” this is a clear indication that G’d, i.e. the Shechinah, was itself in need of salvation.
    The word ואנוהו, i.e. אני והוא is an allusion to both the Israelites and the Shechinah. They shared the exile experience first and now are ready to celebrate the redemption together also. When Ezekiel 1,1 describes his first experience as a prophet and says ואני בתוך הגולה, “and I was in the midst of exile,” the introductory letter ו is a reference to the Shechinah which shared the exile experience with the Jewish people. When Jeremiah 40,1 speaks of והוא אסור באזקים, “and He is bound in fetters,” the extraneous word והוא is a reference to the Shechinah. Having explained all this to you, you need no longer ask about the formula אני והו הושיעה נא which we recite on Hoshanah Rabbah. Had it not been for the fact that the reference is to the Shechinah which is perceived as being in exile and therefore cannot be addressed in our prayers, the wording ought to have been: אני ואותך הושיעה נא. At the same time, there can be no greater ray of hope concerning our own eventual redemption than the knowledge that the Shechinah shares our fate while we are in exile.
    Another reason why the prophets Ezekiel and Jeremiah both refer to the Shechinah in the third person in the verses we have quoted. Speaking of G’d’s attributes in the third person is a reminder of the relative inaccessibility of G’d  who by definition is beyond our capacity to fully comprehend. However much G’d has revealed Himself both at Mount Sinai and through His Torah, there will always be elements of His essence which will escape our understanding at least while we are alive on this earth. The juxtaposition of the formula אני והוא הושיעה נא instead of אני ואותך הושיעה נא, is designed to remind us that although G’d is wrapped in mystery this does not make Him inaccessible to our prayers and our entreaties. Part of G’d’s mystique is that even the angels do not know His location, as we say in the Shabbat קדושה prayer that they ask each other (and Israel) איה מקום כבודו,  “where is the site of His glory?” This is why we adopted the formula used by Ezekiel 3,12: ברוך כבוד ה' ממקומו, “blessed be the glory of Hashem from His place (wherever that may be).” These concepts are best illustrated by the benedictions we recite in our עמידה prayer every day where our sages formulated each one so that it contains both a direct approach to G’d and an indirect approach. At the commencement of each benediction or request we approach G’d directly such  as in שמע קולנו, “listen to our prayer, or in רפאנו ה' ונרפא, “heal us O Lord and we shall truly be cured.” On the other hand, we conclude these benedictions by affirming G’d in the third person instead, i.e. שומע תפלה, “the One who listens to prayer,” or רופא חולי עמו ישראל, “the One who heals the sick of His people Israel.” [The author continues with a list of verses all designed to make the same point. I have omitted same in the interest of brevity. Ed.]
    You may be interested to know that the numerical value of the words אני והו is the same as אנא י-ה-ו-ה, i.e. 78. The word אנא =52, i.e. twice the numerical value of the tetragram, i.e. 26. This would account for the formula אנא הושיעה נא, The words אנא ה' represent the numerical value of the letters in the tetragram three times, (78) suggesting that our appeal to that attribute is addressed to three time frames, the past, the present, and the future. We also have a tradition that these “names” appear as the three-lettered fractions of the 72-lettered name of G’d as arrived at by positioning the words of the three verses (Exodus 14,19-21) in a certain order [as the author discussed there, page 944 in my translation. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach to the words זה א-לי ואנוהו. The word זה (as well as the word זאת) is a name of the Shechinah.  Examples are 13,8 בעבור זה עשה לי, “He did it for me on account of זה.” In Genesis 49,28 we read וזאת אשר דבר להם. In Leviticus 26,44 we read: ואף גם זאת בהיותם בארץ אויביהם; these verses demonstrate that the Shechinah is with the Jewish people in all the exiles. This is why we read in Exodus 13.19 that “the angel of G’d journeyed with the Israelites,” as this presence orchestrated the salvation. This is also the meaning of the line in Exodus 23,21 -which is both promise and warning- כי שמי בקרבו, “for it (the angel, i.e. Shechinah) contains My name.” This “name” is  what David referred to in Psalms 114,7 as  אדון חולי ארץ, “the Lord who was present at the beginnings of the earth.” These considerations prompted Moses to mention עזי וזמרת י-ה, referring to G’d by His name י-ה, something totally uncharacteristic of Moses. Even though we do find that after the battle against Amalek Moses did mention that name of G’d (Exodus 17,16) where he spoke of כי יד על כס י-ה, we need to remember that in that context Moses made the point that G’d’s name as י-ה is incomplete just as the word כס for throne is incomplete and should have been כסא. While an Amalek exists in this universe, G’d, i.e. His name and His Kingdom, cannot be complete.
    The reason that Moses did mention that name is because it represents the attribute of Justice. This is also why David uses this name in Psalms 130,3 where he says אם עונות תשמור י-ה מי יעמוד, “if she will keep track of sins (the attribute of Justice) who can possibly survive?” The word תשמור in that line is not a masculine second person future, but a feminine third person future, i.e. an indirect reference to the feminine attribute of Justice. In Psalms 118,18 David discusses the same theme when he writes that the attribute י-ה, though it had disciplined him severely, had not delivered him to the angel of death.” Again the name י-ה appears as the attribute of Justice. We find the same in Psalm 94,12.
    In Bereshit Rabbah 92,1 the author emphasises that David does not mention the tetragram when speaking of the afflictions endured by those whom the Lord disciplines, but he rather refers to the source of these afflictions as י-ה. Here too the word תיסרנו should not be understood as “You discipline him,” but as “whom the attribute י-ה disciplines.” We may picture someone as standing in front of a judge who pronounces judgment upon him. Thus far Bereshit Rabbah. 
    I have found in Midrash Tehillim on Psalm 118,14 that whereas in this world G’d is exalted only in His capacity as the two-lettered name י-ה, in the world of the future He will be exalted in His capacity as a six-lettered name. This is the meaning of Isaiah 26,14 כי ביה יהוה צור עולמים “that in the eternal life the Rock will be called י-ה י-ה-ו-ה.” I believe that the message of this Midrash is that whereas the present world was created by G’d in His capacity as י-ה, i.e. as the attribute of Justice, the world to come will represent a world created by the attribute of Mercy, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה. Seeing that at that time there will neither be a יצר הרע, an evil urge, nor death, the function of the attribute of Justice will be severely curtailed and the world will be based almost exclusively on the attribute of Mercy.
    There is another short passage in Shemot Rabbah 19,6 which may be understood along similar lines. The author, quoting G’d, says: “in the past I and My court used to walk ahead of you as described in Exodus 14,21. In the future, however, I will be walking all by Myself;” as we read in Isaiah 52,12: “for the Lord    (י-ה-ו-ה) is marching before you, the G’d of Israel is your rear guard.” The G’d of Israel is identical with the “G’d of Yaakov.” This is the same attribute.
    When Moses spoke both of אלי and of אלו-הי אבי separately, the reference to the אלו-הי אבי was to the G’d of his tribe, the tribe of Levi (seeing that Levi represented the attribute of Justice both when he killed the males of Shechem and when he carried out the execution of the Jews who had worshipped the golden calf).
   וארוממנהו, “and I wish to declare Him supreme.” This is a veiled reference to the time when G’d can be called by His full Name as the world will have recognised His full potential in the affairs of man. Moses follows with 
   ה' איש מלחמה ה' שמו, “eventually G’d’s attribute of Mercy will be permanently in the ascendancy.” The unique nature of G’d consists of the fact that He will link the beginning to the end, the start of a development to its successful completion. He can do this as He is eternal and has foreseen the final outcome already at the beginning of its development. You will find this concept confirmed in the Sefer Hayetzirah 1,4: הבן בחכמה וחכם בבינה העמד דבר על בוריו והשב יוצר על מכונו, “[if I understand it correctly. Ed.] when approached with wisdom and understanding it will be seen that though initially man could not decipher how G’d’s plan for the universe was going to work out, eventually it will be demonstrated as having been the logical result of the premises it is built on.”
    
    15,4. מרכבות פרעה וחילו, “Pharaoh’s chariots and his army.” The  “chariots of Pharaoh” are the 600 chariots mentioned in 14,7. The word חילו, “his army,” refers to the שלישים who were manning these chariots. In view of this we would have expected the Torah to have written the following sequence: “He flung into the sea the chariots of Pharaoh and his army whereas his choicest captains drowned in it.” It is possible that the correct interpretation of the verse is: “seeing that the fate of Pharaoh’s chariots had already been determined in the celestial tribunal, they and their captains were bound to drown in the sea.” 
    Mechilta Beshalach 4 comments on our verse as follows: man is measured by the same yardstick he himself had applied to others. Seeing that Pharaoh had decreed that every Jewish male baby be thrown into the sea, his own chariots and his army were flung into the sea. He had instructed the midwives to look at the birthstool (Exodus 1,16) prior to male babies being born alive; in retaliation many of his soldiers went down in the sea like a stone (אבן).
    
    15,6. ימינך ה', Your right hand O Lord, etc.” It is an accepted rule that every one of G’d’s attributes contains within it an element of its opposing attribute. As a result the attribute of Justice is “clothed” in the attribute of Mercy. This idea appears to be expressed by the words נאדרי בכח “is glorified by strength.” The word is derived from אדרת, “mantle, cover,” the power of the mercy contained in that mantle over the attribute of Justice was responsible for the Israelites escaping the fate of the Egyptians. The latter were drowned by the essence of the attribute of Justice whereas the Israelites were saved by its periphery, the mantle of Mercy. Some Midrashim (Tehillim 18) phrased it thus: The word “Your right hand smashed the enemy,” suggests that G’d’s other hand saved the Israelites.
    
    15,7. תהרוס קמיך, “You destroy Your opponents.” The reason Moses employed the word הריסה, a word applicable to the destruction of buildings, may have been to demonstrate that whereas the Egyptians had forced the Israelites to build, G’d now tore down the very people for whom these buildings had been constructed. This would be another illustration of “measure  for measure.” This is precisely what impressed Yitro when he said (Exodus 18,11) “by the very matter with which they had sinned.” Gentiles were impressed by how G’d made the punishment fit the crime. Moses said קמיך instead of קמינו, “those who oppose You,” instead of “those who oppose us.” Moses thereby equated people who attack Israel with an attack against G’d Himself i.e. the Shechinah which protects Israel. David followed in Moses’ footsteps when he said (Psalms 83,3) “for Your enemies rage, Your foes assert themselves.” People who attack G’d’s people by definition attack G’d .
    
    15,8. נערמו מים, “the waters piled up in a heap.” The plain meaning corresponds to the translation by Onkelos חכימו מיא, “that the waters acted intelligently.” The waters are given credit for arranging themselves in a tall column in order to permit the liberated Israelites to find a path through them and to pour the Egyptians into them immediately after the Israelites had completed crossing when they would again resume their original shape, etc.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word נערמו is similar to the pile of ashes which formed a huge pile on the altar from the burned parts of the sacrifices, a pile which would be cleaned off regularly (compare Numbers 4,13). This would mean exactly the reverse of displaying intelligence as Onkelos understood it. In fact, it would mean that due to the waters’ whole orderly behaviour having been upset, it appeared unable to act in any kind of orderly manner. This was the result of the input from the attribute of Mercy having ceased to reach the waters due to the prevalence of the attribute of Justice at that time. The very words נערמו מים instead of נערמו מי המים are an allusion to the confused state the waters were in. Had they acted intelligently the Torah would have described their behaviour as that of the מי המים, “the waters of the body of water,” or “the waters of the sea.” 
    You should also appreciate that the very word מים is an allusion to the attribute of Mercy. The reason that the waters split, i.e. lost their cohesion, was that they failed to receive the input from the very attribute that enabled them to act as a constructive force. The celestial agent responsible for  water (שרו של מים) is one of the disembodied forces as we can prove from the Jerusalem Targum which translates the words קפאו תהומות בלב ים, as בגו פלגס דימא רבא, “they froze inside the high seas of the great ocean [“great ocean” is presumably a reference to this celestial agent in charge of the waters. Ed.].
    
    15,11. מי כמכה באלים ה' מי כמכה נאדר בקדש, “Who is like You amongst the heavenly powers, who is like You majestic in holiness!” The additional letter ה both times at the end of the word כמך is an allusion to the attribute of Justice; the first one refers to the “weaker” attribute of Justice, this is why the letter כ at the beginning is weak,” i.e. without dagesh. This attribute is merely a conduit having received its input from the “strong” attribute of Justice. This is why the second word כמכה is spelled with the dagesh in the first letter as it describes the original attribute of Justice, not its delegate. It originates in the region Moses described as קדש.
  נורא תהלות, “awesome in splendour.” All G’d’s creatures are afraid to proclaim His praises as they are afraid to do so inadequately. David echoed this sentiment in Psalms 65,2 when he said  לך דומיה תהלה, “vis-a-vis You o G’d silence is the essence of praise.” This is so because who can be arrogant enough to presume to praise the Lord adequately?
    Praise may be offered in one of three ways. 1) Excessive praise. Exaggeration demeans. 2) adequate praise. 3) inadequate praise; this reveals lack of perception by the one who offers the praise.  When applied to G’d, the first two ways amount to a lie when applied to someone praising the Lord. This leaves only the third possibility of praising the Lord inadequately. Seeing this is so David explains that silence is best. We have a similar though differently worded statement by David in 106,2: “who can tell the mighty acts of the Lord?” A third statement in Scripture making a similar point is found in Nechemyah 9,5: “exalted though it is (His glorious name) beyond every blessing and praise.” Jerusalem Talmud Berachot at the beginning of chapter 9 writes לך דומיה תהלה סמא דכולא משתוקא, “as to You, silence is praise, seeing that in the final analysis there is only silence.” Just as if one praises the beauty of an exquisite pearl one invariably fails to do justice to its beauty, so when attempting to praise the Lord one invariably will fall short of one’s objective.
    Nachmanides writes as follows about the words נורא תהלות: “seeing that the nations of the world put their trust in that which is fraudulent and tortuous, Moses made the point that G’d is awesome, entitled to all the praises with which He is being extolled.”
   עושה פלא, “working wonders.” Moses referred to the miracle that the same wind which had dried out the sea, etc., also accomplished the reversal. One might have expected G’d to employ separate agents for separate objectives. The same רוח אפיך which had caused the waters to pile up in a wall, etc. (verse 8) was active in making the waters cover the Egyptians with the waters of the sea as spelled out by Moses in verse 10. Had G’d employed two different winds for this purpose, the Torah (Moses) would have referred to His performing נפלאות, “wonders” (pl) instead of פלא, a single miracle. The entire phenomenon of the splitting of the sea and everything connected with it is described by Moses here as a single miracle, פלא.  
    You are aware already that the types of miracles which are visible phenomena are known as נפלאות, seeing that they are phenomena which, though they have been revealed, originate in causes, i.e. in a power that is hidden from us. The very word פלא means something which is at one and the same time visible and concealed. The source of the concealed power is the letter א in that word. The emanation חכמה is derived from the א. This is why Elihu says (Job 33,33) אאלפך ,”l will teach you (wisdom).” [He referred to the letter א as being the source of that wisdom. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (based on Midrash Tehillim 106: Rabbi Yudan said that the words נורא תהלות mean ‘You are more awesome than any of the praises of You could describe.’ When one praises a king of flesh and blood his subjects will call him “a hero, a strong man” even if he is physically weak and lacking in courage. The reverse is true of G’d. However much one praises Him, and however exaggerated these praises may sound they still fail to do justice to His grandeur.
    
    15,12. נטית ימיך תבלעמו ארץ, “when You inclined Your right hand the earth swallowed them.” Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 17 use this verse to prove that the Egyptians were granted burial in the earth. This was in recognition of their having accompanied Yaakov on the long journey to the land of Canaan at the time he was buried. Mechilta Shirah section 9 adds: ”the word ימין or ימינך when referring to G’d always refers to an oath G‘d has sworn. We know this from Isaiah 62,8: ‘The Lord has sworn with His right hand.’ The meaning of all this is that whereas the sea had spat out the bodies of the Egyptians who had been drowned in it, the earth refused to accept these bodies remembering G’d had cursed it for accepting Hevel’s body at the time (Genesis 4,11). It continued in its refusal until G’d swore an oath that He would not demand an accounting from earth for accepting these bodies. This accounts for the words נטית ימינך תבלעמו ארץ, ‘after You gave a signal with Your right hand the earth swallowed them.’”
   נחית בחסדך, “You guided in Your love, etc.” The Israelites had three merits to their credit which helped them become redeemed. 1) the merit of performing deeds of kindness to one another. 2) the merit of Torah; 3) the merit of the sacrificial offerings. The word בחסדך in our verse alludes to the deeds of loving kindness performed by one Israelite for another in return for which You G’d repaid them with kindness.” In Deut. 30,14 the Torah refers to all three of these merits when we read כי קרוב אליך הדבר מאד בפיך ובלבבך לעשותו, “for the matter is very close to you, in your mouth and in your heart to observe it.” The word בפיך, “in your mouth,” refers to Torah; the word ובלבבך refers to sacrificial service of which G’d said  (Deut. 11,13) “you shall serve Him with your whole heart;” the word לעשותו, “to do it,” refers to deeds of loving kindness. 
    
    15,14. שמעו עמים ירגזון, “when the nations heard they became agitated.” Moses mentioned the various nations here in four sections to describe the four directions on earth where these nations had their habitat. Palestine, Edom, Moav, and Canaan are merely representatives of the four directions. The name פלשת includes all nations residing in the West; the name Edom includes all nations south of the Holy Land. The name Moav includes all the peoples residing east of Eretz Yisrael; the name Canaan includes all the nations north of where Moses sang this song. The phenomenon of the sea splitting was felt by all these nations. A more specific reason for the nations mentioned by Moses by name to have been specifically fearful at that time is: the Philistines had killed 200,000 members of the tribe of Ephrayim who had made an ill-fated attempt at fleeing from Egypt 30 years prior to the Exodus having calculated that the decree of 400 years was at an end. They marched to the land of the Philistines on their route to the Holy Land but were killed to a man by the Philistines. This is why the Philistines were now afraid of the Jewish G’d’s retribution. The Edomites were afraid that the Israelites would now revenge themselves on their ancestor Esau’s behaviour against Yaakov. The Moabites trembled remembering the feud between the shepherds of Avraham and the shepherds of Lot. The inhabitants of Canaan had special reason to be afraid as they had simply appropriated to themselves lands belonging Yaakov and his family.
    
    15,16. תפול עליהם אימתה ופחד, “May fear and terror befall them, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word אימתה, “fear,” refers to the nations close by whereas the word פחד refers to those nations who lived further away. The people living a considerable distance from the Sea of Reeds, i.e. the people of Jericho, admitted 40 years later (Joshua 2,10) that they had heard about G’d having dried out the sea in order to let the Israelites pass, something that still left them afraid. The word אימתה is basically the same as אימה, the letter ת being an addition much as we find in Psalms 44,27: קומה עזרתה לנו, where the letter ת is also a poetical license taken by the author. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the word אימתה is equivalent to אימת ה', a fear of G’d derived from the attribute פחד. Moses’ prayer was that this attribute should be stretched taut over all the Israelites’ enemies. The letter ה at the end of the word is taken from the last letter of the tetragram so that when you read the sequence  אימת ה' ופחד, the reference is to the attribute of G’d as represented always by the Shechinah (symbolised by the Holy Ark in the Tabernacle). The fact that this Holy Ark was fear-inspiring is documented in Samuel I 4,17 after the Holy Ark had been captured by the Philistines and it caused terror and panic amongst them and their deities until they voluntarily returned it to Israel. You will find a clear allusion to all this when you note that the capture of the Ark is described there as  נלקחה instead of as נלקח, seeing the word ארון is masculine. The letter ה at the end then is not a sign of the noun being feminine, but refers to this attribute of Justice which is an integral part of the Ark and which spread  fear and terror when in the  hands of the wrong people. 
    Proof of the attribute of Justice being an integral part of the Holy Ark is the fact that frequently  when the Torah speaks of the Ark, the Ark is simply called ה'. Examples are: Numbers 10,36: ובנחה יאמר שובה ה', “when it came to rest, he would say: ‘reside tranquilly O Hashem.’” The word ובנחה is a contraction of ובנח ה' ”when G’d came to rest.” The subject under discussion in Numbers is the Ark being returned to the Tabernacle after the Israelites had made camp. We find something similar when the Israelites broke camp (Numbers 10,35). At that point the Torah writes that Moses would instruct קומה ה' ויפוצו אויביך, “rise O Lord and let Your enemies scatter.” Clearly he was addressing the attribute of G’d linked to the Holy Ark. The word קומה is a contraction of קום ה' just as שובה is a contraction of שוב ה',
    Furthermore, the letter ה at the respective end of the words קומה and שובה are feminine endings of a verb addressing a feminine noun, i.e. the Shechinah, an attribute of G’d which is viewed as feminine (as indicated by the word itself). This is all part of the proof that Moses did not just address the Ark [though the Ark was capable of supporting both itself and those who carried it. Ed.] but that he addressed the Shechinah, the attribute of Justice we discussed earlier. Support for our theory is found also in the way the Targum translates the words in Exodus 33,14 פני ילכון.  The wording is שכנתי תהך, “My Shechinah will go.” This is the feminine form for “walking, traveling.” The masculine equivalent would have been יהך.
    The Shechinah, which is viewed as the “signature” of the structure, receives its input from the attribute גבורה also known as פחד. This is why Moses said תפול עליהם אימתה ופחד, as if he had said: “may the fear of the Shechinah which receives its power from the attribute פחד fall upon them.”
   עד יעבור עמך ה', “until Your people O Hashem cross over.” Moses refers here to the Israelites crossing the river Arnon (Deut. 2,24). When he continued עד יעבור עם זו קנית, “until this nation whom You have acquired will cross,” he referred to the Israelites crossing the river Jordan (compare Pessikta Zutrata) This is why we are told specifically that when the Ark entered the waters of the Jordan, that the water piled up north of the river to afford the Israelites passage on a dry river bed (Joshua 3,16 and 17).
   עם זו קנית, “this nation You have acquired.” Why did the Torah change from calling the Jewish people עם זו גאלת, in verse 13  to עם זו קנית? As long as Moses had spoken about the status of the Jewish people at the crossing of the Sea of Reeds when they had not yet accepted the Torah he described them as the nation whom “G’d had redeemed.” When he speaks about future events, events which would occur after the revelation at Mount Sinai, he speaks of the people G’d had acquired.
    A Midrashic approach (Mechilta Shirah section 9) to the words  עם זו קנית: G’d is described as having acquired four things. 1) “Israel,” as we know from the words עם זו קנית.” 2) “The Torah,” as we know from ה' קנני ראשית דרכו (the Torah speaking in Proverbs 8,22) “The Lord has acquired me at the beginning of His way.” 3) “Heaven and Earth” as we know from Genesis 14,22 קונה שמים וארץ “who owns heaven and earth.” 4) “The Holy Temple,” as we know from Psalms 78,54 הר זה קנתה ימינו “His right hand has acquired this Mountain.” It is therefore appropriate that Israel which has been called an acquisition of G’d should receive the Torah which has also been described as G’d’s acquisition. The whole world which is also an acquisition of G’d owes its continued existence to the merit of Torah. It is furthermore appropriate for Israel who are G’d’s acquisition to build the Temple which is also G’d’s acquisition. 
    
    15,17. תביאמו ותטעמו, “You will bring them and plant them, etc.” By excluding mention of himself in this verse, Moses prophesied that he would not enter the land of Israel (Mechilta Shirah section 10). As to his words מכון לשבתך פעלת, “You have made the foundation of Your dwelling-place,” these words are a continuation of the words בהר נחלתך, “on the mount of Your heritage.” The meaning of the whole verse is: “on the mount of Your heritage down here on earth You have established the foundation of a dwelling-place which corresponds to Your dwelling in the heaven.” Moses referred to that dwelling-place with the words מקדש ה' כוננו ידיך, a reference to the Sanctuary in the heavens. This is the reason that you find the tone-sign zakef gadol on the word מקדש, “Sanctuary.” The letter ק in the word מקדש is spelled with the dagesh chazak tone-sign in the letter to indicate the תוקף, “the strength” represented by that Sanctuary. This is because it is a “Sanctuary of Sanctuaries,” the crown of the Sanctuary on earth. Whereas in connection with the Sanctuary on earth Moses speaks of a פעולה, a physical activity, something appropriate for the terrestrial regions, no such activity is mentioned in connection with the Sanctuary in heaven. However, he did say כוננו ידיך, “Your hands have established it,” a reference to the ten emanations (i.e. the ten fingers on the two hands).
    
    15,18. ה' ימלך לעולם ועד, “the Lord will rule forever.” The plain meaning of the text is that just as G’d had demonstrated His supremacy over all of mankind and the forces of nature at this time by saving the deserving and punishing the guilty, may He continue to do so in each and every generation. The same idea has been expressed by David in Psalms 146,10: “The Lord will reign forever, your G’d, O Zion, for all generations, Hallelujah.” The word ימלך is written defective, without the letter ו to teach us that  G’d does not approach His subjects with great demands by demanding an exhausting sort of service from them. (Avodah Zarah 3). The prophet Micha 6,3 has already publicly remonstrated with his people showing that G’d’s demands of His people (and on mankind) are quite minimal. He asked: “My people! What wrong have I done you? What hardship have I caused you?” 
    A kabbalistic approach: after Israel had watched the emanation מלכות split the sea and they had offered their praises to G’d and His Kingdom, they concluded their praises by invoking the tetragram just as they had used that attribute at the beginning of the song when they sang אשירה לי-ה-ו-ה. 
    Onkelos translates the word ימלך as if it were present tense; i.e. “G’d’s kingdom endures forever.” We find the same in Psalms 10,16: “The Lord is king forever and ever; the nations will perish from His land.” [whenever G’d’s kingdom is expressed in the present tense some of our commentators are concerned that the reader who in his lifetime sees no evidence of G’d exerting His power may find such terminology bothersome. This is especially so if, as here, the grammar clearly speaks of the future. Ed.] Perhaps what prompted Onkelos to translate the word ימלך as a present tense instead of as a future tense is that Moses and the people of Israel had in mind G’d in His capacity as representing מלכות, kingdom, sovereignty. This is why they thought it appropriate to conclude the song with that theme. This then was in contrast to the opening of the song when  they emphasized the tetragram, at the conclusion they emphasised the מלכות aspect of G’d. When we look at the missing letter ו in the word ימלך, the idea may have been to impress upon us that the King, i.e. מלך, is the essence of any kingdom. It is in the nature of a king to exert different degrees of his influence and power on the affairs of state at different times depending on his judgment of which is more appropriate.
    It is also possible that what Onkelos had in mind was that in G’d’s thinking all the “times,” be they past, present or future, are all one, i.e. as if they were the present, seeing that He had preceded the very concept of time and He will be in existence long ”after” the concept of time has ceased to exist.
    It is important to remember that the entire song consists of 18 verses; perhaps the number 18 is to symbolise the number of vertebrae in our backbone (Berachot 28) which will be renewed at the time of the resurrection and at which time we will recite such a song of thanksgiving for having been resurrected. This also gives even deeper meaning to the statement by our sages in Sanhedrin 91 that the reason that the Torah does not insert Moses’ song by referring to it as אז שר משה, “at that time Moses  sang,” instead of writing אז ישיר משה, “then Moses will sing.” The Torah wanted to provide us with an allusion to the eventual resurrection. You will find a parallel wording when Isaiah 26,1 speaks of the song of thanksgiving to be sung in the future after the final redemption. He writes: “In that day, this song shall be sung in the land of Yehudah: ‘ours is a mighty city; He makes victory our inner and outer wall. Open the gates, and let a righteous nation enter, a nation that keeps faith, etc., etc.”.....This song concludes with the words  יחיו מתיך, “Your dead will come alive.” Isaiah too composed 18 verses to make up that song of the future Just as Moses made reference to עזי וזמרת י-ה, so Isaiah mentions in that song the words בטחו בה' עדי עד כי בי-ה ה' צור עולמים, adding the tetragram to the two-lettered name of G’d י-ה which had been in use prior to that final redemption. All of this was to hint of additional spiritual attainments which would be achieved at that time. At that time G’d’s name will be complete and His throne will be whole (compare Tanchuma Ki Tetze 8).
    
    15,19. כי בא סוס פרעה, “for  Pharaoh’s cavalry came, etc.” The Torah now goes back to the beginning of the שירה  as if the opening line had read אז ישיר משה ובני ישראל את השירה הזאת כאשר בא סוס פרעה ברכבו ובפרשיו בים, “then Moses and the Children of Israel sang a song when Pharaoh, his cavalry, and its riders went into the sea and G’d brought the waters of the sea upon them whereas the Israelites walked on dry ground.” The verse teaches that the Israelites sang the song while still crossing.
    
    15,20. ותקח מרים הנביאה, “Miriam the prophetess took, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason the Torah added the words “sister of Aaron,” -something we were well aware of- was to ensure that the three siblings Moses, Aaron, and Miriam should all have their names associated with this song. Another reason is connected with good form. It is customary that when the name of a person is introduced we relate it to his or her oldest  brother as we find in Genesis 36,22: “the sister of Lotan was Timnah.” It is also possible that Aaron was mentioned in order for her to obtain permission to use the percussion instrument drum, seeing a drum is an instrument connected with the planet (zodiac sign) Jupiter. Each of the planets had a musical instrument which was specifically associated with that planet, the drum being that associated with Jupiter. We have a verse in Job 29,14 צדק לבשתי וילבשני, “I clothed myself in righteousness and it robed me.” This verse is understood to refer to Aaron’s priestly garments. The word צדק then appears both as meaning “Jupiter” and as meaning “Aaron.” Miriam had to obtain Aaron’s permission to use the drum. You are aware that Psalm 150 contains 10 “hallelujahs” of G’d but only nine musical instruments corresponding to nine celestial bodies. (horn, harp, lyre, timbrel, dance (מחול), lute, pipe, cymbals, loud-clashing cymbals. [More on this subject on Exodus 32,19.] The words אהרון את התוף are a clear allusion that there was a conceptual linkage between Aaron and the instrument called תוף.
    A Midrashic approach (Sotah 12-13): the Torah links Miriam as a prophetess to her brother Aaron rather than to her brother Moses. The Torah’s message is that she demonstrated her prophetic gift while she was a sister of Aaron, before Moses had been born. In fact, her prophecy concerned Moses. She predicted that  her mother would give birth to the redeemer of the Jewish people.
    We need to understand why the prophetic spirit was entrusted to a woman rather than to a man. Actually, there is hardly anything surprising in this; after all woman is as much part of the species as is man. Did not the Torah refer to both of them as אדם in Genesis 5,2? Our sages (Megillah 14) claim that Sarah was not inferior to Miriam in her prophetic qualities seeing the Torah refers to her as יסכה (Genesis 11,29) which means means that she saw things with her Holy Spirit. Shemot Rabbah 1,1 claims that the word in Genesis 21,12 where G’d told Avraham to listen to all that Sarah would tell him prove that as a prophet Avraham was junior to Sarah. This is the view of the Midrash. The fact is that the Torah itself does not mention prophecy in connection with a woman until Miriam. The reason that this is the time the matter of Miriam’s prophecy was revealed is either to teach us that she possessed this gift prior to Moses’ birth or because the Torah wanted to wait with telling us this until the Shechinah itself had been exiled. The Torah wanted to allude to the statement we have already quoted that the quality of the prophetic visions granted even to women at the bottom of the social register at the time of the crossing of the sea surpassed that of the visions granted to the great prophet Ezekiel. Hence the Torah saw fit to record that not only Miriam but all her colleagues broke out in song and dance praising the Lord. The Midrash (Mechilta Shirah 3) means that Miriam and her colleagues broke out in that song spontaneously; they did not paraphrase the words Moses had composed but composed their own.
    There are numerous other fundamental aspects of Torah which have been taught to the people by women. One such fundamental concept is the spelling out of the existence of spiritual life after death which Abigail mentioned to David when she explained to him that by not taking revenge on her wicked husband Naval he would merit to be accorded special status in that hereafter (Samuel I 25,29 where participation in that  hereafter is called והיתה אדוני צרורה בצרור החיים את ה' אלו-היך, “and may the soul of my lord be joined to the bundle of life in the care of the Lord”). Another major contribution about fundamentals of our faith was provided by Chanah (mother of the prophet Samuel) when she referred to the resurrection in her prayer of thanksgiving after Samuel had been born and she brought him to the High Priest Eli (Samuel I 2,6); compare Rosh Hashanah 17. The fundamental belief in transmigration of souls was taught by the woman from Tekoah (Samuel II 14,14) when she told David  that “G’d would not take away life from a person in such a way that nothing remains, etc.” All of these examples I mention to show that woman is not to regarded as a mere subsidiary to the male. She is a mainstay of the tenets of Judaism in a number of spheres. [perhaps the fact that the author enumerates only examples connected with life and earth is due to the fact that it is woman’s domain to bring forth life on earth. Ed.] Our sages in Megillah 14 have taught that there were a total of seven women-prophetesses: Sarah, Miriam, Chanah, Devorah, Chuldah, Avigail and Esther. The number corresponds to the seven attributes which are of a passive nature. (חסד, גבורה, תפארת, נצח, הוד, יסוד מלכות).
   בתופים ובמחולות, “with drums and dances.” The women mentioned here were extremely wise as we mentioned earlier. They had experienced visions not granted to the greatest prophets bar Moses. Some of them were motivated by pure motives, others had unacceptable motives. The ones who engaged in dancing had unacceptable motives as the “dance” as a musical instrument  was the one associated with the planet Mars, a symbol of warfare, violence. The negative impact of that “instrument” became evident at the time of the golden calf where the Torah reports the woshippers as indulging in מחולות, (Exodus 34,19). I will have more to say on that subject in my commentary on that verse.
    15,22. ויצאו אל מדבר שור, “they went out to the wilderness of Shur.” The reason that wilderness was called שור was because it was the place where the Jewish people yearned to see further revelations of the emanation חכמה, such as had been granted to them during the crossing of the sea. The name ישורון  was bestowed on the Jewish people in recognition of these insights which had been granted to them. The word is also reminiscent of Bileam’s blessing in Numbers 23,9  ומגבעות אשורנו, “and I can see them from the tops of hills.” At that time the Israelites were on a spiritual high, ascending higher and higher. The wilderness of Shur is identical with the wilderness איתם, of which we read in Numbers 33,8: “they set out from Pi Hachirot, and passed through the sea into the wilderness; and they made a three-days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham.” They camped at Marah.
    A Midrashic view cited in Shemot Rabbah 24,4: “This was a place where the Israelites were anxious to place flags in rows upon rows. Another explanation: the desert of Shur is a euphemism for the Jewish people prior to their receiving the Torah. As long as the Torah had not been given the entire world was comparable to a wilderness. Once the Torah was given it was transformed into “Shur” i.e. a (protective) wall. Rabbi Yehudah son of Rabbi Seymon quoted G’d as saying that in the future He would do the same for Zion. Whereas in Isaiah 64,9 Zion was described as a wilderness, it would become a protective wall as prophesied in Zecharyah 2,9 “I shall become a wall of fire (for Zion) surrounding it and I will glory inside it.”
   וילכו שלשת ימים במדבר, “they walked for three days through the desert.” I have already mentioned at the beginning of my commentary on this portion that every occurrence that took place in the desert was in the nature of a trial. There has never been a reported march of a nation numbering three million souls plus through the desert without their being supplied with a drop of water especially at a hot time of year. According to our sages  (see our comment on 13,17) when the Israelites arrived at Marah the waters they found there had first been sweet, water fit to drink. These waters turned bitter, bracken, to intensify the trial they were undergoing. This is best reflected in the Torah itself writing “there He subjected them to a test” (verse 25). When Moses prayed and G’d showed him how to sweeten the water by throwing some bitter piece of wood into it, this was all part of the same trial. The very irrationality of bitter wood turning bitter water into sweet water was designed to underline that the whole experience was designed to test the Israelites’ dependence on G’d’s goodwill.
    In discussing this matter, Rabbi Nathan in Mechilta Vayissa section 1, says that the wood G’d showed Moses is called Hardefani, a tree growing by the banks of a river, and the fruit of which is a deadly poison for any man who eats from it. On the other hand, Rabbi Eleazar Hamoda-i claims that the tree was the olive tree. A third opinion offered holds that it was the root of the fig tree. In any event, the common denominator of all these traditions is that the wood was bitter and could not have sweetened the water by natural means. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel, reflecting on this phenomenon (and others) was prompted to exclaim: “how wondrous are Your works O Lord, so much more wonderful than anything designed by man.” When Elisha told his disciples (Kings II 2,20 ) “bring me a new dish and put salt in it,” he added matter which would make the water even less palatable than before in order to turn the water into drinking water. This too was an example of a miracle within a miracle.
    Rabbeinu Chananel writes that when the Torah writes that the Israelites marched through the desert for three days, this does not mean that they actually walked for three days. It means that they covered a distance that would normally be a three days’ march in a single day.
   וילכו שלשת ימים במדבר ולא מצאו מים, “they walked in the desert for three days without finding water.” The water which they had drawn from amongst the rocks in the Sea of Reeds had been exhausted at that time. The commentators described in Baba Kama 82 as דורשי רשומות in commenting on this verse say that the word מים in this verse is a simile for Torah as we know that when the prophet Isaiah 55,1 invited the people with the words: ”let every thirsty person come and drink water,” he did not refer to physical water, but to the equally life-sustaining Torah. The fact that the Israelites went without water for three days prompted the sages under the leadership of Ezra to introduce Torah-reading in the synagogue at least every three days (the Monday and Thursday readings).
    
    15,25. שם שם לו חוק ומשפט, “there He established for it (the Jewish people) statute and social legislation.”  According to the plain meaning of the text Moses (at the instruction of G’d) laid down some ground rules for the Israelites’ conduct while they journeyed in the desert. Moses occupied the de facto position of king, lawgiver. He rebuked the people and told them how to treat their wives and children. He also established rules how to relate to other nations with whom the Israelites could expect to come in contact during their trek to the land of Canaan. They would have to engage in trade relations with surrounding nations.
    Some commentators say that he taught them details about the vegetation they would encounter in the desert, which plants had therapeutic value, which were poisonous, etc., etc. The word חק applied to phenomena which were known only empirically, whereas the word משפט applies to knowledge of the inner workings and the why and wherefore of the phenomena in question.
   ושם נסהו, “and there He tested it” “It” refers to the various plants which were unfamiliar to the people. This is why Moses added (verse 26): “if you will surely listen to the instructions of the Lord your G’d...for I am your healer.” In view of the new-found knowledge about nature’s remedies, etc. the people might have considered themselves as self-sufficient, less dependent on G’d. Moses therefore warned them that in the final analysis not their familiarity with what nature had to offer would ensure their well being but their obedience to G’d. These were the considerations which prompted Chizkiyah King of Yehudah to hide the medical textbooks as the people had come to believe that cures to illnesses were to be found there rather than by faith in the Lord and observance of His commandments (compare  Pessachim 56 where the sages of his time are recorded as having approved of Chizkiyah’s measure).
    A Midrashic approach: the words חק ומשפט refer to the legislation preceding the Torah which G’d revealed at Marah, notably certain aspects of the Sabbath legislation and the laws of the red heifer (known as חוקים as they cannot be arrived at by means of human logic) as well as laws about litigation which the Torah here mentioned under the heading משפטים. Sanhedrin 56  lists 10 laws which were revealed at Marah.
    If you will read this paragraph carefully you will note that at this point of their wanderings the celestial force ruling the deserts began to actively try and interfere with the Israelites’ obedience to G’d and Moses. The obstacles to a smooth journey which this שר המדבר, the celestial agent in charge of the desert, placed in the path of a smooth journey of the Israelites led to their complaints against Moses and indirectly against G’d. In the ספר הבהיר by Rabbi Nechunyah Hakanah the matter is described in the following words: “Satan said to the Israelites: ‘although these bitter waters which have now become sweet are sufficient for you for the moment, as you progress deeper and deeper into the desert you will not even find enough water to wash your faces.’” Another comment found in connection with the bitter waters turning sweet, on the words “He taught them about a certain wood” teaches that this was the tree of life (from Gan Eden) which surrounded the bitter waters. When Satan became aware of the presence of that tree he removed it in order to confuse the Israelites and to lead them into sin As a result, וילונו העם, the people complained. This was followed immediately by Moses crying out to G’d (verse 25), and He showed him an alternative wood to sweeten the water.” In other words, G’d intervened and weakened the power of Satan. He did so by providing the Israelites with the legislation mentioned so that performance of these commandments would fortify them against temptation by the Satan. Had G’d not weakened the power of Satan at that time the Israelites could not have prevailed against him. This is the reason the Torah condensed all this into the few words: “there He gave them certain laws and there He had tested them.” The manifest presence of Satan at that time and at that place had made it necessary for Moses to engage in prayer to secure G’d’s assistance. The very words שם שם לו are an allusion to the presence there of סמאל, Satan (similarity of pronunciation of these letters). Bileam alludes to this in Numbers 24,23: אוי מי יחיה משמו, “who will survive when He imposes these!”
    
    15,26. ויאמר אם שמוע תשמעו לקול ה', “He said if you will truly hearken to the voice of the Lord, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text Moses meant that if the Israelites were truly going to observe G’d’s laws then neither disease caused by internal  causes such as the intake of rotten food, nor by external causes would befall them. The reason that Moses mentions “the voice of G‘d” in this instance  is because he already alludes to the Ten Commandments which would be given to them by the ‘voice’ of G’d which they were going to hear at Mount Sinai. In Deut. 4,12 Moses reminded the people that they had heard קול דבריו, “the voice of His words.” He continues to break down the commandments into their constituent parts, i.e. rational ones, laws involving faith, and laws that are statutes, not accessible to our understanding. 
   והישר בעיניו תעשה, “and you will do what is right in His eyes.” These are the social laws, laws accessible to our logic. Nechemyah 9,13 refers to these laws by saying: ותתן להם משפטים ישרים, “You have given them laws which are “right, fair.”
   והאזנת למצותיו, “and you will give ear to His laws.” These are the commandments whose  performance demonstrates faith; they are commandments which no sane person would have invented by himself. One needs an ear in tune with G’d’s instructions in this matter. Proverbs 15,31 speaks of “He whose ear heeds the discipline of life.”
   ושמרת כל חקיו, “and you will observe all His statutes.” This is a reference to all those laws which defy our logic to find reasons for them. The Torah promises that if in spite of our total inability to understand the reasons for these laws we observe them meticulously, we will be spared all the diseases and sicknesses other nations are suffering from at intervals. There was no need to tell us that we would not be stricken with the plagues G’d inflicted upon the Egyptians with which we are familiar from having watched the Egyptians. G’d promises that even ordinary sickness will not affect the Jewish people if they observe the חקים.
   כי אני ה' רופאך, “for I the Lord, am your healer.” “I will preserve your good health so that you will not become a victim of natural diseases at all.” Nachmanides writes: “Since when does someone ‘reward’ his servant by ‘promising’ that if he carries out his duties he will merely not fall victim to disease or other afflictions? None of the other promises by G’d are of this type at all. G’d usually promises  long life, fertility, success in agriculture, etc., i.e. promises of positive developments, not promises of negative developments not occurring!”
    This “promise” therefore is not a promise at all; rather it is a warning of what could happen if the people did not obey the statutes. It is an implied threat that what did happen to the Egyptians could happen to a Jewish people who rebel against G’d’s commandments. Deut. 28,60 is more specific in this respect, Moses saying: “He will bring back upon you all the sufferings of Egypt of which you were terrified, etc.”
    The words: “for I, the Lord, am your healer,” are a promise  that G’d is able to remove all ordinary sickness from afflicting the people just as He had demonstrated that He healed the bitter waters at Marah. Thus far Nachmanides.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word ויאמר refers to the emanation (attribute) Tiferet. The word לקול is a reference to kenesset Yisrael, (the spiritual concept of the Jewish people). It is the “glory” of which we have been warned  כי אם שמוע תשמע בקולו (Exodus 33,22) “to listen to the voice of that spiritual concept. (called כבוד).” The meaning of the whole verse then is: “if you will hearken to that voice in that you will observe the Lord’s various commandments, i.e. the commandments issued by the attribute תפארת, I will not afflict you with any of the afflictions with which I afflicted the Egyptians because My attribute כבוד will act as your healer.” 
    In the Sefer Habahir of Rabbi Nechunyah Hakanah items 163-4 our verse is understood thus: “The verse is aimed at the evil urge within us, seeing that the Israelites’ complaints against Moses and G’d about which we read just before were inspired by the evil urge. G’d says that ‘if you will surely hearken to the voice of the Lord your G’d (instead of to the voice of Satan, the evil urge), and you will observe His commandments instead of the urgings of Satan, all His statutes, and not just part of His statutes and part of Satan’s urgings, then I will keep away from you all manner of disease, etc.”
    What precisely is meant by “the spirit of the evil urge?” Let me explain by means of a parable. A king had appointed officials in charge of his Kingdom and the economic health of his country. Different officials were placed in charge of different government departments. One official was in charge of the treasury, another one in charge of the supply of stones for building, a third one in charge of exotic foods and fruit. It was found that the official in charge of exotic fruit and food enjoyed great popularity, everyone flocked to him to buy the wares he had to offer. When the official in charge of the building materials saw that he had hardly any customers, he engaged agents to destroy poor people’s houses so that they would need to buy stones to repair the damage to their homes. He did not order that the houses which had firm foundations be torn down as his agents were not able to do that without giving themselves away. Not only that, he reasoned that in the time it would take his agents to tear down one solidly built house they could destroy twenty shacks in the same amount of time. He would then attract twenty customers instead of merely one. By resorting to this stratagem he hoped to attain the same popularity as a supplier of essential products as had his competitor the official selling exotic fruit and foods. This is the meaning of the verse in Jeremiah 1,14: “for evil will originate from צפון, from the north.” According to commentators this means that Satan has permission to cause destruction only in the “northern spheres,” i.e. in spheres already prone to destruction. In terms of the evil urge, this means that only spiritually weak people are legitimate targets for Satan. The way to fortify oneself against the attempts of Satan to undermine one’s well being is to observe כל חקיו, “all of G’d’s statutes.” By doing this G’d will ward off any attempt by Satan to undermine one’s piety and faith in Him. If Satan were to find a person weaken even a single time it is as if he opened a door for him to enter. After that, it will be much harder to expel him from an area to which he felt he had been freely admitted.
    What is the meaning of the words: “for I the Lord am your healer?” How can such words be appropriate to people who have not been previously afflicted by any disease? We must understand the words to mean that when Satan gets ready to attack such a person G’d will use preventive medicine to ward off such an attack. Thus far Sefer Habahir. I have heard further that the numerical value of the acrostic describing the ten plagues i.e. דצ'ך עד'ש באח'ב amounts to 501 This is the numerical value of the word אשר in the line אשר שמתי במצרים in our verse.
    
    15,27. ויבאו אילמה ושם שתים עשרה עינות מים ושבעים תמרים, “they arrived at Eylim and there they found twelve springs of water and seventy date-palms.” According to the plain meaning of the text the fact that the Torah relates these details shows that the waters were sweet as otherwise the date-palms could not have survived there. As a result of this oasis being pleasant, the Israelites stayed there a little while longer. The Torah alludes to this with the words “they camped there by the water.” The climatic conditions at this time of year were such that these waters would be cool and refreshing. Jeremiah comments on such conditions when he writes (‎Jeremiah 18,14) “Does one forsake Lebanon snow from the mountainous rocks? Does one abandon cool water flowing from afar?”
    A Midrashic approach (Mechilta Yayissa section 1) on the words “12 springs of water and seventy date-palms.” Rabbi Eliezer Hamodai said that from the day G’d had created the universe He had created 12 springs of water corresponding to the 12 tribes of Israel. He had also planted 70 date-palms corresponding to the seventy elders of the Jewish people. The meaning of this Midrash is that after the crossing of the Sea of Reeds the Israelites had not encountered such a good camping place as this one at Eylim. Just as they had experienced a miracle at the sea when G’d sweetened the salt-water of the sea so that they could drink from it while crossing, and He provided 12 lanes for the different tribes to cross in, so this type of miracle was re-enacted at Eylim. Its waters were sweet and flowing; there were 12 separate springs so that each tribe could have its own water supply. The seventy date-palms corresponded to the seventy elders each of whom was accorded honour in his own right.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words “they came to Eylim where there were twelve springs of water and seventy date-palms“ mean that when the Israelites now arrived at this site they attained a certain spiritual level called “elohim” (play on the word אלימה with the letters re-arranged). The 12 fountains are a simile for 12 angels, three from each of the four directions. Each group of three angels was accompanied by an army of minor angels so that between them all they represented the מחנה שכינה, the camp of the Divine presence supported at four corners with its celestial entourage. 
    The seventy date-palms represent the seventy angels who surround the throne of G’d’s glory and who are assigned, one each, as the celestial representatives of the 70 nations of the world. You find this confirmed in the Sefer Habahir items 165-6. The author there asks: “what was the significance of the twelve fountains?  First G’d gave the Israelites 12 fountains. These were exchanged later when the Jewish people crossed the Jordan into the twelve stones Joshua erected there (Joshua 4,9). The reason is that originally the Torah was likened to life-giving water seeing the Torah, i.e. its bearers were on the move, just like the waters issuing from fountains are on the move, their waters constantly flowing. Once the Israelites crossed the Jordan and began to conquer the Holy Land Torah found a permanent home, was stationary.
    As far as the 70 date-palms are concerned, this is a symbol for seventy different קומות, conduits, by means of which G’d dispenses His largesse. These draw their input from twelve of the “simple” letters in the alpha-bet. Just as these waters are ordinary waters (of terrestrial origin), so the seventy nations are essentially terrestrial in nature. Whence do we know that a date-palm may be equated with a קומה? We base this on Song of Songs 7,8 זאת קומתך דמתה לתמר, “such is your stature, likened to a towering palm tree.” Not only that but there are 70 different species of palm trees; this is meant by our verse speaking about seventy palm trees. The words ושבעים תמרים mean that each one was different from the other and the fruit they produced were different from one another, each tasting differently. So far Sefer Habahir. [Levush Orah by Mordechai Jaffe in his super- commentary on Rashi-and Menachem Rekanati explains many of these concepts in greater depth. Ed.] It is important to remember that each date-palm had been assigned its task in nature and each had to contribute according to its specific task. It was not in order for them to be grafted one to another to produce new mutations. The entire phenomenon is reminiscent of Yaakov and his twelve sons and the seventy descendants who arrived in Egypt. They were likened to towering palm trees due to their spiritual stature. At the same time they drew their inspiration from Yaakov’s twelve sons who in turn drew theirs from their patriarch-father. The 12 tribes were divided into four camps of three tribes each, encamped in the four directions of the globe enclosing (protecting) the encampment of the Shechinah. This made them carriers of the Divine Presence, Shechinah. This is all reflected in the fact that the patriarch Yaakov himself was called א-ל אלו-הי ישראל, (Genesis 33,20) which line is explained in Megillah 18 as “who called him א-ל? None other than the אלו-הי ישראל, the G’d of Israel.” All of the foregoing only serves the purpose of giving us an inkling of the spiritual stature of our patriarchs.
    
    16,1. בחמשה עשר יום לחודש השני, “on the fifteenth day of the second month, etc.” this was the month of Iyar; the verse teaches by inference that the dough the Israelites had slung over their shoulders (Exodus 12,39) and which had turned into unleavened cakes had lasted them for a whole month. On the night of the 15-16th of Iyar they still ate from that, whereas on the 16th of Iyar during the day the first installment of manna descended from heaven. In that particular year the 16th of Iyar occurred on Sunday (first day after the Sabbath). This is why the Torah (verse 22) writes that on the sixth day they collected a double-portion. It was the sixth day after  the manna had started to descend. (compare Mechilta Yayissa section 1).
    
    16,3. מי יתן מותנו ביד ה' “who would give that we had died by the hand of the Lord, etc.!”  They referred to the three days of darkness during which most of the Israelites had died, (compare Rabbeinu Chananel).
    
    16,4. הנני ממטיר לכם לחם מן השמים, “I am about to make bread rain down for you from heaven.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word לחם is appropriate because the people would make bread out of the manna though the manna itself was not bread. It is well to remember that the manna consisted of small grain-like crystals which were collected individually. This is why the expression לקיטה, “gleanings,” was an appropriate description for the manner in which it was collected.
   ולקטו דבר יום ביומו, “they would gather it on a daily basis;” it looked like granules covered by a husk, more or less globular in appearance. This is what the Torah means when it described it (verse 14) as דק מחוספס, “fine, peeled.” The word מחוספס is similar in meaning to קלוף, derived from מחשוף הלבן, (the letter ש andס  are often interchangeable, compare Genesis 30,37). Onkelos also translates it in this sense, i.e. דעדק מקלף דעדק. The meaning of the second word דק in verse 14 is דעדק i.e.: “white as chalk.” It fell in heaps. Onkelos has translated Exodus 8,10 חמרים, as דגורין. The manna was white like frost, and sweet. A later verse sums up all its qualities in one expression when the Torah compares it to זרע גד לבן, “white coriander seed tasting like wafers with honey” (verse 31).
    Perhaps the repetition of the letter ס, (60) in the word מחוספס is what prompted Rabbi Eleazar Hamodai in Mechilta Vayissa section 1 to suggest that the layer of manna was more than 60 sa-ah high. He made a comparison to what the Torah wrote in connection with the deluge, In Genesis 7,11 the Torah spoke about the ארבות השמים נפתחו, “the windows of heaven being opened (in order to release all that rain). In connection with the manna, Assaph, a contemporary of that event, speaks in Psalm 78,23 of the “doors of heaven being opened.” In both instances Scripture uses the expression פתח, “opened.” In Yuma 76 the Talmud describes that the manna descended during the night while the people were asleep so that they would be able to find it all ready for them when they awoke in the morning. They would find their livelihood had already been provided for them. During the period when the Temple was being built (Taanit 23) something analogous took place. Rain fell only on the nights of Tuesday to Wednesday and on Friday nights. This was designed to ensure the rain did not interfere with the Israelites’ normal activities. During the reign of King Chizkiyah G’d was also active on behalf of the people as in his prayer Chizkiyah said: “I am unable to kill, to pursue the enemy, or even to sing a song of praise. All I am able to do is lie down and sleep and leave my problems in Your hands.” G’d replied: “I am going to look after things.” This is the meaning of Kings II 19,35: ”on that night an angel of the Lord went out and struck down 185,000 in the Assyrian camp, and the following morning they were all dead corpses.” This has all been explained in the introduction to Eychah Rabbati chapter 30. There is a single verse in Psalms 127,2 which sums it all up: “He provides as much for His loved ones while they sleep.” The psalmist teaches that what all the people who rise early and stay up late (beginning of same verse) achieve only after expending much energy and not even enjoying the bread they eat, the Jewish people (who observe G’d’s commandments) find that G’d provides for them without any effort on their part. In other words, those people’s toil and fatigue was really all in vain.  
    What is the meaning of the words ועינו כעין הבדולח “its appearance was like the colour of bedolach” in Numbers 11,7 where we are given another aspect of the appearance of the manna? This is an indication that the colour of the manna was of an extraordinary nature, similar to the diamond known as perla as described in Exodus 28,18. It is a derivative of a supernatural light described by Ezekiel 1,24. On the breastplate of the High Priest the precious stone called יהלום had the name of the tribe Zevulun engraved upon it. This stone emitted this light. It is recorded in a book by David Kimchi called Sefer Michlol under the root בדולח. The manna descended in the form of a fine drizzle, similar to what is meant by Psalms 147,16-17: “He scatters frost like ashes, He tosses down hail like crumbs.” This is why David explained in Psalms 78,23: “He commanded the skies above and opened the doors of heaven, and rained manna upon them to eat, giving them heavenly grain.” This teaches that the origin of the (colour) light of the manna was supernatural which prompted David to describe it as “heavenly grain.” David mentioned further that G’d opened the doors of heaven in order to cause it to rain down from those regions because concerning this supernatural light we have been told in Ezekiel 1,1: “the heavens opened and I beheld visions of the Divine.”
    You will note that this paragraph which acquaints us with the manna contains the word מן five times. This corresponds to the five occasions that the word אור, “light,” is mentioned in the first paragraph of the Book of Genesis (Genesis 1,1-5). This teaches that the manna is a derivative of G’d’s first physical creation, of the original light which was withdrawn after Adam sinned. Just as the light was created on the first day, so the manna was released on the first day. (compare what we wrote on verse 1) 
    In interpreting the meaning of Psalms 78,25  לחם אבירים אכל איש, “each man ate a hero’s meal,” our sages (Yuma 75) comment that the reference is to the kind of food which the angels consume (view of Rabbi Akiva). Rabbi Yishmael countered saying that the angels do not consume any material food at all. He based himself on Moses who had said that during the forty days he had been in heaven, in the domain of the angels, he had neither eaten bread nor drunk water. The idea was that when in celestial regions one conducts oneself like celestial beings whereas when the angels visited earth, i.e. Avraham or Lot, the Torah reports them as partaking of the food offered to them by earthly beings (compare Deut. 9,9 and Genesis 18,8 as well as 19,3). Rabbi Yishmael understood the meaning of the word אבירים as food which was totally absorbed by the organs of those who ate it, there being no need to excrete any of it. [the word אבירים is equated with אברים, organs, human tissue.] As a result of this discussion  our sages in Yuma found that the numerical value of the word מחספס is 248, i.e. the number of bones in the human skeleton. This is the background to the claim that people eating an exclusive manna diet did not ever have to excrete any of their food intake. We have a further comment in Bamidbar Rabbah 7,4 on Numbers 14,11 “how long will this people spurn Me and how long will they not have faith in Me after the all the miracles I have performed ‘within them?’” The word בקרבו, “inside it” is a reference to all the manna dissolving in their tissue instead of in their entrails.
    Nachmanides writes as follows concerning the dispute between Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yishmael about the angels’ eating habits. “It is well known that the continued existence of the angels is dependent on the זיו השכינה, “the brilliance of the Divine Presence” as explained by Shemot Rabbah 32,4 in connection with Nechemyah 9,6 ואתה מחיה את כולם, “and You keep them all alive” [the “host of heaven” mentioned in that verse, Ed.]. The Midrash takes its cue from Exodus 23,21 where G’d speaks of the angel He will send with the Jewish people as “My name is בקרבו, inside it.” [We have the same word as we have in Numbers 14 11. In other words, what the manna did for the Jewish people, G’d’s name did for the angels, i.e. it kept them alive. Ed.]
    Nachmanides quotes Kohelet 11,7 “sweet is the light” as a source for the assumption that the angels feed on the brilliance of the Presence of the Shechinah. [I suppose the reason is that since “light” cannot be “sweet” in the culinary sense of the word, it represents something equivalent to the sweetness of food in the terrestrial regions. Ed.] At any rate, according to Nachmanides Rabbi Akiva holds that the source of food for the angels and the Jews in the desert was one and the same. He therefore concluded that manna was a derivative of “light,” seeing the angels being disembodied beings do not consume three-dimensional food, however refined. Rabbi Yishmael’s objection concerned consumption of actual light as distinct from derivatives of light. He disagreed that the Israelites had become capable of feeding on actual light. [In fact had they been able to, Moses’ feat of going without food for forty days in the celestial regions would not have been so impressive. Ed.] Rabbi Yishmael holds that seeing the Israelites had been granted visions of the brilliance of the Shechinah at the sea, they had qualified ever since for this food that the angels partake of. Thus far Nachmanides.
    I believe we may have to pay closer attention to the wording we see in our paragraph i.e. “this is the word of G’d: ‘collect from it on a daily basis’” this indicates a linkage with the words: “this is my G’d and I want to exalt Him” (which the Israelites had said while at the sea). Ever since then they had been able to refer to G’d as “this,” the Israelites had become worthy of eating the same kind of “food” as do the angels. It is important to appreciate that inasmuch as the manna was definitely physical food it nonetheless enabled the derivative of the supernatural light to survive in terrestrial surroundings. G’d supplied this food to the people who received His Torah in order to refine their abstract intelligence and enable it to attain deeper spiritual insights into the mysteries of the Torah. It is not strange that physical food can have this effect. We have evidence of this on several occasions. Not only that. Our sages speak of physical food which G’d will feed disembodied spirits (human) in the hereafter when He will provide the flesh of the Leviathan which He has stored for this purpose. (compare our commentary on Genesis 1,21) Unless such food could enhance the spirits of the departed souls, what would be the point in our sages telling us about such meals in the heavenly regions? Perhaps we are to assume that the creatures such as the Leviathan and the bird called בר יוכני are themselves derivatives of this original light, and that this is the reason they would be able to survive in this world until needed to provide food for the righteous in a future when life on earth will be different from today. Let us examine the creation of Leviathan and Bar Yuchni and what we know about them. Both these creatures  were created on the fifth day of creation. Baba Batra 74, basing itself on  the plural in the words התנינם הגדולים, states that one of them was to serve as food for the righteous in the hereafter. The same applies to the  בהמות בהררי אלף, “the beasts on a thousand mountains,” (a reference to what is known as שור הבור, designated for consumption by the righteous (their souls) in the future. It has been described in Psalms as “of a thousand mountains” to reflect Psalms 105,8 דבר צוה לאלף דור, “something G’d has commanded to come true after 1000 generations,” (in the hereafter). According to Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer this tremendous ox consumes the grass on 1000 hills daily. By night the grass grows again so as not to denude the environment. The beast exists in anticipation of the righteous in the world to come when G’d will feed its meat to them. On the other hand, the point of all this is may well be that there are creatures on this earth whose remains can serve as physical food for the bodies of the righteous in a period described by Isaiah 11,9 as a time when “the earth will be filled with knowledge of the Lord like water which covers the oceans.” At that time we, (terrestrial man spiritually refined), will be able to consume such food. No doubt, the meat of these creatures is the kind of refined food which resembles that of the manna and which had a spiritualising effect on those who consumed it. 
    A Midrashic approach. The words: “Here I will make it rain down for you bread from heaven” are an expression of G’d’s fondness of the Jewish people; He was so fond of them that He changed the laws of nature on their account. Normally, dew descends from the sky and the vegetation providing food grows from the earth. This time the bread came down from heaven and the dew rose towards the sky.
   ויצא העם ולקטו, “let the people go out and collect it.” They would go out of the camp into the desert.
   דבר יום ביומו, “on a daily basis;” because G’d would create it anew every single day just as He does with the livelihood of mankind. This insight prompted Rabbi Eliezer Hamodai to say that anyone who has enough food for the day and asks “what will I eat tomorrow? has thereby displayed a deficiency in his faith in G’d.” Let us put his words into their proper perspective. He who asks the question concerning where his food for the next day will come from has demonstrated that he only believes what his eyes can see, what is already under his control, at his disposal. The main ingredient of having faith in the Lord is to consider that which one cannot see as part of reality. A believing person is convinced of G’d’s mercy, of the fact that the same G’d who has created this very day and what it brings also created the means to provide for His creatures on this day and on subsequent days.
    We have been told in Yuma 76 that the disciples asked Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai why G’d did not simply provide a year’s supply of manna at one time? The Rabbi answered his students that G’d wanted to teach the Jewish people that they are dependent upon His goodwill every day of the year. If they would reflect on the fact that maybe on the morrow there would be no manna and they and their families would face starvation they would turn to their father in heaven in supplication. Another reason given why the manna descended only one day’s supply at a time was so that they would eat it while it was fresh. A third reason given is that by receiving only one day’s supply at a time they would be saved the trouble of carrying their food supply with them all the time.
    The following folio (75) in the Talmud also relates that the manna displayed different properties for different categories of people. The righteous would eat it in the form of bread; the average Israelite would prepare it into cakes. The wicked would grind it in a mortar or other utensil described in Numbers 11,7-9 (compare our comments there). The righteous would find it at their doorsteps; the average Israelite would  leave his tent and collect it a little further away; the wicked would have to leave camp to search for it and to collect it. This explains the various verses describing all this in Numbers chapter 11. When Assaph, a contemporary of these events, described the manna in Psalm 78,27, he describes things in a similar manner: “He rained it upon them like dust;” a reference to the righteous. “He made it fall upon inside his camp;” (a reference to the average Israelite); “around his dwelling place;” (this was a reference to the wicked).
    A kabbalistic approach: The word ממטיר in the verse “here I will make it rain from the heaven,” is similar to משמרת, the attribute of Mercy which is a recipient of largesse from heaven. [which the Targum renders as מטרת (similar to מטר, rain.) The word מטרת is reminiscent of Mattatron, the angel in charge of running the universe on behalf of G’d]. Concerning this attribute Solomon wrote in Proverbs 31,14: ”She (this attribute) rises when it is still night and supplies provisions for her household and statutes for her maid-servants.”
    The meaning of the word הנני is intransitive, whereas the word ממטיר is transitive, referring to the Shechinah. In other words: “The Lord will instruct the attribute Shechinah which provides the פרנסה for all creatures on earth to make manna rain down from השמים, ‘heaven.’” There was actually no need for the Torah to mention that the manna would come from השמים, seeing that rain always comes from “heaven.” If the Torah nonetheless made special mention of the words מן השמים, “from the heaven,” the intention is to tell us that this manna comes from an attribute known as השמים, or רחמים. I believe that this is the meaning of Job 39,27: “does  the eagle soar at your command?” Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 20,4 say that G’d said to Job: “if I were to either direct the Shechinah to settle on the Holy Ark or to remove itself from there by your command? You would then be greater than Aaron!” Verse 29 in Job continues with the words “‘from there he (the eagle) spies out his food, his eyes see it from afar.” These words closely parallel what Solomon said in Proverbs 31,14: “from afar she brings her bread.” Both verses tell us that the livelihood (food) for G’d’s creatures on earth is provided by the attribute Shechinah. In Song of Songs 5,2 Solomon calls the same attribute אחותי רעיתי, “my sister (beloved), my dove.” Our sages comment on this expression in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,3 by saying that the sacrifices were offered to this attribute as this is the spiritual region from which parnassah, livelihood, emanates. It is the region from which all blessings flow to earth. It becomes active during the last of the three watches the night is divided into. In other words, the manna fell during the final hours of the night. (Berachot 3 discusses the three watches of the night). The three watches represent the three (emanations) attributes גדולה גבורה,,תפארת in that order. Our sages (on that folio) provided us with a reminder of the three watches by telling us how to recognise them. During the first watch the donkeys bray; during the second watch the dogs bark; during the third watch the infants suckle at the breasts of their mothers.
    All of the above helps you understand that the origin of the manna was in those regions reserved for mercy, regions in which the original light is at home, and that this is what the words מן השמים allude to. The word השמים has been used by Solomon in the same sense in his prayer on the occasion of the opening of the Holy Temple (Kings I 8,32). He said ואתה תשמע השמים, instead of ואתה תשמע בשמים. The former means “You, the שמים will hear” (respond to prayer), instead of “You will hear in the heavens.” Psalms 78,24 continues with ודגן שמים נתן למו, “giving them heavenly grain.” When we read in Numbers 11,9: “and when the dew descended on the camp at night the manna would descend upon it,” the Torah makes the point that whereas the manna was received at night it was not collected until the daylight hours in accordance with G’d’s promise of “bread in the morning to satisfy” (Exodus 16,8).
   למען אנסנו הילך בתורותי אם לו, “so that I can test them whether they will follow My teaching or not.” The verse teaches that anyone who has ample food supplies, a comfortable lifestyle, is obligated to devote his time to Torah-study. This is what G’d had in mind when He said: “to test them if they follow My Torah or if not.” This is also the reason the Torah provided that the Levites and Priests be given various tithes and other gifts from the farmers so as to leave them free to devote themselves to Torah as we know from Chronicles II 31,4: “so that they might devote themselves to the Teaching of the Lord.” The sages have seen fit  to introduce similar contributions to be made to support non-priest Torah scholars, basing themselves on Proverbs 31,14: “she is like the merchant ships; she brings food from afar.”
    Remember that the principal test G’d subjects His creatures to is designed to strengthen their faith in the fact that He provides for those loyal to Him and that He punishes those who willfully transgress His laws. These tests and trials are not designed in order for G’d to find out who has faith in Him and who does not; He is well aware of that, being familiar with the workings of the hearts of all His creatures. He conducts these trials in order to demonstrate to the world, i.e. to His creatures, that He is indeed aware of all this. This is why the righteous are being tested as we know from Psalms 11,5: “The Lord tests the righteous man” in order that it will become common knowledge that the righteous has displayed faith in Him, has passed the test. We find that G’d tests not only the wealthy but also the poor by means of reward and punishment. He tests the wealthy in order to find out how they use their wealth, if they are generous in giving charity, etc. He tests the poor by giving him a chance to accept his poverty without losing his faith in G’d and his reverence for G’d. It is understood  that the reason man’s body is equipped with a soul is to test whether he will allow his body to accept the counsel of his soul or whether he will use his body to stifle the urgings of his soul and to behave like an animal which is interested only in physical matters. Every human being who passes these tests thereby adds to the greatness of G’d’s name on earth. People will recognise  by means of the responses to G’d’s tests by their peers that He does indeed operate a system of reward and punishment applicable both to life on earth and to life in the hereafter. The amount of reward or punishment depends on man’s actions (Avot 3,15).
    
    16,5. והיה ביום הששי והכינו, “it will be on the sixth day  when they prepare, etc.” This was the sixth day after the manna had started falling. It had begun to fall on the first day of the week as we explained on verse 1.
    
    16,7. בשמוע את תלונותיכם על ה' ונחנו מה, “that He has heard your complaints against G’d, and what are we?” Moses made reference to the “glory” of G’d, i.e .כבוד ה', the attribute of Justice. This terminology is found also in Exodus 24,17 ומראה כבוד ה' כאש אוכלת, “and the appearance of the glory of G’d was like a consuming fire,” where it is clear that it refers to the attribute of Justice. This is also the reason that the name of G’d is alluded to here backwards, (in the acrostic of the words (ה' ונחנו מה). Whenever the letters in the name of G’d appear in a reverse order this is an allusion to the attribute of Justice (compare our commentary on Exodus 3,1).
    
    16,8. בתת ה' לכם בערב בשר לאכול ולחם בבקר לשובע, “when the Lord will give you in the evening meat to eat, and bread in the morning to the full.” According to the plain meaning of the text  the verse reflects the fact that most people eat twice a day, in the evening and in the morning. This is why G’d did not supply a whole day’s food in the morning. Our sages in their commentary on the word תשבו in Leviticus 23,42 have already pointed out that the meaning of the word is “similar to normal dwelling,” i.e. that we are to eat in the Sukkah once in the morning and once in the evening (Sukkah 27).
    A Midrashic approach: one may read the words together as follows: בערב בשר לאכול ולחם בבוקר, “in the evening to eat meat and bread in the morning.” This is a hint that G’d granted the meat with a “dark face,” i.e. unwillingly, when it was night, whereas He supplied the bread with a  lit up face, i.e. willingly, when it was daylight. The Israelites had been perfectly entitled to ask for the bread. After all, one cannot survive without basic food. By giving them the manna in the morning, G’d left them enough time during the day to prepare it. By giving them the meat in the evening, He did not leave them time to prepare it so that they could eat it at supper time.
    A kabbalistic approach: we read the words together as follows: בערב בשר לאכול ולחם בבוקר, “the parnassah was divided into two times of the day, the evening and the day. The evening corresponded to the attribute of Justice, the morning to the attribute of Mercy. The verse tells us that provision of meat is reserved for the evenings whereas provision of bread is reserved for the mornings. When the Talmud (Avodah Zarah 3) describes the daily activities of G’d during the twelve hours of the day, Rabbi Yehudah assigned the third section of three hours as devoted to G’d providing sustenance for all His creatures. In the words of the Talmud this included the needs of the horns of the beasts known as Re-emim, as well as the requirements of fleas’ eggs in order for them to hatch. It appears therefore that Rabbi Yehudah refers to the provision of meat, not bread. Why did this occur during the day? This is perfectly in order as the third section of three hours commences immediately after noon, a period called by the Torah “evening” as we know from the time when the Passover lamb is to be slaughtered. The Torah (Numbers 9,11) speaks of preparing the Passover בין הערבים, literally “between the evenings,” suggesting that there are two periods called “evening” (compare also Leviticus 23,5 and Nachmanides’ comment on Exodus 12,6). The first evening is composed of the period immediately following noon, whereas the second “evening” ends with sunset. The first “evening” is allocated to the slaughtering of the Passover lamb, whereas the second “evening” is the period during which the Passover may be consumed until midnight. The meat was allocated to the Jewish people between these two periods of “evening,” whereas the manna became available to them in the morning as a gift from the attribute of Mercy. The fact that the manna could be eaten “as is,” without further preparation, signaled that it had been given to the Jewish people wholeheartedly rather than reluctantly.
   לא עלינו תלונותיכם כי על ה', “your complaints are not directed at us but at the Lord.” This verse teaches us that anyone who quarrels with a prophet or even with an accredited Torah authority is compared to someone who quarrels with the Shechinah. This type of complaint by the Israelites was not an isolated instance but occurred already  in 16,2 and in 17,2.
    
    16,12. שמעתי את תלונות בני ישראל, “I have heard the complaints of the Children of Israel, etc.” Our sages in Pessikta zutrata on this verse said that G’d refers to the Israelites as “Children of Israel,” a complimentary title, in spite of the fact that they had uttered complaints. What is the meaning of the word לאמור here after the words דבר אל בני ישראל? The message in the repetition is that Moses was to address the Israelites twice; once in a friendly tone, concerning their complaint about not having bread, and in a sterner tone concerning their demands for more than necessities, i.e. meat. Whereas the word וידבר refers to stern talk, the use of the word לאמור, denotes a friendly tone. We have proof of this in Genesis 42,30 דבר האיש אדוני הארץ אתנו קשות, “the man, the ruler of the land spoke with us harsh words.” The Talmud in Makkot 11 states that the word דבר already implies קשות, tough talk.
   ובבוקר תשבעו לחם וידעתם כי אני ה' אלו-היכם, “and in the morning you will be satisfied with bread and you will know that I am the Lord your G’d.” You will bless My name for supplying your food. This is the first indication of the legislation we read about in Deut. 8,10: “you will eat and be satisfied and bless the Lord your G’d.” Our verse prompted our sages (Berachot 48) to conclude that Moses formulated the first benediction in the ברכת המזון prayer after meals at the time when the manna descended. Whereas thanking G’d for the food one has eaten is a Biblical requirement, reciting the benediction prior to eating is a Rabbinical law. The Rabbis arrived at the logic of this by an “a fortiori,” קל וחומר, saying that if one needs to thank the Lord after one has already had one’s fill, how much more must one do so prior to eating for having found food available at a time when one is  hungry! 
    
    16,13. ויהי בערב ותעל השלו...ובבוקר היתה שכבת הטל, “it happened in the evening that the quails ascended,....and in the morning there was a layer of dew, etc.” Both the quail and the manna appeared for the first time on a Sunday (compare our comment on verse 1 and 5). The quails formed a daily diet of the Israelites for 40 years (based on Tossaphot Erchin 15 on the word התאוו). As long as the Israelites had the manna they also had the quails. Concerning verse 38: “the Israelites ate the manna for 40 years,” (where no such particulars are given for the quails), we must assume that the same applied to the supply of quails which became available every evening. The reason the Torah only refers to the continued supply of the manna for 40 years is that seeing it was heavenly food it required a daily supernatural miracle during all those years. The availability of the quails by comparison, was a much less impressive miracle, not having required that something out of the ordinary be “manufactured” in the celestial regions. Making the quails available is described by the Torah as a more or less natural phenomenon in Numbers 11,31 when the Torah reported: “a wind went out from Hashem and blew quails from the sea and spread them over the camp.” The fact that the quails were something extant in the terrestrial part of the world is the reason the Torah did not apply to its becoming available the word ותהי, which always refers to the coming into existence of something new (a derivative of what we previously described as the אור עליון, a light in the celestial regions), but wrote only ותעל, the same word used to describe the sudden manifestation of the frogs (Exodus 8,2). When describing the major miracle of the arrival of the manna from the celestial regions the Torah considered it appropriate to use wording normally reserved for the six days of G’d’s creative activity, i.e. היתה, “it had come into existence.” When the original light materialised the Torah also described this by using the verb הוה, by writing יהי אור, ויהי אור.
    A Midrashic approach (Mechilta Vayissa section 3): “how exactly did the manna descend? First a north wind descended and cleared away all the dust on the earth; afterwards a layer of dew descended smoothing out the surface of the earth. Following this, the manna descended on to this layer of dew. Please note that the Torah does not speak of the manna ascending, i.e. ויעל המן, but the Torah writes ותעל שכבת הטל, “the layer of dew ascended” (verse 14). This teaches that a layer of dew descended form heaven in order to cover the manna, i.e. it ascended on to the layer of manna which had fallen immediately before. As a result the manna was protected from below and from above. When we keep this in mind we can understand why the sages demanded (Pessachim 30) that when placing the two challot on the Sabbath table we must place a serviette or other base both below and above the bread to symbolise how it was in the desert with the manna. Rashi explains the words ותעל שכבת הטל to mean that when the dew was lying above the manna facing the sun, it suddenly became visible; this is the meaning of the words והנה על פני המדבר דק מחספס, “and here!, on the face of the desert something fine and exposed.”
    
    16,15. מן הוא, “it is a portion (of food)!” The word is derived from מנה, a gift.” we find the word in Samuel I 1,8 מנה אחת אפים, “a double-portion (of gifts).” Here too the arrival of the manna was a gift for Moses (who had not even had to ask G’d for it). The Torah had to explain this as the Israelites did not know what to make of this new phenomenon. Seeing that they did not know what it was they named it “a gift” (from heaven). Rabbeinu Chananel writes: the words מן הוא mean מאין הוא “where does it come from,” as they did not know its origin.
    
    16,16. זה הדבר אשר צוה ה': לקטו ממנו איש לפי אכלו, “this is the thing G’d has commanded: “gather from it, each person according to how much he can eat.” Our sages in Mechilta Vayissa section 4 explained  that Moses said to the people: “do not be afraid that Nachshon ben Aminadav and other powerful men will come and gather so much of it that hardly any of it will be left for the poor; each Israelite will have as much as he can eat.” What was the quantity that every Israelite could eat (or, better, required)? “One omer per head.” The meaning of this statement in the text is that if one ate an omer of manna per day one maintained one’s health. If one ate less it would be injurious to one’s health, and if one ate more than an omer it would also be injurious to one’s health. As to the words מספר נפשותיכם איש לאשר באהלו, “according to the number of persons in each man’s tent you will take,” these words refer to one’s wife whose proper place is within the tent. We know this from Sarah who is described as being inside the tent (Genesis 18,9) and we have a verse in Psalms 45,14 “that the true honour of the king’s daughter is reflected by the fact that she remains indoors.”
    One of the halachic messages of this verse is that a husband/father is obligated to look after the requirements of his wife and children while they are minors. This is why the Torah speaks of “the number of your souls (persons).” This is the way Rabbeinu Chananel explains the wording of our verse.
    This verse contains two extremely significant themes, each one of which has ramifications in the terrestrial as well as the celestial spheres. The themes are: 1) the significance of the letters in our alpha-bet (22); 2) the subject of parnassah (livelihood). There is nothing in this world which is not rooted in some letter or letters of the א-ב. Neither is there anything in either the terrestrial or the celestial spheres which does not require continued input by a heavenly force in order to survive. We call this input פרנסה. Anyone or anything which is not self-sustaining is in need of פרנסה, benevolent, life-sustaining input by G’d. Our sages in Berachot 4 told us about the value of reciting Psalm 145 three times daily by promising that he who recites it three times daily is assured of life in the hereafter. They have revealed to us that the principal features of the Psalm are that it is organised according to the letters of the א-ב, each line starting with a different letter; secondly, it deals with the fact that G’d provides פרנסה, i.e. the line starting with פותח את ידך ומשביע לכל-חי רצון, “You give it openhandedly, feeding every creature to its heart’s content.” Our verse here also includes both of these themes seeing it contains all the 22 letters of the א-ב, and it also has as its theme that G‘d provides פרנסה. This led the sages (Mechilta Vayissa section 2) to say that the Torah was given only to the people who depended on the manna as their daily food, i.e. who depended on their פרנסה coming directly from Hashem. It is appropriate then that one recites the paragraph dealing with G’d providing the manna  at least once daily to help stave off famine, etc., in our world.
    
    16,21. וילקטו אותו בבקר בבקר, “they collected it morning after morning.” Had the word בקר been written only once it would have meant two hours after sunrise. The repetition of the word בקר means that it could be collected until he end of four hours after sunrise. After that time the words: “when the sun was hot it would melt” would apply. Anyone who had failed to collect the manna by that time had to receive it as a charitable gift from people who had collected their share on time. A great miracle occurred in connection with the manna. Just as it was the function of the prophet to reveal to people matters otherwise concealed from them, so the manna served as a source of information (Yuma 75). If someone’s slave had fled and was found in some other household, and the householder claimed that the first owner had sold the slave to him, whereas the first householder claimed that the slave in question had fled from him, the number of omers of manna in the two households would reveal who had spoken the truth. If the first household wound up with an extra omer of manna it was evident that the slave had escaped from that household and had not been sold. If an extra portion of manna 
was found in the second household however, it was proof that the owner of that household had bought the slave, that he had not run away from the first household. The same would apply to a woman who had run away from her husband. If she were to claim that her husband had kicked her out and she would demand her כתובה, financial settlement, whereas her husband declared her guilty of the kind of infidelity by which she forfeits her כתובה, the presence or absence of an extra portion of manna would help to determine whose claim was true. Moses would announce that on the following morning when the husband went out to collect the daily manna ration for the family the truth would become evident. This is how the sages in Yuma 75 describe the judicial help which the manna represented. They base this on the wording of Numbers 11,7 that the manna כזרע גד הוא, “was like the seed of gad;” the Hebrew word גד being similar to מגיד, “telling, revealing.” It revealed many matters which had previously been hidden.
    
    16,23. שבתון שבת קודש לה' מחר, “a rest day, a holy Sabbath for the Lord tomorrow.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason why the word Sabbath is repeated is because there are two distinct aspects to each and every Sabbath. One is to do with the עומר, which will be dealt with in verse 29, the other with the special מוסף offering which was offered in the Temple on every Sabbath accompanied by the recital of a special hymn (Psalm 92) sung by the Levites on that occasion.
    A kabbalistic approach: the combination of the words שבתון שבת קודש לה' מחר mean that the Sabbath on the day following Moses’ announcement would be parallel to the Sabbath observed in the celestial regions. 
    
    16,24. ורמה לא היתה בו, “and no worms had developed on it.” This verse is an allusion to our tradition that on the Sabbath the corpses are not being disturbed by worms. (compare Torah shleymah note 132) The expression ורמה occurs only twice in the whole Bible, once here and the other time in Job 21,26 ורמה תכסה עליהם, “and  worms cover them.” The verse in Job describes the state of corpses during the six days of the week; our verse describes the state of corpses on the Sabbath.
    
    16,25. אכלהו היום כי שבת היום לה' לא תמצאוהו בשדה, “Eat it today, for today is the Sabbath for Hashem; you will not find it in the field.” Mechilta Vayissa section 4 understands the emphasis on the word היום, today, in our verse to mean that whereas in this terrestrial universe you will not find the manna on the Sabbath, in the hereafter you will be able to find it, i.e. you will be able to locate the source from which it had emanated. This is a reference to the אור העליון, the celestial light, we have discussed already.
    The word היום, today, occurs three times in our verse. This is an allusion to the halachah that we are to eat three meals on the Sabbath. (Shabbat 117). Let me reveal to you a secret which our sages the Kabbalists have discovered to be part of that legislation to consume three meals on the Sabbath: The first meal, the one to be consumed at night, corresponds to the attribute (commandment) שמור, to observe the negative commandments of the Sabbath, work prohibitions, etc. This attribute (emanation) is better known as מלכות, [the emanation which is the connection between the world of disembodied creatures and our own world, עולם העשיה, Ed.]  Kabbalists have introduced the custom of going out of one’s house at the onset of the Sabbath to welcome the כלה שבת מלכתא, the bride “queen Sabbath,” with the words באי כלה, באי כלה, “welcome O bride, welcome O bride.” [In our countries we turn around at the end of the לכה דודי hymn in order to symbolise the same thought. Ed.] This is why Moses first said [even before mentioning the word Sabbath, Ed.] אכלהו היום, “eat it this day.” The word אכלהו contains the word כלה, a hint that we are to relate to the Sabbath as a groom relates to the bride, i.e. he sanctifies her by giving her a gift. The second meal, the Sabbath morning meal, is an allusion to the emanation יסוד, the one immediately above that of מלכות, also known as שבת הגדול. The principal sanctification of the Sabbath occurs by day and that is why that קדוש is generally known as קדושא רבא, (compare Pessachim 105 and 106). These considerations also account for the fact that in the daily evening prayer we recite the introductory paragraph before the קריאת שמע commencing with the words אהבת עולם,  whereas the parallel paragraph before the קריאת שמע in the morning commences with the words אהבה רבה to indicate the greater importance of what is done by day (compare Berachot 11). It is well known that night is the period reserved primarily for שמור, passive observance, whereas day is reserved for זכור, active observance. This consideration prompted Moses to say in our verse כי שבת היום לה'. The third meal which is to be consumed after the מנחה prayer represents the conclusion of the day. It is an allusion to ראשית, i.e. the mainstay of all constructive activities, בנין, and its head,  in the language of Kabbalists. [a reference to the entire “structure” of the universe both physical and meta-physical. Ed.] To signify this Moses said: היום לא תמצאוהו, the word לא is similar to the word אין, as in Job 28,12 והחכמה מ-”אין" תמצא, “as to ‘wisdom’ it can only be found in a domain called “אין” (more on this on 17,7). The spiritual significance of the three meals on the Sabbath proceeds from the lowest emanation to the next higher one יסוד, etc. and from there to the next higher one, הוד. One ascends spiritually in accordance with consumption of these three meals in the right spirit. When you keep this in mind you will have an inkling of the spiritually elevating phenomenon called Sabbath and the importance of eating three meals on that day.
    
    16,29. ראו כי ה' נתן לכם השבת, “See that Hashem has given you the Sabbath.” We find a comment in Midrash Tehillim on Psalm 92, where the author asks about the significance of the word ראו in our verse. What precisely did the people of Israel “see” in this gift of the Sabbath? Rabbi Yossi quotes: “behold this pearl which He has given to you.”  Rabbi Yitzchak says that it is a reference to the fact that everything connected with the Sabbath is repeated, i.e. has more than one dimension. The usual omer, measure of manna per person, was doubled. The Torah wrote in verse 22 “two omers for everyone.” The daily communal sacrifice consisted of two sheep instead of one sheep (Numbers 28,9).  The penalty for desecrating the Sabbath is worded doubly, i.e. מות יומת (Exodus 31,14). The reward for observing the Sabbath is also worded twofold; Isaiah 58,13 writes: “If you call the Sabbath ‘delight,’ the Lord’s holy day ‘honoured,’ etc., etc.” The exhortation to observe the Sabbath is also couched in two words זכור ושמור, (compare Exodus 20,8 and Deut. 5,12). The hymn to be sung on the Sabbath is called by that name twice, i.e. מזמור שיר ליום השבת, (Psalms 92). When we examine the way Kohelet refers to the “vanities” of this world when he lists the word הבל or הבלים a total of seven times (Kohelet 1,2), these expressions are perceived as applying to the first 7 days of the universe. Solomon related to these days as follows: “what was created on the first day? Heaven and Earth. What will be their end? Look at Isaiah 51,6 who writes: “raise your eyes to the heavens and look upon the earth beneath; though the heavens should melt away like smoke and the earth wear out like a garment, etc., etc.” Solomon proceeds to find similar negative phenomena regarding everything that has been created up to and including the sixth day.  Every creature created on any day was doomed sooner or later, hence הבל הבלים, it was all vanity; none of it would endure. When he came to evaluating the Sabbath, Solomon tried to find something negative but could not. The reason he could not do so was that the Sabbath is all sanctity and rest. Rabbi Yitzchak said that finally, Solomon observed that when a person desecrates the Sabbath he forfeits his life; then he exclaimed: הכל הבל, “everything is vanity, i.e. there is nothing on earth which does not have a potentially deadly ending!” This gives us a total of seven vanities.
    
    16,32. למשמרת לדורותיכם, to be kept throughout your generations.” The word משמרת, “safekeeping, memento,” occurs three times in connection with the manna. The first time the Torah writes למשמרת לדורותיכם in our verse here. Seeing the Torah adds the words “in order that they see the bread  which I have fed them,” this is intended for the generation who actually were sustained by this bread. The second time (in verse 33) the wording is לפני ה' למשמרת לדורותיכם, “in front of G’d as a memorial throughout your generations.” This is a reference to the generations who would live in the land of Israel in the future. Thirdly, the Torah writes in verse 34 לפני העדות למשמרת, “before the Holy Ark as a memorial.” This is a reference to the latter years of the Holy Temple when King Yoshiyahu hid both the bottle of manna and the staff of Aaron to ensure it would not fall into the hands of the enemy if and when Jerusalem would be destroyed  (compare Horiot 12). At that time the bottle containing the anointing oil (for Kings of Davidic descent) was also hidden to prevent it being applied to someone else. All of this happened when the High Priest Chilkiyah found an “opened” Torah scroll in the Sanctuary. (It was open at the verse describing the Israelites going into exile Deut. 28,36). He interpreted this as a bad omen and hid the Holy Ark, the tablets with the Ten Commandments and the items we have already listed. Also the box in which the Philistines had sent a gift to the G’d of Israel at the time when they returned the Holy Ark in the days of the Judges (Samuel I 6,8) was hidden at that time. We have a record of this in Chronicles II 35,3: “He (King Yoshiyahu) said to the Levites, consecrated to the Lord, who taught all Israel, ‘put the Holy Ark in the House that Solomon son of David, King of Israel built;’” Rabbi Eleazar said that there are textural indications that the staff of Aaron and the bottle of manna were to be treated on a similar basis as in each case the Torah used words such as משמרת, דורות, which suggest that these items should be kept where the Holy Ark was being kept. Hence when it came time to hide the one, the other items would be hidden in the same place.
    
    16,33. ויאמר משה אל אהרן קח צנצנת אחת, “Moses said to Aaron: ‘take one bottle, etc.,’” note that the Torah did not say that “Moses took a bottle and placed it there.” (although G’d had told Moses about this and Aaron had not yet been anointed High Priest). We find at a later stage that Moses was offering sacrifices  and that he even offered the incense until Aaron had been appointed.
    It is possible to explain this apparent discrepancy  by seeing in this statement an allusion to an assurance that the descendants of Aaron, the priests of the future, would enjoy a comfortable lifestyle, would  not have to live on a day-to-day basis as had the generation who had to subsist on the daily allocation of manna. Their parnassah would be governed by what we read in Chronicles Ii 31,4-5 where King Chizkiyah ordered “the people, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to deliver the portions to the priests and Levites so that they might devote themselves to Teaching of the Lord. When the word spread, the Israelites brought large quantities of grain, wine, oil, honey and all kinds of agricultural  produce and tithes in large amounts.”
    Moses first mentioned: “deposit it  before the Lord.” This was a hint that the provision of a livelihood for the Torah scholars in each and every generation is something left to the Almighty. It is “so to speak” placed at G’d’s disposal. This is why he added the words “for your generations,” as G’d is the One who will endure during all these generations. It was necessary to provide us with an allusion to the fact that the Torah is the source of celestial wisdom, and that wisdom is to be found in celestial regions, in spiritually higher regions (compare Kohelet 7,12). It is the source of true blessings and true life. David referred to this when he said (Psalm 134,2) “lift your hands toward the Sanctuary and bless the Lord.” It is appropriate therefore that physical life on earth, i.e. parnassah, should be linked to Torah which supplies the life of the soul, spiritual life.
    Afterwards the Torah reports לפני העדות, that Aaron placed the bottle containing manna in front of the Holy Ark (verse 34). This was much later, as at this time the Holy Ark did not exist yet. This is the reason the Torah had to mention in between “as G’d had commanded Moses.” Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write: “Aaron placed it (the bottle) in front of the Ark as a memorial as G’d had commanded Moses.” However, the Torah wanted to make the point that the parnassah of Torah scholars is always under the exclusive care and protection of G’d Himself as G’d had commanded Moses at Mount Sinai when He had said to him: פסל לך שני לוחות אבנים, “carve for yourself two stone-tablets” (Exodus 34,1). The word “for yourself,” meant that the splinters from the stones out of which Moses carved the tablets remained his personal property. According to Shemot Rabbah 46,2 this became the source of Moses’ personal wealth.
    According to Pessikta Zutrata the words קח צנצנת אחת, “take one bottle, etc.” are one of ten items which were created at dusk just before the first Sabbath (Avot 5,6). When G’d told Moses to take a צנצנת, Moses did not know what material that bottle was to be made of. He arrived at the correct material by deducing it from the meaning of the word, i.e. it is something cold, i.e. צונן, something that keeps its contents cool, preserves its contents indefinitely in earth. It must therefore be an earthen vessel. We have a verse in Jeremiah 32,14 where the prophet is told specifically by G’d to put certain documents in an earthen jar so that the documents would last a long time. The same thing applies to aged wine when it has been aged in earthen jars. In fact it ages well only in those kinds of jars. This then is the meaning of the words (verse 33) והנח אותו לפני ה' למשמרת, “and place it before Hashem as a safekeeping.” Jeremiah took out these documents from an earthen jar, saying to the people: “O generation, behold, the word of the Lord! Have I been like a desert to Israel, or like a land of gloom?” (Jeremiah 2,31). He said to the people: “why are you not busy with the Torah?” They responded by asking: “if we study Torah how will we live?” When hearing this Jeremiah took out the bottle of manna and said to the people: “take a look! your forefathers were in the desert and they busied themselves studying Torah; where did their livelihood come from?  If you will busy yourselves with studying Torah G’d will provide your livelihood just as He provided it for your forefathers. Why do My people say: ‘we have broken loose, we will not come to You any more?’” 
    
    16,35. ובני ישראל אכלו את המן ארבעים שנה, “and the Children of Israel ate the manna for forty years.” At first glance there could not have been forty whole years as the first month after the Exodus they did not have any manna. It did not start descending until the middle of Iyar and the dough they had taken out of Egypt had lasted them for a month. If the report of the Torah is correct the manna should not have stopped until the middle of Iyar after Moses’ death, i.e. more than a month after the Israelites crossed the Jordan. We have a report in Joshua 5,11-12. that on the morrow of the Passover i.e. on the sixteenth of Nissan they ate from the produce of the land both unleavened bread and parched grain! The verse continues by reporting that on the day the Israelites ate from that produce the manna ceased. We are forced to understand the words “for forty years” in our verse as an approximate figure. In order to make certain that we do not misunderstand and believe that the manna was eaten for a full forty years, the Torah repeats giving further details by saying “they ate the manna until they came to an inhabited land, the edge of the land of Canaan.” You will find that this information corresponds exactly to what is written in Joshua 5,12: “on that same day, when they ate of the produce of the land, the manna ceased. The Israelites got no more manna.” According to our tradition the manna fell from the 15th of Iyar in the first year of the people’s  wanderings and ceased falling the day after Moses died on the seventh day of Adar. For the next 38 days when the Israelites were already under the authority of Joshua no manna fell. The first thirty days were observed as mourning for Moses. They were followed by three days of preparing to cross the Jordan (Joshua 1,10) after which they crossed the Jordan on the 10th of Nissan. This was followed by the male Israelites born since the Exodus being circumcised at Gilgal (Joshua 5,9).
    According to Rashi (verse 35), however, the number “forty years“ is to be considered as a full forty years. He explains the words in two ways. 1) The dough the Israelites took with them out of Egypt tasted like manna. 2) The manna which fell on the day Moses died miraculously lasted them until the 16th of Nissan, the day after the Passover observance in Gilgal. The Torah was correct in saying then that “they ate the manna for forty years.”
    
    16,36. והעומר עשירית האיפה הוא, “the omer was equivalent to one tenth of the measure known as eyphah.” Rashi in Kidushin 15 explains that 1 איפה =3 סאין, which in turn =6 קבין, which are equivalent to 4 לוגין, each לוג equalling 6 eggs; this means that the daily ration of manna per Israelite was equivalent to a quantity equaling 43,2 eggs. Based on this fact the sages determined that a dough of that amount is subject to the provisions of challah; this is also the maximum amount of dough to be prepared in one lot for baking matzot for Passover.
    The reason that the Torah waited until the end of the whole paragraph to tell us the amount of manna G’d assigned to each person daily instead of telling us this when we were told that each person found he had collected 1 omer per head (household member) in verse 16, is because the Torah did not want to interrupt the train of thought we are to entertain when reading about the manna and what is connected with it. If you will examine the paragraph you will find that there were actually three logical points at which this information would have been pertinent. If the Torah deliberately refrained from using any of these opportunities it clearly had a reason for this.
    It is also possible that the Torah reserved mentioning this information in order to link it to what follows, i.e. the events at Refidim. It is a well known psychological fact that when a person enjoys material blessings in abundance he becomes less meticulous in serving the Lord and he develops a certain laxity in his approach to Mitzvah-performance, just as he can afford to be lax in his concern for his daily bread. He will not be likely to develop this laxity if he is only just able to feed himself and his family as he is constantly aware of the need of G’d’s goodwill on a daily basis and will make an effort to remain in G’d’s good graces. The Torah tells us that the Israelites became delinquent in their Mitzvah-performance although their daily ration was not so abundant that they could have been expected to develop laxity. As a result of this unwarranted laxity, Amalek (17,8) attacked them. The name רפידים is equated by our sages with רפה, weak, i.e. their Torah-observance weakened. This is the conceptual linkage between this new paragraph and the story about the manna preceding it.
    The Torah could have described the amount of manna the Israelites received daily in terms other than “1 tenth of an eyphah.” Why did it choose to mention that it was “1 tenth“ of something? Perhaps the reason for mentioning “1 tenth” is the same as the fact that מעשר, “the tithe” which the farmer has to give to the Levite is “1 tenth.” The Israelites, while in the desert were considered as “sacred bodies,” something akin to angels with bodies. When they would consume this delicate heavenly food their thoughts may have concentrated on the “tenth” emanation and all the holy concepts involved in such contemplations. Perhaps the best example is Exodus 24,11: “they beheld (a vision) of G’d and they ate and they drank.” Perhaps their very eating of such celestial food as the manna is what enabled those אצילי בני ישראל, the most noble group of Israelites, to become privy to such visions at such a time. When we couple this with the proximity to the הר האלו-הים, the mountain of G’d, Sinai, around which all this took place it is not really so remarkable at all. They joined the select elite of which Isaiah said יילכו ולא ייעפו, “they keep walking without becoming fatigued.”
    
    17,5. ומטך אשר הכית בו את היאור, “and your staff, the one with which you smote the river Nile, etc.” At that time the staff became an instrument of afflictions; this time the same staff will become instrumental in producing blessings, i.e. water. The rock will turn into a lake as described in Psalms 114,8.
    A Midrashic approach: (Pessikta Zutrata) there are three things each of which can serve as instrument of disaster or as instrument of bliss. They are: the staff of Moses, the incense, and the Holy Ark. We have evidence that incense was instrumental in halting disaster from Numbers 17,12: “Aaron put on the incense in the midst of the congregation and made expiation for the people....until the plague was checked.” On the other hand, the same incense (even inside the Sanctuary) brought death upon Nadav and Avihu, the two older sons of Aaron (Leviticus 10,1). The Holy Ark became the cause of death of Uzza and the people of Beit Shemesh  as we read in Samuel I 6,19, and it could be a source of blessing (Samuel II 6,11) to Oved Edom Hagitti as we read there: “and the Ark remained in the house of Oved-Edom the Gittite three months, and the Lord blessed Oved-Edom and his whole household.” The staff of Moses which consisted of a material known as sanpiryon, smote the river Nile, brought plagues on the Egyptians. But it also produced water from the rock at Refidim, renamed Massa u-merivah. Thus far the Midrash. You should take note of the fact that no person (prophet) other than Moses ever performed any miracle with that staff. Seeing that this staff was the instrument of the first of the miracles, it was entrusted to Moses, the first of the prophets. Even Joshua who received this staff from Moses never used it to perform miracles with. He only used a staff called כידון, such as when G’d said to him: “lower the כידון which is in your hand in the direction of Ai” (Joshua 8,18). 
    The reason for this is that the staff in the hand of a ruler is a symbol of his authority and power as we know from Ezekiel 19,14: מטה עז שבט למשול, “a strong rod is a sceptre to rule.” Kidon, on the other hand, is not a symbol of power, authority, etc. Every warrior carries one with him when going into war. The difference between the staff of Moses and a כידון is similar to the difference between Moses’ level of prophecy and the level of the prophetic power of Joshua. As is common knowledge, the numerical value of the word והמטה, is the same as the numerical value of the letters in the name of G’d א-ד-נ-י, i.e. 65. The numerical value of the word וכידון is the same as the numerical value of the word המלאך, i.e. 96. The prophecy of Moses was one that did not require an intermediary such as a מלאך in order to be translated into reality. Joshua’s level of prophecy was of the level that required the assistance of the angel who returned to the Jewish people after the death of Moses. Moses had opposed his presence in Exodus 33,2 where G’d had proposed that the angel accompany the people instead of His own פנים, Essence, and 33,15 where he had refused to be satisfied with that level of divine presence. As mentioned, after Moses’ death this angel reappears in Joshua 5,14 saying עתה באתי “now I have come.” The difference between the two levels of prophecy is like the difference between heaven and earth. One is active, the other is passive, a mere recipient. This is why as long as Moses was alive the Israelites were able to eat heavenly bread as G’d had said: “here I am going to make it rain bread from heaven for you” (16,4). Once Moses had died and the people came under the leadership of Joshua they ate bread which had been produced on earth as we know from Joshua 5,11. Once we appreciate this we understand why Moses appointed Joshua to fight the terrestrial battle against Amalek while he himself fought the battle against the celestial representative of Amalek in the “higher” regions. He tried to defeat Amalek and uproot him from earth once and for all. Our sages (Baba Batra 75) illustrated the difference between the power of Moses’ prophecy and that of Joshua as the difference between “the face of the sun and the face of the moon.” The meaning of this statement is that Moses’ prophecy was of the “active” type whereas the prophecy of Joshua was of a “passive” nature.” The sun is an active luminary whereas the moon is a passive luminary.
    
    17,6. הנני עומד לפניך שם על הצור בחורב, “here I shall stand in front of you there by the Chorev (mountain).” This rock at Refidim was the same rock which we encounter almost 40 years later at Kadesh. This was also the source of the well of Miriam which traveled with the Israelites through the desert during all those years. (compare Bamidbar Rabbah 1,2). The very word הנני used by G’d prior to the rock erupting in a well was the same as that used by G’d prior to releasing the manna from heaven. Just as the manna became a daily feature for the remainder of their trek through the desert until Moses’ death, so the well which appeared here for the first time became the Israelites’ constant companion at least until the death of Miriam. Furthermore, just as the giving of the manna had been preceded by a revelation of G’d’s glory (16,7), so the miracle of the rock erupting as a well was also preceded by a revelation of the glory of G’d seeing it was an ongoing  miracle just as was that of the manna (compare Nachmanides).
   והכית בצור, “strike at the rock!” the Torah did not say that Moses was to strike “on the rock,” i.e. על הצור. This proves that the staff was made of an extremely hard material, sanpiryon. It would not be broken on impact with the rock.
    
    17,7. היש ה' בקרבנו אם אין, “if the Lord is in our midst or not?” Actually instead of the word אם אין, “if nothing,” we would have expected the expression אם לא, “if not?” This is the way the Torah expresses such alternatives in 16,4 for instance, where G’d had explained that the daily manna ration was designed to test whether the Israelites had faith in Him “or not.” The Torah was concerned to allude to the attribute אין, which is also known as יראה, an attribute second to which is the one called יש, or in more familiar terms חכמה. (compare commentary on 16,24) This is the reason you find the name ה' immediately next to the word יש to show you how closely these two attributes are associated with one another. Yaakov had first realized this after his dream with the ladder when he awoke and said אכן יש ה' במקום הזה, (Genesis 28,16) This is the attribute Solomon had in mind when he said in Proverbs 8,21 להנחיל אוהבי יש “and to let those who love Me inherit יש.” You have learned already that the two emanations (attributes) חכמה and יראה cannot really be separated from one another. The teachers of the Mishnah have already alluded to this when they said  (Avot 3,17) “where there is no יראה there can also not be any חכמה, and where there is no חכמה, there cannot be any יראה. The two attributes are inseparably intertwined with one another. Israel’s sin at Refidim was that they tried to separate חכמה and יראה. This is a sin of a heretical nature. This is why they were punished immediately by the attack of Amalek who represents heresy of the worst kind.
    
    17,9. בחר לנו אנשים, “choose men for us!” The Amalekites were expert astrologers (compare Rashi; our edition מכשפים, sorcerers). Moses meant that Joshua should select men who according to their horoscopes would not die during the current year, something Moses was aware of due to his own knowledge of astrology. The two armies facing each other would all consist of soldiers who according to their respective horoscopes would not die during that year. As a result of these considerations neither army inflicted fatal casualties on the other during this encounter. This is what is meant when the Torah reports the outcome of the battle as: “Joshua weakened Amalek and his people by the sword.” The Torah carefully refrained from mentioning that the Israelites actually killed any of the Amalekites.  When Moses said to Joshua “choose for us,” he compared Joshua to himself  and did not say: “choose for me!” Mechilta Amalek section 1 uses this phrase to teach: “the honour of your student should be as dear to you as your own honour.”.
    
    17,12. ומזה אחד, “and from this (side) one.” This verse illustrates that when Moses spread out his hands toward heaven in prayer while he was on top of the hill, Aaron stood on his right and Chur on his left. When one raises one’s ten fingers one receives the power of divine support between these fingers. This is an example of what is called the קו האמצעי, by means of which the prophetic power sought by the supplicant is received via the Seraphim (angels) which are above him. [According to Remak  (Rabbi Moshe Cordovero) this “line” is the central conduit of celestial input into the terrestrial world. Ed] We find elsewhere also that the deputy of the High Priest would be positioned on his right whereas the next lower ranking dignitary the אב בית דין would be positioned on his left (Yuma 37). Moses followed this pattern. Nonetheless, the infusion of celestial input occurs directly via the one who carries on the battle, i.e. Moses against the spiritual head of Amalek.
   ויהי ידיו אמונה, “his hands remained faithful.” According to the plain meaning of the text the verse tells us that as long as both Aaron and Chur supported Moses’ hands they remained strong. The use of the term אמונה in this sense is borrowed from Isaiah 22,23, ותקעתיו יתד במקום נאמן, “I will fix him a peg in a firm place.” At the beginning of the battle, when Moses raised his hands the Israelites were in the ascendancy. When Moses lowered his hands, (against his will) this had immediate repercussions on the progress of the battle. According to our sages (Sefer Habahir item 138) it is forbidden for medical reasons to maintain a standing posture with hands outstretched toward heaven for more than three hours. It is quite possible therefore, that Moses did not lower his hand because of physical fatigue but in deference to this halachah. In either event, it became necessary for Aaron and Chur to support Moses’ hands.
    A Midrashic approach on the words ויהי ידיו אמונה: Moses based his prayer on the faith the patriarchs had always displayed in their relationship with G’d, a faith which G’d had acknowledged. He had lauded Avraham for his faith in Genesis 15,6). He had lauded Yitzchak for his faith in Genesis 24,62  (based on the words עד בא, because the Torah writes: ויצחק בא מבוא,  whereas He had lauded Yaakov’s אמונה based on the word השמש, in Genesis 32,32 ויזרח לו השמש,”the sun shone for him.” Thus far the Midrash. I believe that the meaning of all this is that Amalek had relied on Esau his patriarch who had received his blessing from the spiritual power of Yitzchak his father. This power was the attribute גבורה, an attribute identical with the attribute of Justice. Amalek (his spiritual representative) hoped to be able to exploit this attribute to overcome Israel. This is why Moses had to outmaneuver the celestial representative of Amalek in order for the Israelites on earth to prevail in this armed conflict. He therefore mentioned all three patriarchs in his prayer. He was “the son” of Yaakov, representing the principle that החוט המשולש לא במהרה ינתק, “that a three-plied cord will not easily come apart.” Amalek, i.e. Esau did not have such a three-plied cord to call on. 
    Our sages (Mechilta Amalek section 1) also commented that the words עד בא השמש, “until sunset,” allude to a peculiarity in that battle. Normally, other kingdoms engage in battle only until midday. This evil Kingdom of Amalek engaged in fighting both in the early morning and in the evening. Tanchuma Beshalach 28 adds that on that day the sun stood still for the sake of Moses. This is why the Torah added the words: “until the sun set.” The Amalekites  were able to calculate what hour of day it was by means of astronomical calculations. What did Moses do in order to confuse them? He arrested the orbits of both sun and moon and thereby interfered with their calculations. The Midrash bases itself on the words: והיה כאשר ירים משה ידו; we also have a verse in Chabakuk 3,10, רום ידיהו נשא, followed by the words שמש ירח עמד זבולה. In other words: the prophet mentions the raising of the hands with the arrest of the sun’s and the moon’s orbit. Thus far Tanchuma.
    A kabbalistic approach: Moses’ raising his hands was a matter of his concentrating on his ten fingers being pointed at what is called רום השמים. The קו האמצעי the central line in the emanations, which we discussed earlier, is known as רום with the vowel shuruk. This is alluded to in the words ירים משה ידו. He did something similar to what the priests do when they raise their hands in the priestly blessing. By concentrating on the number ten they also concentrate on the ten emanations and the source of blessing that flows from that region to disembodied spirits. At such a time the power of any force opposing such prayers is checked and its influence halted (at least temporarily). At such moments the Israelite soldiers would be victorious. The words וגבר ישראל, “Israel had the ‘upper’ hand,” was therefore something closely linked to Moses’ continued ability or willingness to raise his fingers and concentrate on the number ten. Whenever Moses’ concentration flagged, the accusing finger of the celestial representative of Amalek made itself felt and the Israelites retreated. Moses was compelled to lower his hands from time to time as it is not admissible to interfere with opposing spiritual forces to such an extent that one neutralises them altogether. G’d has not created forces in the universe in order for them to be totally ineffective. This is what the prophet Isaiah 45,18 also had in mind when he said of G’d creating the earth כי לא תוהו בראה לשבת יצרה, “He did not create it a waste, but formed it for habitation.” This statement includes all the phenomena G’d has created, not just those that we appreciate or are fond of. Consider the matter as if in order to have balance in the world the forces of evil have a role assigned to them and it is not up to any man to totally deny them unless the premise for their existence has been removed, i.e. unless all people are good all the time. [I have taken the liberty to paraphrase the author’s words. Ed.] “The Midrash expressed this by saying that it is forbidden to stand with outstretched hands in prayer for more than three hours.”
    The Torah speaks of Moses’ hands in the singular instead of in the plural when it writes: ויהי ידיו אמונה, when in reality it should have written ויהיו ידיו אמונה. Actually, the word ויהי does not refer to the hands, but to Moses as a person. It is as if the Torah had written: ויהי משה פורש ידיו להמשיך כח אל ה'א האחרונה היא מדת הדין הנלחמת לישראל הנקראת אמונה, “Moses spread out his hands in order to draw upon the power of the last letter ה in the tetragram, the attribute of Justice, urging it to fight on behalf of Israel, the attribute also known as Emunah.” We encounter the word אמונה in that context in Psalms 92,3 ואמונתך בלילות, “and your אמונה at night.” This is also why our sages said that whoever has not recited the paragraph commencing with the words אמת ואמונה at night, or the paragraph commencing with the words אמת ויציב in the morning, has not fulfilled his duty. The reason such omission is considered very negligent is that one must mention these respective attributes of G’d every day at the appropriate time, i.e. when that attribute is usually active. (compare Berachot 12).
    I believe further that the words ויהי ידיו include the concept that the priest when blessing the people should form the letters of the tetragram with his hands. It is as if the vowel under the first letter in the word ויהי is a chirik instead of a patach. The priest’s hands should be straight and pointing upwards while he concentrates with all his power. He should not join his two hands together. This is part of the meaning of the word אמונה. The reason that he is to hold his fingers in such a position is so that the blessing will flow unto each finger separately. In order that at the base of his hands the letters of the tetragram should not become mixed up with one another he must make sure that he holds his fingers in the assigned position. In the Sefer Habahir item 139-40 you will find that the author was asked  by his students to whom raising of the hands during the priestly blessing is addressed. Answer: to the attribute רום. The source quoted is Chabakuk 3,10 נתן תהום קולו רום ידינו נשא. This verse makes it plain that the raising of the hands is aimed at the attribute רום השמים. When there are found amongst the Jewish people learned men, familiar with the mystical dimensions of the various names of G’d, and they raise their hands in prayer they are answered immediately. This is what Isaiah 58,9 referred to when he said: אז תקרא וה’ יענה תשוע ויאמר הנני אם תסיר מתוכך מוטה שלח אצבע ודבר און, “then you will call upon the Lord and He will answer. When you cry He will say: ‘Here I am, if you banish the yoke from your midst, the menacing finger and evil speech.’” The message of the prophet is that the cry to G’d must reflect the concept alluded to in the word אז, i.e. “The Lord who rides the seven heavens.” It is not sufficient to appeal only to the attribute represented by the letter א, but one must also address oneself to the letters attached to the א. They represent the emanations, attributes which occupy a pivotal role in G’d’s Kingdom. They are seven in number. This was the reason Moses commenced his song with the word אז, indicating that he did not mean to bypass those seven attributes, emanations. Thus far the Sefer Habahir.
    
    17,13. ויחלוש יהושע, “Joshua weakened, etc.” The word “he weakened,” is testimony that G’d does not totally destroy and make ineffective the forces of the horoscope, and that He does not force nature not to pursue its assigned tasks unless there is an overwhelming and urgent need for this. The reason that He does not destroy the system is simply that he Himself created it. Why should G’d uproot His own handiwork? Nonetheless, G’d from time to time “outwits” the system in order to save someone whom He wants to save; He continues to operate His system of reward and punishment without destroying the system of the laws of nature in the process. The word ויחלש in our verse conveys precisely this thought. The Torah did not say that Joshua “killed.” What occurred was that G’d saved Israel from the onslaught of Amalek without destroying the system of forces based on astrology.
    This is what Bereshit Rabbah 44,12 had in mind when it explained what G’d said to Avram in Genesis 15 where Avram complained that according to his knowledge of the laws of nature he could not father children. G’d took him “outside,” i.e. showed him that  while it was true that the laws of nature, i.e. the sky and the constellations it displayed, did indeed presage that as Avram he could have children, this did not mean that the same rules applied if his name were not (going to remain) Avram. Instead of interfering with His system of the stars and what they portend, G’d would interfere with Avram’s name and rename him. In this way He would “outsmart” nature. 
    The word ויחלש may also mean that Joshua weakened certain forces in the celestial domain which had threatened Israel. The Torah does not say that Joshua dealt a weakening blow לעמלק, “to Amalek,” but it says that Joshua weakened את עמלק. The word את as usual includes something additional; in this instance it means that Joshua also dealt a blow to the celestial patron of Amalek, weakening him also. Joshua accomplished the latter either by his own prayer or by Moses raising his hands in supplication. At any rate, the celestial patron of Amalek not only desisted from supporting his people on earth against Israel, but he even turned against his terrestrial charges, weakening them.
    
    17,14. כי מחה אמחה, “for I will utterly wipe out, etc.” The first word מחה refers to the elimination of Amalek’s patron in the celestial spheres, the second i.e. אמחה, refers to the wiping out of the forces and influence of Amalek on earth. This reflects what our sages have said (Devarim Rabbah 1,19) that prior to destroying a nation on earth G’d always first deals with its patron in the celestial spheres. They base this on Isaiah 34,5: ”For My sword shall be drunk in the heaven,” followed by: “it shall come down upon Edom, upon the people I have doomed.”
    A Midrashic view: The words כי מחה refer to what G’d does to Amalek in this life; the word אמחה refers to what G’d will do to Amalek in the hereafter (Mechilta Amalek section 2). The words מתחת השמים are a reference to Lamentations 3,66 where Jeremiah prayed: “Oh, pursue them in wrath and destroy them from beneath the heavens of the Lord.”
    
    17,16. ויאמר כי יד על כס י-ה, He said: ‘for there is a hand against the throne of G’d, etc.” The word ויאמר, reverts back to Moses who said what follows. The words כי יד indicate that what follows is in the nature of an oath. People used to place a hand on some object before swearing an oath. Moses uses the expression here as a simile for an oath. We have other examples of this such as Deut. 32,40 “for I shall raise My hand to heaven,” etc.; another example of the same simile being used in lieu of a direct oath is found in Numbers 14,30, G’d saying: “about which I have raised My hand.”
    According to the plain meaning of the text the verse has G’d saying as an assurance to any future King of Israel that he is to fight a war on G’d’s behalf against Amalek. This war would be distinguished by the fact that any loot collected in such a war was out of bounds to any Israelite and would be exclusively G’d’s property. This is why Saul, King of Israel, was punished for allowing the people to retain part of the loot from his campaign against Amalek (compare Samuel I 16, 14-27). This stain on the character of the Israelites (Saul and descendants) continued until the time of Mordechai when the Jews took revenge on their enemies without touching any part of the loot (Esther 9,16).  Saul was punished measure for measure. Seeing that the Torah had made the wholeness of G’d’s throne dependent on the war against Amalek being waged by the Israelites, G’d deprived Saul of his own kingdom for failing to heed His instructions to the letter. He did not leave much of a name behind, both he and Yonathan his eldest being slain in battle. Mordechai had appreciated this lesson of history and this is why he exhorted all the Jews that on the day they would confront their enemies and defend their lives they were not to touch any of the possessions of the people against whom they would fight. Haman was a descendent of Amalek. The Torah had warned to “wipe out the memory of Amalek“ (Deut. 25,19), i.e. not to retain anything which ever belonged to that people. 
    We find that also concerning the battle against Amalek in the future the prophet Micah 4,13 warns: “and you will crush many peoples; you will devote their riches to the Lord, their wealth to the Lord of all the earth.” 
    A Midrashic approach: (based on Tanchuma Ki Tetze 11) The Torah did not write כי יד על כסא י-ה but כי יד על כס י-ה. G’d swore an oath that He would not consider His throne as whole; neither would He consider His name as whole until He had avenged Himself from the descendants of Amalek. These words of the Midrash have been elaborated on by the Kabbalists.
    A kabbalistic approach: The “hand” mentioned in this verse is the ongoing war against Amalek; it is a reference to the attribute of Justice of the celestial regions. The verse reveals to us that there are forces at work even in the celestial regions which aim at disputing G’d’s sovereignty. The battle in the celestial regions is aimed at G’d’s throne, i.e. as long as it is in progress His throne is not “whole.” The name י-ה represents G’d’s incomplete name here on earth, i.e. the attribute of Justice in the terrestrial domain. On earth, the fight against G’d and His representative the Jewish people, is aimed at preventing His name from becoming the four-lettered tetragram. I have explained this in connection with 15,2 עזי וזמרת י-ה. Moses explains that the attribute which is aimed at G’d’s throne is the same as that which fights against the tetragram becoming sovereign in our domain. The battle is an ongoing battle from generation to generation. Moses prays that G’d would punish Amalek in the celestial spheres with the strong attribute of Justice in order to subsequently wipe out this people in our terrestrial world. This can occur only when Amalek on earth can no longer draw on support from its patron in the celestial regions. While there remains a patron of Amalek in the heavens G’d’s throne is, as it were, defective, i.e. כס and not כסא.
    Now to the meaning of the Midrash which had linked G’d’s name and His throne. The words השם and הכסא in the Midrash are a symbol of seven attributes alluded to in the last two letters ו-ה in the tetragram. They represent the “throne” of what is in the celestial spheres. Alternatively, the words כי יד על כס י-ה mean that Amalek attacked with his “hand” על כס י-ה, i.e. the two last letters in the tetragram, the letters ו-ה. These letters serve as the throne for the first two letters in the tetragram, the letters י-ה, i.e. the three letters כסא which represent G’d’s throne. Seeing that this is so G’d is engaged in an ongoing battle with Amalek.
    I believe that this is also the mystical dimension of the words אלוף עלוה in Genesis 36,40. The same person’s name is spelled as אלוף עליה in Chronicles I 1,51 by Moses himself. [according to Baba Batra 15 the author of the Book of Chronicles was Ezra. Perhaps the part of Chronicles preceding Moses’ death was recorded by Moses himself. Ed.]  The letter י was substituted for the letter ו by Moses in order for the name of this descendent of Esau/Amalek to reflect the attack on G’d by the descendants of Esau/Amalek, i.e. על יה “against G’d.” Even the name of this Aluph, leader, reflected his program in life, i.e. to “dethrone” G’d. This would be similar to what we read in Psalms 2,2 על י-ה-ו-ה ועל משיחו, “against the Lord (tetragram) and against His anointed.”
    Another message concealed in the word כס as opposed to כסא may be an allusion to the seven clouds which surround G’d’s throne, כסא (compare Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 4). This is based on Job 26,9: מאחז פני-כסה פרשז עליו עננו, “He shuts off the view of His throne, spreading cloud over it.” The letter ז added at the end of the word פרש in that verse is an allusion to the number of clouds surrounding the throne of G’d i.e. “seven.” When the Israelites carry out the Lord’s will the clouds open up in the shape of the letter כ; when they do not carry out the Lord’s will these clouds close around the throne of G’d in the shape of the letter ס. It may be similar to Lamentations 3,44 סכותה בענן, “You have screened yourself off with a cloud, so that no prayer may pass through.” This is also the meaning of Exodus 24,15 ויכס הענן את ההר, “the cloud enveloped the mountain (Mount Sinai),” or ויכס הענן את אהל מועד, “the cloud enveloped the Tent of Meeting” (Exodus 40,34). 
    You are already aware that there were seven clouds which surrounded the camp of the Israelites in the desert. I have seen a text by one of the Kabbalists in which he wrote: “know that the throne of G’d’s glory confers blessing and power on seventy angels who surround that throne and who represent the seventy nations on earth other than the Jewish people. They are these nations’ patrons. They are guiding their fates and Amalek who is descended from Esau exercises exceptional power seeing he represents the power of Esau his ancestor and all the while he drew his inspiration and power from the blessing bestowed upon him by Yitzchak his ancestor and Esau’s father. This power was the power of the attribute of Justice, Yitzchak’s predominating attribute. This whole concept is hinted at in the word ויחלש which the Torah uses describing the outcome of the encounter between Joshua and his army and the forces under the command of Amalek. The word ויחלש rather than ויהרוג as a reference to the defeat inflicted on Amalek indicates that the Torah did not describe the military encounter with these words but the spiritual encounter between the two peoples in the celestial spheres. Concerning that encounter the Torah reports that the power of the representative of Amalek-Esau had been greatly weakened. Once that had occurred the military forces of the Israelites were able to inflict fatal casualties on their enemies just as in any battle.
    Amalek was one of the seventy nations. His celestial representative was also one of seventy. When the Amalekites on earth, his charges, sinned by attacking the Jewish people unprovoked, G’d punished their celestial representative by withdrawing some of his power. He did this by removing him from being so close to His throne. The result of this weakening of the celestial patron of Amalek was that henceforth his people’s fate would be governed by the horoscopes only, their representative at the heavenly throne having no intercessionary power on behalf. of the people he represents. This is the meaning of the oath we read here that יד על כס י-ה, that Amalek’s celestial representative henceforth has access only to the כס, as distinct from the כסא. [In plain language, it was not G’d’s throne which had been undermined but Amalek’s access to it. Ed.] The absence of the letter א from the word כסא means that as far as Amalek was concerned it was denied access to that part of G’d’s throne and all the advantages  that such access entailed. Similarly, Amalek lost access to the letters ו and ה in the four-lettered name of G’d. In the future, when there will be no more Amalek and hence no need to allow Amalek or the likes of him access to the four-lettered name of G’d, these two letters will become freely accessible to people on earth. This is the meaning of ה' אחד ושמו אחד, that “both the Lord and His name will be indistinguishable from one another.” [The author proceeds to quote numerous verses from Scripture depicting the idyllic situation of when G’d will rule supreme after the forces opposing Him have been disposed of. I am content to conclude with the last cited verses from Ovadiah 21 and Zecharyah 14,9 respectively: “For liberators shall march up on Mount Zion to wreak judgment on Mount Esau; and dominion shall be the Lord’s.” “On that day the Lord shall be king over all the earth; in that day there shall be one Lord with one name.” Ed.]
    
    
    
    
    
   וישמע  יתרו
    
    
    
   מרפא לשון עץ חיים וסלף בה שבר ברוח, “a healing tongue is a tree of life, but a crooked one causes a broken spirit.” (Proverbs 15,4). In this verse Solomon informed us of the tremendous usefulness of the power of speech. The tongue, i.e. the words spoken by the tongue, are the remedy capable of healing the mentally sick and depressed. Curing a sick mind by means of the right words is a greater medical achievement than curing by means of organic or inorganic medicines. Whenever one employs external agents it is doubtful if they will accomplish their purpose. Even when these medicines remove the disease or sickness  they do not add to one’s life span. Using one’s power of speech to effect a cure does not result in a doubtful cure but its effect is usually prompt and beyond question. Such a cure has the potential of increasing the patient’s life span. It is like a tree of life to which life is attached.
    If one uses the power of speech in a negative way, i.e. one abuses this power, the result is a broken spirit. Just as a cure effected by judicious use of the power of words is the most effective cure, so malicious use of the power of words is apt to inflict deeper psychological harm on a person than any other cause of disease or sickness. This is why our sages said (Baba Metzia 59) that if someone publicly shames another person he forfeits his entitlement to life in the hereafter. This kind of mental anguish and sickness is far more serious than a bodily dysfunction as it is likely to result in a broken spirit. Proverbs 18,14  states: “a man’s spirit can sustain him during sickness, but who can lift up a dejected spirit?” The meaning of this verse is that the spirit, i.e. the soul, is able to relieve the sickness of the body to an extent as it sustains the sick body by itself going without food or drink for many days and offering solace to the body. When the mind is sick however, who can sustain it? Who will offer it solace or comfort? 
    Furthermore, just as there are physical afflictions so there are mental diseases. The latter are more serious and harder to combat than diseases of the body. Most people suffering mental disease are victims of sins committed or are the result of such a person (mind) having believed in the wrong values. This is what Solomon referred to when he said in Proverbs 2,16: “to deliver you from the alien woman, from the strange woman  whose talk is smooth.” He continues about this “strange woman” in Proverbs 5,3 “for the lips of an immoral woman drip honey;” Solomon compares  beliefs in the wrong values as equivalent to an alien woman who destroys her victim in the end.” This is why Solomon said: “but in the  end  she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword” (Proverbs 5,4). Another verse dealing with the same subject is Proverbs 5,5: “her feet go down to death, her steps support she-ol.” By having provided man with the ability to speak and to communicate his thoughts to others, G’d has also given man a decisive advantage over all other creatures. He enabled us to heal people whose minds are sick and to bring them close to the protective wings of G’d’s presence, the Shechinah. (compare Ruth 2,12). Being under these protective wings of the Shechinah means to enjoy true and everlasting life. Avraham possessed this attribute of being able to heal spirits and this enabled him to attract so many people to the one and only G’d (compare Sotah 10). All of this he achieved by healing people through judicious use of his tongue. When the sages describe that he had a pearl around his neck which conferred a cure upon people they meant the power of speech (compare Baba Batra 16). We are told that the single pearl which hung around Avraham’s neck had the effect that any sick person who looked at it would be cured instantly. When Avraham died G’d took this pearl and made it part of the planet sun. The Midrash obviously needs elucidation as it is a euphemism expressing a certain idea. The author compared Avraham’s attribute which enabled him to gain converts to monotheism to the sun and its ability to illuminate matters that were previously concealed. The mention of Avraham’s neck in this connection is to be understood as the source of the “pearl” being in his throat, the source of verbalising one’s thoughts. What the author of the Midrash meant was that anyone suffering from spiritual dejection who listened to Avraham’s words would be cured.
    When Avraham died he did not leave behind him any person  or creature capable of teaching the Divinity of G’d and His uniqueness other than the planet sun; this is why G’d removed this “pearl” and hung it around the “sun in its orbit.” This is confirmed by Psalms 19,2: “the heavens proclaim G’d’s glory,” and this is also the meaning of the words מרפא לשון עץ חיים which we quoted from Proverbs as the introduction to this essay. The healing power demonstrated by the judicious use Avraham made of his tongue was the reason that so many of the people with whom he came into contact adopted his belief in monotheism. These were the people referred to in Genesis 12,5 as ואת הנפש אשר עשו בחרן, “and the people whom they had converted to monotheism while in Charan.”
    The healing power of Moses’ tongue was demonstrated in verse 8 of our chapter when the Torah reports Moses as telling his father-in-law about all the miracles G’d had performed on behalf of the Jewish people. Yitro converted to Judaism after hearing his son-in-law describe what had transpired since he had left him. He abandoned his prestigious position in Midian as the High Priest, wealth, and his many children, and went into the desert in order to place himself under the protective wings of G’d’s Shechinah as soon as he hard Moses tell him what had happened since he had returned to Egypt at the time.
    
    18,1. וישמע יתרו כהן מדין חותן משה את כל אשר עשה אלו-הים למשה ולישראל עמו כי הוציא ה' את ישראל ממצרים, “Yitro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard all that G’d had done for Moses and His people Israel, that the Lord had taken Israel out of Egypt.” Concerning this entire portion there are conflicting opinions amongst  our sages (Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua Hamoda-i in Zevachim 116) as to when Yitro arrived in the desert at the encampment of the Israelites. Some say he arrived prior to the giving of the Torah; others say that he arrived after the giving of the Torah. Each group of sages can cite evidence which appears to support its view.
    The sages who claim that Yitro arrived only after the giving of the Torah refer to the words in verse 5 which describe the location where Yitro found the Israelites as “where it was encamped at the Mountain of G’d.” The words אשר חונה שם in that verse mean “where it was still encamped.” We know that Moses and the Israelites remained encamped at Mount Sinai for approximately an entire year. This makes it likely that Yitro arrived there after the Torah had been given (6 days after the Israelites’ arrival at that site). Furthermore, Moses’ words in 28,16: “and I make known to them the statutes of G’d and His social laws,” appear to presuppose that Moses had already been given the Torah. A third indication that Yitro arrived after the giving of the Torah is found at the end of our portion where Moses reluctantly sees his father-in-law off when the latter returns home. We read there (19,27) “Moses sent off his father-in-law and he went to his land.” Had the Torah not been given already, it is hardly conceivable that Moses would not have detained his father-in-law at least until after that event!  However, if we accept the view that Yitro had arrived only after the giving of the Torah it seems peculiar that Moses should have told him only about what transpired in Egypt and at the Exodus without mentioning the revelation at Mount Sinai with a single syllable! At the very least Moses should have mentioned that the entire nation had been found worthy to hear the words of G’d directly out of the fiery spectacle which occurred at Mount Sinai. Moreover, if Yitro acknowledged the might of G’d based on matters which he had heard second-hand, i.e. the plagues and the crossing of the Sea of Reeds and the drowning of the Egyptians  so that he was moved to exclaim: “now I know  that the Lord is greater than any god,” would he not have been even more impressed when he heard about the revelation which had occurred much more recently and had demonstrated the existence and involvement of G’d in the affairs of man? Keeping this in mind we can understand the view of the sages that Yitro must have arrived at the encampment of the Jewish people prior to the giving of the Torah. When we accept the latter view the sequence of the Torah’s report of events is in chronological order also. These words reflect the opinion of Nachmanides.
    Such a view explains the fact that Moses did not mention the revelation at Mount Sinai; he could not have done so as it had not happened yet. As to the argument that the words אשר הוא חונה שם הר האלו-הים indicate that Yitro found the people there after the revelation, these words do not necessarily mean that Moses was encamped at the Mountain of G’d. Actually, at that time the Israelites were at Refidim which is located between Eylim and Sinai. The “mountain of G’d” was a term with which Yitro was familiar ever since Moses had told him of his appointment as leader of the Jewish people which had taken place at that mountain. The mountain was so named because it was going to be the location where the Israelites would perform service to the Lord, as mentioned already in Exodus 3,12. This service was the justification G’d cited to Moses for liberating an as yet not worthy Jewish people. The Torah tells us about the great stature of Yitro who did not wait for the revelation at Mount Sinai before coming to join the Jewish people and to convert to Judaism. As to Moses telling his father-in-law that he was instructing the people in G’d’s statutes and social laws, these were not the laws of the Torah, but the legislation which G’d had already revealed as we have been told in connection with what transpired at Marah 16,25 “there He taught them decrees and ordinances.”
     As to the third argument that at the end of the Parshah we read that Moses saw off his father-in-law when he returned to his own land,  it is well to remember that the Torah does not say that וישב יתרו למקומו, that “Yitro returned to his place,” i.e. as if nothing had happened. On the contrary, Yitro returned to Midian “his land” in order to convert as many Midianites as he was able to monotheism or to Judaism. At the very least he converted his own family. Mechilta Yitro section 2 writes that Yitro told Moses before his departure that he would go back to Midian and convert his people; it is possible that though he went he never returned, having been unsuccessful. At any rate, this would account for the report in Judges 1,16: “the descendants of the Kenite, the father-in-law of Moses went up with the Israelites from the city of Palms to the wildeness of Yehudah.”
    The portion of Yitro follows immediately after the paragraph dealing with Amalek because the two stories show the diametrically opposite reaction of different Gentiles to the same event. Whereas Amalek used the defeat of the Egyptians in order to take up the fight against G’d and G’d’s people instead, Yitro learned from history and converted to Judaism. Seeing that Amalek was a descendant of Esau, the son of Yitzchak, one could have expected that the events of the Exodus would have evoked a feeling of penitenece in these people, the very opposite was the case. Amalek travelled from afar in order to counteract the psychological impact on the majority of mankind when they heard of the miracles G’d had performed and how for the first time in history slaves had been freed.
    On the other hand, Yitro, who was related to the Jewish people only through Avraham and Keturah became a convert. The Torah requites the behaviour of both by instructing us to wipe out Amalek and every vestige of his memory (Deut.25,19), whereas  we read in Samuel I 15,6 that when King Saul went to war against Amalek he made sure that the Kenites (descendants of Yitro) would evacuate the city before he attacked it. The reason given for that act of consideration was the fact that their forefathers had acted with kindness vis-a-vis the Jewish people when they  departed from Egypt on their way to the land of Israel.
    It is possible to explain the proximity of these two paragraphs, i.e. the fight against Amalek and the arrival of Yitro followed by the paragraph of the revelation at Mount Sinai, followed in turn by Parshat Mishpatim, in a dfferent way. It is a fact of life that the descendants of Esau are a painful thorn for the Jewish people throughout our history, no less so during the first hostile encounter reported at the end of Parshat Beshalach than at the end of our exile when G’d will bring the final redemption. We have a hint here that just as Israel was successful in its first encounter with Amalek with the help of Moses and Joshua so it will be during the final encounter in the future. During the exile in which we find ourselves nowadays we will be helped by the prophet Elijah, a descendant of the tribe of Levi just like Moses; the second helper will be the Mashiach ben Yoseph, the redeemer from the tribe of Joseph like Joshua who was from the tribe of Ephrayim. (based on a Jewish-Christian theological confrontation involving Nachmanides in his Sefer Hage-ulah page 291 edited by Rabbi Chavell). Just as the first redemption resulted in Yitro converting to Judaism and returning to the fold (his ancestor was Avraham), so, as a result of the final redemption, all the surviving Gentile nations will convert and join Judaism. The reason that the portion of Yitro which contains the account of the giving of the Torah also follows the story of the fight against Amalek and Yitro’s conversion, is that the report of the giving of the Torah is a reminder that eventually the Torah will become the property of all of mankind and G’d’s name and knowledge of Him will be world-wide “like the waters which cover the ocean” (Isaiah 11,9). Following that redemption there will be a יום הדין, a “day of judgment,” a resurrection of the dead. This is why the portion ואלה המשפטים follows the giving of the Torah to signal to us that resurrection and eternal life will be for those who observe the commandments spelled out in that portion. It is worth noting that when Daniel 12,2 refers to that day in the future he mentions the word אלה twice in that verse. The proximity of our portions is to be understood in terms of Isaiah 46,10 מגיד מראשית אחרית “who foretells at the beginning what the end is going to be like.” By commencing פרשת משפטים with the word ואלה, the link between Torah legislation, observance and resurrection as mentioned in Daniel is established.
   כי הוציא ה' את ישראל, “that G’d had taken out Israel.” After Moses had first spoken of G’d as אלו-הים, when he spoke of  עשה אלו-הים, he wanted to introduce Yitro to the tetragram, G’d’s full name. and other attributes. It was important to Moses that Yitro should realise that the Exodus had been orchestrated by this attribute of G‘d. In this Moses merely paraphrased what we have read in 13,16: “for with a strong hand did Hashem take us out of Egypt.” Moses wanted to prevent the misconception that only the חזק יד had been active in orchestrating the Exodus of the Jewish people. 
    18,4. ושם האחד אליעזר, “and the other one’s name was Eliezer.”  The Torah should have written either: “the name of the second one, i.e. השני, or האחר.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the justification for the Torah describing both sons with the adjective “the one,” is that one son was special, exclusive for his father, whereas the other was special, exclusive for his mother. Gershom being the firstborn was special to his mother. Seeing Tzipporah had taken a knife and circumcised her son thus saving (him) or (his father) from death at the hands of the angel (Exodus 4,25) he was special to his mother. Eliezer, on the other hand whose name commemorated the fact that G’d saved Moses’ life when he fled from Pharaoh, was special to his father.
    Another way of understanding the words האחד as applicable to both these sons is that the potential to increase, to multiply, is rooted in the first one. Unless there is one son to start with, other children do not represent an increase. We know from Chronicles I 23,17 that whereas Eliezer himself had only one son, רחביה, his grandsons were very numerous as proved by the words in that verse ובני רחביה רבו למעלה, “the sons of Rechaviah were very numerous.” Berachot 7 interprets that line to mean that eventually more than 600,000 descendants came out of Rechaviah. The Torah mentioned the word האחד to indicate that he was the origin of all those descendants.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Chukat 8): On the words "“and the name of the one was Eliezer,” Rabbi Yossi son of Rabbi Chanina said that that at the time Moses ascended to heaven he found G’d studying the laws of the red heifer saying that in a certain dispute between two Rabbis, the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer was the correct one.” He (Rabbi Eliezer) had ruled that whereas the calf used in the procedure of עגלה ערופה, “atonement for an unresolved case of murder” (compare Deut. chapter 21) the animal to be killed had to be up to one year old, the heifer to be used in the ceremony of the red heifer had to be up to  two years old. When Moses became aware of G’d “debating the issue before coming to a decision,” he exclaimed “Lord! The entire universe is Yours and you waited until mortals had debated the issue and ruled on it before ruling on the issue Yourself!” G’d answered him by saying that in the future there would arise a certain righteous person by the name of Rabbi Eliezer and he would be the first one to render a ruling on this subject. When Moses heard how highly G’d rated the scholarship of that Rabbi he exclaimed that he hoped the Rabbi in question would be one of his descendants. G’d assured him that this would indeed be the case. Hence the description האחד here in our verse. 
    
    18,6. ואשתך ושני בניה עמה, “and your wife and her two sons with her.” The Torah should have quoted Yitro as saying to Moses: “and your two sons,” instead of “and her two sons,” just as he said “your wife,” “your father-in-law.” However, we must remember that it is customary for the Torah to describe sons as belonging to their mother such as in Genesis 46,15: “these are the sons of Leah,” whereas daughters are described as “belonging” to their father such as in the same verse “and Dinah his daughter” (compare Nidah 31).
    
    18,7. ויצא משה לקראת חותנו, “Moses went out to meet his father-in-law.” Our sages in Mechilta ask the rhetorical question: “was there anyone who observed that Moses left the camp in order to welcome Yitro and he himself stayed behind? Was there anyone who observed that Aaron left the camp to welcome Yitro and he himself stayed behind?” The wording of the text makes it clear that the entire menfolk went out to welcome Yitro.
    
    18,8. את כל התלאה, “all the hardship, etc.” this was a reference to the waters having turned bitter at Marah, to the Israelites having run out of dough which they had taken with them from Egypt to make into bread; he told him about their having been attacked by Amalek. He added that in spite of all these hardships which they encountered on the way the Lord had saved them in a critical situation each time.
    
    18,9. ויחד יתרו, “Yitro rejoiced over the goodness, etc.” The word ויחד is the same as the word חדוה in עז וחדוה במקומו, “strength and joy are in His place” (Chronicles I 16,27). We may also see the word אחדות as intimately related to the word ויחד, “he united.” This meaning would reflect that Yitro had converted and accepted the אחדות, the “Unity” of G’d. He blessed the name of the Lord as we hear in verse 10: “blessed be the Lord who has saved you .”
     The Midrash (Sanhedrin 94) views Yitro’s reaction as expressed by the word ויחד somewhat differently, understanding the root of the word as חדד. Accordingly, Yitro had mixed feelings which expressed themselves in goose-flesh at the news of what had overtaken the Egyptians at the Sea of Reeds. The Talmud says that his reaction reflects the truth of the popular saying that a convert displays some sensitivity concerning what befalls his former co-religionists until the tenth generation. Yitro was a tenth generation descendant of Mizrayim the son of Cham, Noach’s youngest son. The Egyptians of his time were his allies. At the same time he himself as a Midianite was also a descendant of Avraham and Keturah (Genesis 25,2) as already mentioned. There had been ten generations between Noach and Avraham. Similarly, there had been ten generations from Cham son of Noach, to Midian son of Avraham. This is the background to the popular saying quoted in the Talmud that the affinity to former associations by a convert is noticeable for ten generations.
    
    18,10. אשר הציל אתכם, “who has saved you.” The Torah mentions two separate acts of “saving.” The first was the Israelites having been saved from being enslaved to the Egyptians. The second was the cessation of their slave labour already during the period of the ten plagues. Alternatively, the words: “who has saved you” may refer to the fact that Moses and Aaron individually had escaped the danger inherent in having confronted Pharaoh for a full year. 
    
    18,11. עתה ידעתי כי גדול ה' מכל האלו-הים כי בדבר אשר זדו עליהם, “now I know that Hashem is greater than any deity for with the matter wherein they sinned He came upon them.” Yitro meant the factor which convinced him of the superiority of Hashem to any other deity was the matching of the punishment to the crime committed. Had the Egyptians not committed sins they would not have been punished for fulfilling G’d’s decree that the Jews be strangers or even bondsmen in Egypt. This had been decreed already in Genesis 15,13. They sinned by adding זדו. They decreed that every male Jewish baby be drowned; hence G’d paid them back by drowning them. G’d had never decreed for any of Avraham’s descendants to be murdered. The word כי  is prelude to recognition that the Egyptians must have sinned. Their punishment by water gave Yitro the clue to the nature of their sin. We find a similar construction in Nechemyah 9,10 כי ידעת כי הזידו עליהם, “for You were aware that they had deliberately sinned against them.”
    
    18,12. ויקח יתרו חותן משה עולה וזבחים לאלו-הים, “Yitro, Moses’ father-in-law took burnt offering and meat offering for G’d.” This is the only time when we find the Torah mentioning the attribute אלו-הים in connection with sacrifices. Everyhwere else we have the attribute Hashem in connection with sacrificial offerings to G’d. Yitro had not yet become aware of that dimension of G’d; hence he had to address the attribute he was aware of. Moses tried to educate him in this respect when he told him in verse 8 about what Hashem had done to Pharaoh on account of the Jewish people. Yitro’s motivation in coming, significantly, referred to what אלו-הים had done  for Moses (verse 1).
   עם חותן משה לפני האלו-הים, “with Moses’ father-in-law in the presence of G’d.” The words: “in the presence of G’d,” mean “in front of the משכן, residence, of G’d.” Seeing that there  was not yet a Tabernacle, the meaning is “in front of the pillar of cloud or pillar of fire which symbolised G’d’s residence on earth.” The meal described here was prepared in honour of Yitro’s conversion, circumcision, and ritual immersion. There can be no question that this festive meal, just like the meal Yitzchak had eaten prior to bestowing blessings, was designed to enhance the joy of the souls of the participants so that they would be granted Holy Spirit. We have explained on other occasions already that true spiritual joy is dependent on one’s body feeling well. When one’s physical powers are at their best such feelings transfer themselves also to the soul and enhance its ability to feel at its best. This has been documented in Kings II 3,15 by the prophet Elisha who demanded to be entertained by a musician in order to raise his spirit to the level of prophetic insights.
    
    18,15. כי יבא אלי העם לדרוש אלו-הים, “for the people come to me to seek  G’d.” Moses did not say that the people came to him to seek Hashem.” The reason was that Moses was engaged in dealing with litigation. The attribute of אלו-הים is appropriate in that connection as we know from Deut. 1,17 כי המשפט לאלו-הים הוא, “for matters of judgment are reserved for the attribute אלו-הים is why Moses used this attribute when he explained to Yitro what he was doing (and why he remained seated). He said והודעתיו את חוקי האלו-הים ואת תורותיו “I acquaint them with the statutes of אלו-הים and with His teachings.” The meaning of the whole verse is: “they need to stand in line before me for a long time because they inquire concerning so many things.” Some of them ask me to pray on behalf of their sick family members; some want me to locate lost property for them; we find that the expression דרישת אלו-הים is used in Scripture in connection with both of these requests; in Kings II 8,8,  when Chazael wants to know from the prophet Elisha if he would recover from his sickness, he does so saying ודרשת את ה' מאותו לאמור האחיה מחלי זה? “and through him inquire from the Lord: ‘will I recover from this sickness?’” Chazael meant for Elisha to pray on his behalf and to inform him afterwards if his prayer had been answered. Rivkah did the same when the twins were quarreling in her womb and the Torah says ותלך לדרוש את ה', “she went to inquire from G’d” (Genesis 25,22). With regard to the restoration of lost objects we read in Samuel I 9,9: “Formerly, in Israel, when a man went to inquire of G’d  he said: “come, let us go to the Seer.” The subject under discussion in that chapter was the lost donkeys of Kish, Saul’s father. Clearly, the prophet was expected to be able to tell the petitioner where to find things he had lost. In addition, Moses explained to Yitro that he functioned as a judge and in that capacity he taught the people the laws of the Lord.
    
    18,18. נבול תבול גם אתה גם העם הזה, “surely you will become weary, both you and this people.” The meaning of the words נבול תבול corresponds to Onkelos’ translation of מלאה תלאה, “you will become worn out, tired.” Yitro meant that it was irresponsible, forbidden even, for Moses to undergo such a strain and to make the people undergo such a strain. Many would stand in line and wait and never get around to have their problems aired before Moses.
    A Midrashic approach (Pessikta Zutrata): The word נבול is a euphemism for the leaf of a fig which wilts. The application of the word נבול to leaves is found in Isaiah 34,4: “like a leaf withering on the vine, like shriveled fruit on a fig tree.” The repeated word גם is meant to include both Aaron and the seventy elders.
    
    18,19. היה אתה לעם מול האלו-הים, “be you a representative of the people before G’d.” Yitro meant: “you are to present the people’s prayer  to G’d on their behalf,” as we find in Psalms 88,2 “when I cry out in the night before You.” The psalmist uses the word נגדך.
   והבאת אתה את הדברים אל האלו-הים, “and you will bring the matters to G’d.” Yitro acknowledged the first of Moses’ explanations, i.e. that the people ask him to intercede on their behalf. 
    
    18,20. והזהרת אתהם את החקים ואת התורה, “and you will caution them regarding the decrees and the teachings.” Yitro also acknowledged the need for Moses to deal with the second matter he had mentioned personally, i.e. to inform the people of the decrees and the teachings mentioned in verse 16. However, concerning the third matter, i.e. Moses being the adjudicator of every dispute, Yitro did not agree that Moses personally had to deal with such matters. This is why he said to him (verse 18) “this matter is too hard for you (personally)”. He therefore suggested that Moses deputise people to carry out litigations in his place. He stipulated that the people appointed for such a task be אנשי חיל, (an attribute we will discuss in verse 21).
    
    18,21. ואתה תחזה, “as for you, you are to discern, etc.” We would have expected Yitro to say: “you shall select,” instead of “you will discern.” In fact, when it came to carrying out Yitro’s advice the Torah reports that Moses ויבחר אנשי חיל, “selected men who were accomplished.” The reason two different words were used for the selection of the appointees is that whereas man sees with his eyes, the exterior, i.e. תחזה, Yitro who was aware of man’s limitations in the matter advised Moses to do the most he could, i.e. judge by appearances. He hoped that Moses would have the prophetic insight, i.e. חזיון, visionary quality, to select the right people. When it came to carrying out the advice the Torah reports that Moses had Divine assistance so that the people he “selected,” were confirmed to possess the attributes Moses had judged that they had.
    Another approach to the words: ואתה תחזה. We have stated on another occasion that  the truly righteous person reflects this quality in his face so that even ferocious beasts do not attack him. Similarly, great men such as Yaakov can read facial expressions accurately so that they know what quality of person they face. Here too, Yitro told Moses that he was the kind of individual who could make such judgments based on merely looking at people from the outside. By emphasising the word ואתה, Yitro meant that he was confident that Moses was able to select the right people without special Divine assistance.	
   מכל העם אנשי חיל, “from amongst all the people men of accomplishment.” The term אנשי חיל is a collective term and presupposes that these people possessed all the individual qualities Yitro had enumerated such as being “G’d-fearing, men of truth, people despising money.” The title אנשי חיל is applied to people who can lead the nation by judging fairly. It is impossible for fair judgment to be dispensed unless those dispensing it possess reverence for G’d and His Torah, despise ill gotten gain such as bribes, and are truthful. Our sages (Sanhedrin 7) have stated that a true judge is someone who in his mind’s eye constantly sees a sword at his neck above, and gehinom opening before him below, he being in the middle. If he merits it he will be saved from both, if not he will be afflicted by both. Judges must also be “men of truth,” meaning they must love truth as a value by itself choosing to side only with truth, refusing to accept arguments based on lies. They must personify the principle expressed in Exodus 23,7 applying to judges (according to Ibn Ezra) “keep your distance from anything deceitful.” They must also be שונאי בצע, i.e. display a disdain for money. This applies to a disdain for their own money, money acquired honestly. (‎Sifri on Deut. 1,17)  It goes without saying that they must hate money that was taken from others illegally. (compare Genesis 37,26). The author quotes Scripture to show that the word בצע may mean simply ”money.” An alternative meaning of the word בצע may be  “robbery.” The requirement of the psychological makeup of the personality of a judge would have to be a hatred against anything acquired by means of violence direct or indirect, i.e. the threat of violence.
    In order to appreciate how highly these virtues were esteemed by the Torah we need only look at instances of the Torah complimenting outstanding individuals. Noach (Genesis 6,9) was praised for being righteous and perfect (תמים), a contrast to the violence which permeated mankind at the time and resulted in the decree of the deluge. Avraham was praised and instructed to be תמים, (Genesis 17,1). Yaakov was described as תם, (Genesis 25,27) Moses was described as extremely ענו, humble, the opposite of arrogant, demanding. All of this goes to show that the principal quality of a judge is not his intellect but his personal virtue. Just as the trunk of a tree is not its most important component but the fruit it yields, our sages taught us that the meaning of Psalm 111,10  שכל טוב לכל עושיהם, is that not the לומדיהם, the intelligence itself, is the principal value of a clever brain but the use to which he puts such intelligence., i.e. עושיהם (Berachot 17).
    
    18,22. ושפטו את העם בכל עת, “they shall judge the people at all times.” The meaning of the words בכל עת is “at all times convenient to the people.” As long as Moses was the only judge it was obviously impossible for a litigant to get justice when he wanted to. Moses was constantly swamped with petitioners. If Yitro’s advice were accepted this would change.
    
    19,1. בחודש השלישי, “in the third month.” This was the month of Sivan. The words ביום הזה mean that it was the first day of the month. This is the day normally called חדש, such as in Samuel I 20,24  ויהי החדש וישב המלך אל הלחם לאכול, “It was on חדש and the King sat down to eat.” Another example of the word חדש referring to New Moon is found in the same chapter of the Book of Samuel three verses later: We read ויהי ממחרת החדש השני ויפקד מקום דוד, “It was on the second day of the New Moon celebration that David’s seat remained empty.” The verse teaches you amongst other things that they observed two days of New Moon. This is what King Saul referred to when he inquired speaking to his son Yonathan: “why did the son of Yishai not appear either yesterday or today for the meal?” Our sages in Shabbat 86 also state that the words ביום הזה mean that the Israelites arrived in the desert of Sinai on the first day of the month. They base this on the use of the word הזה in our verse here and the expression החדש הזה לכם in Exodus 12,2.
   באו מדבר סיני, “they arrived in the desert Sinai.” This is another word for חורב of which we heard in Exodus 3,1 that Moses came to the mountain of G’d, to Chorev. Concerning this mountain G’d had told Moses at the time: “when I make you take the people out of Egypt you will serve G’d at this mountain.” (Exodus 3,12).
   
    19,2. ויסעו מרפידים, “they journeyed from Refidim.” This means that on the day they journeyed from Refidim it was New Moon and they arrived later that day at the desert of Sinai. The words ויבואו מדבר סיני ויחנו במדבר, mean that they arrived in the desert on that day, resting, but on the second of the month they made camp facing the mountain. This is why the Torah writes ויחן שם ישראל ההר, “Israel encamped facing the mountain.” The reason the word ויחן is in the singular here whereas at all other reports of the Israelites making camp it is in the plural, i.e. ויחנו, is the Torah’s way of complimenting the people for their unity of purpose when preparing to receive the Torah.
    A Midrash mentioned in Torah shleymah note 28 claims that the reason for the singular of ויחן is that the word ישראל in our verse is a reference to ישראל סבא, the concept of the people of Israel as envisaged in the name Israel the patriarch. The author of that Midrash clearly distinguishes between the Torah speaking of בני ישראל traveling or camping respectively, and ישראל or מחנה ישראל in 12,37 and here. When the word בני in front of ישראל is absent, he understands the reference to be not to the physical people of Israel but to the spiritual entity it or they represent.
    The words נגד ההר, a slightly unusual expression, is to be understood as if the Torah had written כנגד ההר, “opposite the mountain.”
    According to the plain meaning of the text the words נגד ההר mean “to the east of the mountain” (compare Pessikta Zutrata). Moses was told on that very day (second of the month) “so you shall say to the House of Yaakov and relate to Children of Israel” (verse 3). The Torah mentioned women and men separately as there are many commandments which apply equally to both men and women. G’d continued with: “you have seen what I did to Egypt,” and continued in verse 5 with: “and now, if you will hearken well and observe My covenant, etc.” The people responded to the above (verse 8) “all that the Lord has said we will do.”
    On the third day of the month Moses ascended the mountain again and informed G’d of the people’s response (end of verse 8). On the fourth of the month G’d told Moses: “go to the people and sanctify them today and tomorrow” (verse 10). G’d referred to the fourth and fifth of the month. The words: “be ready for the third day” refer to the sixth of the month, i.e. the third day of their sanctification. From the above you observe that the Torah was given on the sixth day of Sivan. Our sages (Rabbi Akiva) say in Shabbat 86 that the Torah was given on the Sabbath. Rabbi Yossi held that the Torah (Ten Commandments) was given on the seventh of the month. Rava added that both scholars are in agreement that the Torah was given on the Sabbath. When the Torah writes in 20,8 זכור את יום השבת, and the same words are used in 13,3 זכור את היום הזה אשר יצאתם ממצרים, (the word זכור being in the infinitive both times) this serves as the reason for both scholars agreeing that both events occurred on the same day of the week, i.e. on the Sabbath. The matter under dispute between these two scholars was only the day of the week on which the first day of Sivan occurred. Rabbi Yossi held that New Moon was on the preceding Sunday, whereas Rabbi Akiva (and the other scholars) held that New Moon in that year occurred on the Monday. Although there is a rule in the Talmud that when Rabbi Yossi’s opinion differs from his peers his opinion is preferred because he always supplied a good reason for his opinion (compare Gittin 67), in this instance the halachah was fixed according to the opinion of the other scholars, the majority. Accordingly, our tradition is that the Israelites arrived in the desert of Sinai on Monday and encamped in front of Mount Sinai on the second of the month, i.e. on Tuesday after having left their initial resting place in that desert. The fact that the Torah was given on the Sabbath is recorded in our עמידה prayer every Sabbath morning when we say  ישמח משה במתנת חלקו “Moses was full of joy with the portion allotted to him.” He rejoiced that it had been his good fortune to hand over G’d’s Torah to the Jewish people on that memorable Sabbath.
    
    19,3. כה תאמר לבית יעקב, “So you shall say to the House of Yaakov.” Moses was to address the women. The word כה means he was to speak to them in Hebrew. The word תאמר means he was to speak to them kindly. The reason G’d told Moses to address the women first was to teach them ethics and general rules of behaviour. Furthermore, in order to make the women receptive for further Torah legislation, Moses gave them an overview of the headings and subject matters that the Torah contains. They needed special preparation for all this as their minds function differently from the minds of men, seeing that their daily tasks did not allow them so much free time to think about their spiritual needs as did the minds of the men.
    Moreover, a good woman is the main reason Torah has a future. The mother encourages her young son to attend a Torah-academy; seeing she is at home throughout the day she is the one who responds to the various needs, both real and imagined, of her children. She protects them against all kinds of dangers. She does all this so that he will cleave to the path of Torah also when he becomes old (Proverbs 22,6). This is why it is incumbent upon a woman to pray to G’d at the time she lights the Sabbath candles, a commandment which is especially addressed to her, that He may grant her children who will learn Torah and observe its precepts. Any prayer is more likely to evoke a positive response when it is offered at a time when one performs a commandment.
    The merit acquired by lighting the Sabbath candles which provide physical light helps her children to become Torah scholars. This is alluded to by Solomon in Proverbs 6,23 כי נר מצוה ותורה אור, that by lighting a candle to provide physical light when one is performing a מצוה, the result will be the spiritual light dispensed by her children who have studied Torah.
   ותגיד לבני ישראל, “and tell the Children of Israel.” He commanded them to both instruct and warn them to observe the commandments as well as to acquaint them with the penalties in store if they would fail to observe G’d’s laws. This is implied in the word תגיד, i.e. the word is derived from גידין, “sinews,” something extremely “tough.” The word is spelled with the letter י in the middle to remind us of the connection with גידין. There is no other occasion in the whole Bible where the word הגדה, telling, informing, is spelled with the letter י such as here. Compare Joshua 7,19 and Isaiah 58,1 where the word הגד refers to revealing one’s sins. Even in those instances we do not find the letter י.This explains why our sages (Shabbat 87) have seen fit to interpret the word here as they did. 
    
    19,4. אתם ראיתם את אשר עשיתי למצרים, “You have seen what I have done to Egypt.” At the outset G’d explains to the Jewish people that the matter of His personal benevolent supervision of their fate is the basic tenet of Judaism and the Torah. When G’d sets out to punish one nation for their sins and to save another nation from them on account of its merits, this is one of the miracles which is part of G’d’s special supervision and of the whole concept of reward and punishment. In order to underline this G’d reminded the Israelites by saying: “Look at what I have done to Egypt.” G’d performed all this in front of the eyes 
of the Israelites so that they would have visual evidence of His personal involvement in their fate. G’d contrasted what He had done to the Egyptians with what He had done for the Israelites when He continued with: “I have carried you on eagles’ wings and brought You to Me (to this Mountain).” The simile was meant to describe how G’d had protected the Israelites, just as an eagle protects its young.
    Mechilta Bachodesh item 2 describes the simile of the eagle in these words: an eagle, the king of the birds, is not afraid of another bird attacking it from above but is afraid of an arrow from below; therefore the eagle carries its young on its wings whereas other birds carry their young in their claws below their wings as they fear that an eagle might swoop down upon them from above.
    The eagle’s reason for carrying its young on its wings is documented in Deut. 32,11 when Moses extols what G’d had done in these words: “He was like an eagle arousing its nest, hovering over its young.” The eagle reasons that it is better for an arrow to pierce it than to pierce its young.
    When the Israelites departed from Egypt and entered the Sea of Reeds the Egyptians were pursuing them; at that time G’d arranged for two pillars one of fire and one of cloud to separate them from the Egyptians who were behind. The Egyptians were shooting arrows in the general direction of the camp of the Israelites. These arrows were absorbed by the pillar of cloud  not causing any harm to their targets. If, according to this Midrash,  the Torah meant to describe G’d’s love for the Israelites as similar to the love of the eagle for its young, the Torah should have written: here: “I have carried you on the wings of an eagle (sing.).”  Why the word נשרים in the plural? Perhaps the reason the Torah writes נשרים, “eagles,” is to allude to the fact that G’d did not only interpose Himself between the Israelites and the Egyptians as a single pillar but as two pillars, one of cloud and one of fire. The fact is that the Torah reported as soon as the Israelites had journeyed from Raamses (Exodus 12,37), that there traveled with them both a pillar of cloud by day to show them the way and a pillar of fire to light up the night for them. These two pillars took up positions behind the Israelites only after the Egyptians had mounted a pursuit and were in a threatening position (14,19).
    
    19,5. והייתם לי סגולה, “you shall be My treasured possession;” any treasure which is hidden is called סגולה, it is the kind of treasure which is most dear and beloved to a king and something which he constantly keeps under his personal control. They are matters which the king does not entrust even to his closest ministers or officials. Kohelet 2,8 speaks of such a situation, i.e. “and the treasure of kings and the provinces.” The reason  G’d said  מכל העמים in our verse is to contrast the other nations whose entire fate is being monitored by G’d’s agents rather than by G’d Himself with the Jewish people whose fate is monitored by G’d Himself. The Torah is even more outspoken about the fact that the fate of the 70 nations has been delegated to His agents in Deut. 4,19-20 “which Hashem has apportioned to all the peoples,....but Hashem has taken you and withdrawn you from the crucible of Egypt to be a nation of heritage to Him.”
   כי לי כל הארץ, “for the whole earth is Mine,” and I have not chosen any other nation except you.
    A kabbalistic approach: I have already discussed that the word כל is reference to an attribute of G’d in Genesis 1,1 where the terms השמים and הארץ have been discussed.
    
    19,6.  ואתם תהיו לי ממלכת כהנים וגוי קדוש, “and you are to be for Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.” The plain meaning of these words is that “you will be My share.” G’d calls the Jewish people “kings, priests, and holy nation,” at the time they received the Torah in order to make clear that he who wears the כתר תורה, the crown of Torah, also has attained the stature of the other two crowns i.e. priesthood and Royalty. This is the meaning of the statement by the sages in Horiot 13 that the meaning of Proverbs 3,15: “she (wisdom, read Torah) is more precious than rubies.” Seeing that the “crown” of Torah includes the two other crowns it is more precious than rubies. Although the High Priest (crown of priesthood) may enter the Holy of Holies, a great distinction, the crown of Torah is superior even to that distinction. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the meaning of the words ממלכת כהנים is equivalent to writing ממלכת משרתים, “a kingdom of servants of the Lord.” This definition of the Jewish people applies to their role in the terrestrial world. The definition גוי קדוש applies to the function of the Jewish people in the hereafter. Grammatically speaking, the word גוי is a possessive, i.e. “nation of.” This means גוי קדוש should be translated as “a nation belonging to The Holy One.” We have a similar construction in Isaiah 26,2 ויבא גוי צדיק, “the nation belonging to the Righteous One came.” Basically, our verse assures the Jewish people of a dominant role both on earth and beyond.
    
    19,8. כל אשר דבר ה’ נעשה, “all that Hashem has said we shall do.” They gave thanks and accepted for themselves the yoke of Torah and the commandments, doing so willingly [under no physical or psychological pressure. Ed.] Seeing that our sages said (Shabbat 88) that G’d threatened to bring the mountain down on them if they did not accept the Torah, and that they would be buried on the spot, how do we reconcile this verse here which clearly indicates voluntary acceptance of the Torah? Answer: our verse refers to acceptance of the written Torah. The subject discussed in the Talmud Shabbat was the oral Torah. G’d put the Israelites under psychological pressure to accept the oral Torah as well. Seeing that the oral Torah includes the thousands of Rabbinic decrees (by reason of the authority vested by the written Torah in the Rabbis) there was a need to apply such pressure. The written Torah, however was accepted joyfully without the need for any coercion whatsoever.
   וישב משה, “Moses brought back, etc.” There are commen-tators who claim that the word וישב does not mean that Moses actually presented G’d with the people’s acceptance of the written Torah. The word וישב means that when Moses set out to inform G’d, G’d already continued to give him new instructions  telling him: “Here I will come to you within a thick cloud, etc.” At that point we are to understand the word in verse 10 ויגד משה את דברי העם אל ה’. “Moses informed G’d of the words the people had said.”
    It is possible to interpret the words וישב משה, as referring to the people saying נעשה, and the words ויגד משה as meaning that Moses conveyed the people’s demand to hear the words in question from G’d directly instead of merely through Moses as an intermediary. (Mechilta bachodesh end of section 2). If we follow this approach then the word יחדו in our verse does not mean that the people responded “in unison,” but that they said two things at one and the same time. 1) They expressed joyful acceptance of the written Torah. 2) They asked to be addressed by G’d directly. G’d had provided them with an opening for such a request when He had said in verse 5  (condensed) “if you will hearken to MY VOI‎CE, etc. you will be something special.” This is why Moses told G’d, ויגד, that the people wanted to hear His voice, i.e. as a substitute for seeing Him.
    
    19,9. בעב הענן, “in the thickness of the cloud.” This is the cloud called ערפל, (20,18, Deut. 4,11). In the former verse the Torah says specifically: אשר שם האלו-הים “in which the attribute אלו-הים was (hidden).” Everybody present could not fail to recognise this as we know from 24,17: “the appearance of the glory of G’d was like consuming fire at the top of the mountain.” The instructions G’d gave to Moses in our verse were: ”I come to you in the thickness of the cloud so that the people will hear (My words) when I speak with you” (so that they themselves will attain the spiritual stature of prophets). Their belief in you will not be predicated on what they hear from others but on what they hear from Me directly. Compare Deut. 4,10: “when G’d said to me: ‘assemble  the people to Me and I will let them hear My words so that they will learn to fear Me, etc.’” Here too, G’d added that the people would forever more believe in Moses. The meaning of these words is that if there were to arise in Moses’ life time a false prophet opposing Moses, the people would not even listen to what he had to say but would deny his legitimacy at once. They would do so because they themselves had attained sufficient prophetic stature to know that everything Moses did or said was divinely inspired. G’d reconfirmed all this to Aaron and Miriam when they dared to compare their level of prophecy and intimacy with G’d to that of Moses. (Compare Numbers 12,6-8).  When the people are quoted in Deut. 5,21 as having said at Mount Sinai: “this day we have seen that Hashem will speak to a person and he can live,” they referred to this experience of theirs that if G’d wants it this is possible.” From this experience they drew the conviction that Moses had attained the highest level of prophecy possible.
    
    19,10. וקדשתם היום ומחר, “sanctify them today and tomorrow.” The meaning of the “sanctity” is that they were not to indulge in sexual relations with their wives. (Pessikta Zutrata). They were also to avoid contact with any ritually impure object or creature. Anyone who consciously refrains from such contact is referred to as קודש, holy.
   וכבסו שמלותם, “and that they wash their garments.”  From the instruction that they were to wash their clothing we derive that they were also to immerse their bodies in a ritual bath. Compare Mechilta bachodesh section 3 that wherever the Torah mentions the requirement to wash one’s clothing, the need to immerse one’s body in a ritual bath is an automatic corollary.
    19,13. אם בהמה אם איש לא יחיה, “whether animal or beast  he shall not live.” The word בהמה in our verse does not refer to four-legged animals; it refers to the wicked people who are deemed no better than animals. The Torah tells the Jewish people that regardless of whether the person touching the mountain is an otherwise righteous person or whether he is a wicked person he will not survive touching even the edge (beyond what was fenced off) of the mountain. 
    When Solomon in Kohelet 3,21 wrote: מי יודע רוח בני האדם העולה היא למעלה ורוח הבהמה היורדת היא למטה לארץ, “who knows the spirit of man  which ascends on high or the spirit of the animal which descends downwards, to earth,” he did not refer to actual animals. He referred to the soul of the sinner which descends just as the “soul” (abstract life-force) of an animal perishes with the body it inhabits, to the soul of the righteous which ascends when the body it had inhabited dies. Solomon’s question (rhetorical if you will) was “while both people are alive on this earth, the sinner and the righteous, how can we know  what is in store for a certain person? Do we humans know who is a צדיק and who is a רשע, i.e. a בהמה?” Solomon teaches that while we are in this world מקרה אחד לכל לצדיק ולרשע כמות זה כן מות זה, “while on earth both the righteous and the wicked appear to share the same fate, i.e. death of the body.” (Kohelet 3,19-20). Verse 21 refers to verse 20 preceding it where death for every creature made of dust is described, thus placing different people on the same level. However, this changes the moment these differing personalities no longer have a body.
    The same is true in our verse. In this life it makes no difference whether a person is wicked or righteous, לא יחיה, he will not live forever. The very fact that the comparison between the wicked and the just is limited to לא יחיה, neither of them escaping physical death, is what makes it plain that as soon as death of the body has occurred the fate of the righteous and that of the wicked will become radically different from one another.  Whereas the words לא יחיה apply to the wicked both in this world and in the next, the same words when applied to the righteous refer only to his life on earth, not to his life after the death of his body. Proof is found in the fact that Nadav and Avihu who died for transgressing the commandment not to touch the mountain were nevertheless accorded life in the hereafter. This is why we read about their death on Yom Kippur. [This presupposes, as has been mentioned in several Midrashim, that they had been guilty of death before the day they died but that their death and the manner of their death had been delayed due to a variety of considerations culminating in their bringing incense into the Sanctuary. The words בקרבתם לפני ה’, וימותו “due to their coming close to the presence of G’d they died” (Leviticus 16,1) refer to their touching the mountain. Ed.]
   במשך היובל, “during the long blast of the shofar.” The plain meaning of the verse is that when a long blast of the shofar would be heard this would signal the departure of the Shechinah from Mount Sinai. At that time the rule restricting the Israelites from touching or ascending the mountain would be relaxed. The word היובל is a reference to the ram’s horn, according to Rashi the horn of the ram Avraham had sacrificed instead of Yitzchak. What Rashi meant was  that although that ram had been burned up as an עולה, a burnt-offering which is completely burned up including its horns, G’d had resurrected it to its original condition. In Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 31 we read the view of Rabbi Chanina ben Dotha who held that the ram in question had been created at dusk of the sixth day of creation (Avot 5,6) and that  none of its parts went to waste. The ash of the flesh was used in constructing the golden altar inside the Sanctuary. The tendons became the ten strings of David’s harp. The skin became the belt used by the prophet Elijah to gird his loins. He bases this on Kings II 1,8: ”a hairy man with a leather belt around his waist.” “That is Elijah the Tishbite, he said.” The right horn of that ram served as the horn which will announce his coming in the future as we know from Isaiah 27,13 ”and in that day a great ram’s horn will be sounded and the strayed who are in the land of Assyria and the expelled who are in the land of Egypt will come and worship the Lord in Jerusalem on the holy mount.” The left horn was the one used at the revelation of Mount Sinai in our verse. Thus far Rabbi Chanina ben Dotha.
    Our sages in the beginning of the first chapter of Massechet Yom Tov use this verse to prove  that anything which had been forbidden by a court comprised of a certain number of judges cannot be permitted again by another court unless it comprises a greater number of judges than the previous court (Megillah 2). This is also what is meant in Beytzah 5: “seeing the Torah had already written that ‘also sheep and cattle shall not graze facing the mountain’ (34,3), why was it necessary to write that when a long blast would be sounded on the ram’s horn this would signal the “all clear?” [we have a principle מתוך לאו אתה שומע הן, “from the conditions attached to a prohibition, you can judge when such a prohibition does no longer apply.” Ed] The Torah wrote the verse only to teach us that unless specifically permitted by a competent authority even a temporary prohibition unless it had a specific time limit to start with needs to be specifically permitted again.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words במשוך היובל, “at the long blast of the horn,” are actually an allusion to פחד יצחק, the attribute which distinguished Yitzchak, especially when he was bound on the altar ready to give his life for G’d. This attribute also known as גבורה was attained by the entire Jewish nation at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai. They did not reach the level of verbalising anything. They heard a (sound) voice [at that point], that was all. This is what ויחרד כל העם, “all the people trembled in awe (without verbalising any response)” is all about, just as we read in connection with Yitzchak ויחרד יצחק חרדה גדולה that “Yitzchak was seized by great trembling,” when he found out that the person he had given the blessing to was Yaakov (Genesis 27,33). I have already dealt with this subject in Genesis 22,13 on the words והנה איל אחר נאחז בסך בקרניו. [page 341-342 in my translation. Ed.]
   והגבלת את ההר, “and you shall fence off the mountain.” The idea is to set a boundary approximately 2000 cubits distant from the mountain to prevent accidental infraction of G’d’s command.
   כל הנוגע בהר מות יומת, “whoever touches the mountain shall be executed.” Anyone actually guilty of ascending the mountain would most certainly also die. 
   לא תגע בו יד, “you are not to touch it by hand.” Seeing that the Torah had already said: “anyone touching it will be executed,” why did the Torah have to write these words? The meaning is that the death penalty to be administered to someone violating the commandment does not involve touching the convicted person by hand such as death administered by the sword or by strangulation as opposed to shooting arrows, but the penalty is stoning which occurs at a distance from the victim. This is why the Torah elaborates כי סקול יסקל או ירה ייראה, “he shall be stoned or thrown down.”
    
    19,16. ויהי ביום השלישי בהיות הבקר, “it was on the third day, during the morning,”  the third day after they started sanctifying themselves, the sixth day of the month.
   ויהי קולות וברקים, “and there was thunder and lightning.” The “voices” which we translated as “thunder” were those of the angels praising the Lord each and every morning, as we know from Job 38,7: “when the morning stars sang together and all the divine beings shouted for joy.” The “lightning” also referred to angels, a different group. We know that angels are described as lightning from Psalms 104,4: “He makes the winds His messen-gers, fiery flames His servants.” We also find this thought reflected in Ezekiel 1,13: “this fire, suggestive of torches, kept moving among the creatures; the fire had a radiance, and lightning issued from the fire.”
   וענן כבד, and “heavy cloud.” The purpose of that was to separate between the angels and the people. If the Israelites had seen the angels they would have become frightened. We have a verse describing something similar occurring in Ezekiel’s vision (Ezekiel 1,4) ”a huge cloud and flashing fire, surrounded by a radiance;”  this was followed (verse 5) by: “in the center of it were also the figures of four creatures.” The foregoing is a relatively new interpretation of this verse by Rabbeinu Chananel. It does not contradict, and must not be understood as contradicting the plain meaning of the words, i.e. that it was a cloudy day, that the קולות וברקים were thunder and lightning accompanied by some rain. This is in line with the plain meaning of Judges 5,4 where Devorah describes the weather on the day of the battle against Siserah, saying: “the earth trembled; the heavens dripped; yea the clouds dripped water. Mountains quaked, etc.” Rabbeinu Chananel’s explanation may be viewed as  perhaps the foremost amongst the proverbial 70 facets according to which the written Torah may be explained. The cloud came first, followed by lightning and thunder, as is usual on such days. The reason the Torah does not report events in that order  may have been to give prominence to the sound of the shofar. Had the Torah described events in their chronological order then the reader would have made a conceptual linkage between the words קולות and קול שופר, something which would have been wrong. By mentioning the thunder first, the Torah made certain that we would not associate the blast of the shofar with ordinary thunder experienced on that day. The difference between the sound of the thunder and the sound of the blast of the shofar may be described as similar to the difference between physical and spiritual sensations man experiences.
    
    19,17. ויוצא משה את העם לקראת האלו-הים מן המחנה, “Moses took the people toward G’d out of the camp.“ The “camp” mentioned here was the camp of the 600,000 Israelites. The words לקראת האלו-הים mean toward the “camp of G’d”, i.e. the area where the ministering angels who had descended from heaven had made their camp. According to Tanchuma Tetzaveh 11 the number of ministering angels who had assembled there matched the number of male adult Israelites. When Yaakov (Genesis 32,3) “saw the camp of G’d” this is what he saw already at the time. He named the camp מחנים, “two camps,” as he envisaged a “return trip” by these angels to earth on the occasion of the revelation at Mount Sinai. Alternately, he envisaged the two camps, the Israelites and the angels taking up position, one opposite the other.
    In Song of Songs 7,1 Solomon referred to these two camps when he said:  כמחולות המחנים, “as a dance by angels.” Solomon mentions the word שובי, “turn back,” four times in that verse in Song of Songs as the Jewish people experienced four periods of exile during each of which they were urged by their host countries to abandon their religion in favour of the local religions. We, nowadays, who are in the fourth of these exiles are the subject of the last of these four שובי, i.e. to us applies the author’s paraphrasing שובי ונחזה בך, “return so that we may make out of you  rulers, people in authority.” based on Yitro’s use of the words ואתה תחזה מכל העם, “and you appoint from among all the people, etc.” (Exodus 18,21).
    In Shir Hashirim Rabbah our sages interpret the word שולמית [a word occurring in lieu of the name Israel, Ed.] as a composite of  אומה אשר שלום העולמים דר בתוכה“a nation in whose midst dwells the One Who represents eternal peace.” That nation is perceived as responding: מה תחזו בשולמית, “what authority can you possibly offer to a nation such as me?” Israel shuns all that the nations of the world have to offer as they cannot match what we have already experienced at Mount Sinai when we were chosen by G’d as His people. This is the meaning of the words כמחולות מחנים, it is impossible to duplicate the joy that pervaded the Jewish people when they saw themselves as paired with 600,000 angels, their equal, at least. Our sages in Taanit 31 have elaborated on this theme when they said that in the future G’d willl arrange dances for the righteous in Gan Eden. In view of all this the “Shulamit” spurned all the offers from the Gentile nations to accord them honour and distinction. Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 29,2 have further stated that 22,000 angels participated  at that sacred site. They were the angels closest to the Shechinah, closer than the 600,000 angels we mentioned already They are referred to in Psalms 68,18 as רכב אלו-הים רבותם אלפי שנאן, “G’d’s chariots are myriads upon myriads, thousands upon thousands.” The number of these angels corresponded to the number of 22,000 Levites who had taken up position around the Holy Ark which was within the Tabernacle. Psalms 144,15 proclaims “hail to the people who have experienced this.” At the time the people saw the 4 figures Ezekiel had seen surrounding the throne of G‘d. This is alluded to in the word שנאן which is an acrostic for the creatures supporting the throne of G’d in Ezekiel’s vision i.e. שור, אריה, נשר, plus the letter ן which symbolises אדם. Five major angels named אוריאל, רפאל, גבריאל, מיכאל, (נוריאל) were seen by the Israelites at that time, the first four representing whole encampments surrounding the Shechinah and presided over by the fifth angel נוריאל who “rode” above the others. This concept has been called ארגמן by Solomon when he wrote in Song of Songs that G’d’s chariot is Argaman (Song of Songs 3,10). The idea described at length in Bamidbar Rabbah 2,2 of the reason for the Jewish camp being provided with flags also goes back to what they experienced a few months earlier when they saw the flags held by the angels. This evoked in them a desire to be given flags also, a request which G’d honoured at the time the Tabernacle was erected. According to another Midrash the experience of listening to G’d’s voice at Mount Sinai was of such overwhelming proportions that each time the people heard a word (commandment) their soul escaped their bodies. They were revived immediately, i.e. they experienced multiple resurrections on that day. This is also alluded to in Song of Songs 5,6 when Israel is quoted as recalling: נפשי יצאה בדברו, “my soul departed when He spoke.” A similar Midrash is found in Devarim Rabbah according to which the sun stood still five times for the sake of Moses; they were the day of the Exodus, the day the Israelites had crossed the Sea of Reeds; the day of the battle against Amalek; the day on which the Torah was given, and on the day the Israelites observed the rivers of blood in the river Arnon (Numbers 21,14-15).
   ויתיצבו בתחתית ההר, “they stood at attention at the bottom of the mountain,” below the mountain, beyond the area of approx. 2,000 cubits which Moses had fenced off. The glory of G’d was on the top of the mountain. We know this because the Torah writes in 19,20 that “G’d descended onto the top of the mountain.” We also have a verse in Exodus 24,17 that “the appearance of G’d was like consuming fire on top of the mountain.” All of the Israelites stood at the farthest end of the mountain. Moses was allowed to enter into the cloud and ascend the mountain, as we know from 24,18 as well as from 19,9. The expression עב הענן refers to a dark cloud within which the Presence of G’d was concealed. The word חשך in our context means a type of fire (compare our comments on Genesis 1,2, page 5 my translation). The whole verse in Deut 4,11 must be understood as the following sequence: “and the mountain was burning with fire until the heart of the heaven; חשך, ענן, וערפל. The word חשך refers to a fire as we explained on Genesis 1,2 (my translation page 5); this was followed by ענן, which in turn was followed by ערפל, also described as עב הענן. In other words, there were 4 separate stages, each one on a higher level than the previous one, each higher level  being “inside” the previous one, closer to the core. The lowest and outermost level was that described as תחתית ההר. This was followed by the region called ראש ההר. The next higher region to that was called ענן, whereas the highest region was called עב הענן. We find something parallel to these regions of relatively higher levels of sanctity when comparing the way the Israelite nation organised itself on earth when it erected the Holy Temple. The level of the relatively minimal decree of sanctity, corresponding to the תחתית ההר, was the שער העזרה, the entrance gate to the courtyard of the Temple. The next higher level of sanctity i.e. corresponding to ראש ההר, was the עזרה, the holy courtyard. This was followed by the היכל, the Sanctuary, which corresponded to the level of ענן when compared to what occurred at מתן תורה. Finally, the Holy of Holies, קדשי קדשים, the innermost sanctum of the Holy Temple was what corresponded to what the Torah described as עב הענן at Mount Sinai. This was equivalent to ערפל, the region where G’d concealed Himself.
    
    19,18. והר סיני עשן כלו, “and the entire mountain of Sinai was  smoking.” The mountain was smoke, not the fire; for the fire which sort of separated between the people and G’d had no smoke. If the Torah nonetheless speaks of  כעשן הכבשן “like the smoke of a furnace,” we know that in a parable the comparisons do not have to be accurate This is especially so when physical concepts are being compared to meta-physical phenomena. Seeing that we are terrestrial human beings, bound to concepts which we can visualise, the Torah cannot describe matters of a spiritual nature except by using terms familiar to us from our daily experience on earth. Similarly, we find that Scripture compares even the brilliance of the sun to the beauty of human beings, and the sun’s orbit to the runner circling a certain prescribed route in the stadium in which he races. This is the meaning of Psalms 19,6: “who is like a groom coming forth from his chamber, like a hero, eager to run his course.” Everybody knows that such a comparison between sun and a human runner is not even remotely similar. Nonetheless, the psalmist chose to make this comparison to give us an inkling of what he had in mind. The same thing applies to the prophet Amos 3,8 comparing G’d to a lion when he writes: “a lion has roared, who can but fear? My Lord G’d has spoken, who can but prophesy?” The reason that the prophet arrogated to himself the right to make such blatantly inaccurate comparisons is simply that he wanted to compare the most powerful and fear-inspiring phenomenon amongst earth’s inhabitants to G’d in order to give man the feeling that he must relate with at least as much fear to G’d as he does to a lion. Our sages have termed all these so-called comparisons as דברה תורה כלשון בני אדם, “the Torah having adopted a style of expression with which human beings are familiar” (Berachot 31).
    
    19,19. משה ידבר והאלו-הים יעננו בקול, “Moses  would speak and G’d would respond to him with a voice.” The fact that the Israelites could hear both Moses and G’d’s response at a distance of 12-13 miles away where the Israelites had their camp was in itself already a miracle. Every Israelite was able to hear Moses clearly. Seeing that simultaneously the blast of the shofar is reported to have been constant though intermittent but did not interfere with Moses’ voice being heard, this  clearly added to the magnitude of the miracle. This is why the Torah considered it as appropriate to mention this miracle along with other miraculous happenings on that occasion. The word יעננו, is similar to the verse in Hoseah 2,23 אענה נאם ה’, אענה את השמים, “In that day I will respond declares the Lord; I will respond to the sky.” The word reflects someone’s preparedness to extend assistance.
    
    19,20. וירד ה’ על הר סיני, “G’d descended on Mount Sinai.” Whenever the Torah mentions the term “descent or descending” in connection with G’d, the meaning is that He revealed Himself in some form which could be assimilated by one’s mind. The term is similar to וירא אליו ה’ which the Torah (Genesis 18,1) writes when it describes G’d revealing Himself to Avraham. This is also the way Onkelos translates the words וירד ה’ here; in Genesis 18,1 Onkelos uses the very same words for וירא אליו ה’ i.e. ואתגלי  השם, “G’d revealed Himself,” except that he uses a different attribute for G’d. Why then did the Torah choose to express a form of גלוי שכינה here as a “descent” instead of as a “vision?” The reason the Torah used the term “descent” here is to remind us that whenever G’d makes Himself perceivable by any of the 5 senses we have been equipped with this could only have been preceded by His “lowering” Himself to the parameters of the terrestrial part of the universe. In this instance, He became “visible” to the entire nation. It had already been announced in verse 11 that on the third day G’d would “descend” before the eyes of the whole people. They had been made aware that when they would observe the glory of G’d in the form of a consuming fire, that behind that “consuming fire” there would be G’d Himself. It did not mean that human eyes would behold an image purporting to be G’d. G’d had told Moses clearly that even he could not have a visual perception of the Essence of G’d while alive (compare Exodus 33,20). What is meant here is simply that the manifestations that the Israelites would experience at the Mountain would convince them that none other than G’d Himself had orchestrated all these phenomena, i.e. that they had “seen” G’d (at work). What happened to the individual Avraham in Genesis 18,1 was similar.  Moreover, it is well known that the level of revelation which the patriarchs experienced was not that of the attribute represented by the tetragram but that of שדי, a level which may be compared to שער לה’, the gateway to the attribute  י-ה-ו-ה. This is why the Torah added there “he was sitting at the entrance to he tent;” these words were an amplification of the words וירא אליו, “He appeared to him.” The Torah teaches that the level of revelation Avraham enjoyed at the time was one that emanated from the “entrance of the gate,” not from the innermost part of the Sanctuary of G’d. The Torah was at pains to alert us to the fact that the level of revelation the Israelites had at מתן תורה was superior to the revelation Avraham enjoyed in Parshat Vayera.
    
    19,21. ונפל ממנו רב, “and many of them would fall.” The choice by the Torah of the word נפל, singular, in connection with רב, many,  teaches that even if a single Israelite were to “fall,” i.e. to die or be executed, it would be equivalent to a whole world dying as at the end of the creation there was only a single human being.
    
    19,22. וגם הכהנים הנגשים אל ה’, “and also the priests who approach G’d.” The “priests” mentioned here are either the firstborn who would perform the priestly functions in those days, i.e. offer the sacrifices, or it may refer to the sons of Aaron who would be consecrated as priests some time later. This is not so strange as in Genesis 2,14 we read about a river flowing from Gan Eden in the direction of Ashur, a city that would not exist until some 1700 years later.
   יתקדשו, “they will be sanctified.” This verse helps us understand Leviticus 10,3 where the two sons of Aaron who died performing a priestly function are described by Moses as בקרובי אקדש, G’d saying: “I will be sanctified by those who are near to Me.” The word קרובי matches נגשים, and the word אקדש corresponds to יתקדשו in our verses here.
   פן יפרוץ בהם ה’, “lest the Lord make a breach amongst them.” This was an allusion to their death, for G’d פרץ בהם, “killed them.” G’d did not want to punish them now at the time when the Torah was being given so as not to disturb the communal joy. He waited until the eighth day of the consecration rites to carry out the decree against them  (Tanchuma Acharey Mot 6). The word וגם is a reference to the seventy elders.
    
    19,24. והכהנים והעם, “and the priests and the people, etc.” The order of things preceding the giving of the Torah (Ten Commandments)  was as follows: First G’d commanded Moses “to fence off the people,” i.e. to establish visible boundaries around the mountain which the people were not to breach. This is what Moses referred to in verse 23 when he said to G’d: “the people cannot ascend the mountain for You have warned us  “bound the mountain and sanctify it.” What was meant by “bound the people” was the boundary of the mountain. After that G’d told Moses that the people should sanctify themselves and abstain from everything impure for three days including their immersion in a ritual bath and the washing of their garments. Following this procedure, on the morning of the third day, the sixth of Sivan, there was thunder and lightning, a heavy cloud enveloping the mountain, and the blast of the shofar emanating from that direction. At this point G’d’s Shechinah had not yet descended on to the top of the mountain. This is something we learned from Kings I 19,11: when G’d taught Elijah that His manifestation does not occur amidst thunder and lightning, etc. The prophet writes describing that scene: “there was a great and mighty wind splitting mountain and shattering the rocks by the power of the Lord;  but the Lord was not in the wind, etc.”
    At that point the Israelites were in the grip of tremors due to the overpowering sound of the thunder (and the chorus of the angels we have described earlier). This is the meaning of verse 16. Moses reassured the people in order to lead them out of the camp toward the manifestation of the Shechinah. Once the people were lined up at the base of the mountain G’d descended on the mountain within the fire, and the smoke rose to the heart of the heaven, dark impenetrable cloud. The mountain itself trembled. This trembling of the mountain intensified causing David to say in Psalms 68,9: “the earth trembled, the sky rained because of G’d, yon Sinai, because of G’d, the G’d of Israel.” The meaning of this verse is that the sky rained fire. The word זה in that verse refers to Mount Sinai burning (the word זה in its aramaic meaning). The prophetic words of Devorah (Judges 5,4) contain similar phraseology i.e. ”the earth trembled, the heavens dripped; Yea the clouds dripped water; the mountains quaked before the Lord, Him of Sinai, before the Lord G’d of Israel.” Another verse describing the mountains as “dancing” like rams is found in Psalms 114,6 These various verses are not to be understood allegorically, just as the line “the sea saw and fled” in the same Psalm is not to be understood as a simile but describes an actual event.
    Our sages (Megillah 29) state that at the time G’d gave the Ten Commandments these mountains were transferred to the land of Israel and Mount Carmel crossed the sea. When that had happened the blast of the shofar became very strong. When the people observed all this  (20,15-18) “the people saw the sounds and the lightning and the sound of the shofar blast.....the people saw and trembled...and stood from afar.” This all took place prior to the giving of the Torah because the people said to Moses: “you speak to us and we will hear (19,19). Their experience up until that point had already left them enfeebled (compare Daniel 10,16).”my joints shattered  and I could retain no strength.” The words: “from afar” mean further away than the fenced off area. Moses told the people that they had nothing to fear, that G’d wanted merely to test them (20,20). At that point they “stood” from afar, i.e. they did not become calm and refused to go up to the boundary set around the mountain. Moses, however, went close to the ערפל without entering that  thick cloud. At that point G’d spoke the Ten Commandments.
   והכהנים והעם אל יהרסו לעלות אל ה’, “but the priests and the people shall not break through to ascend toward G’d.” Why was this repeated? Had G’d not already issued these instructions in verse 21? It seems that at that point Moses had understood the warning to extend not only to people who were actually going to ascend the mountain, but  also to those who would approach the boundary in order to have a visual experience. Concerning this Moses had said to G’d (verse 23) that he had already warned the people that even touching the mountain would carry the death penalty (verses 12-13). Moses had referred to five expressions G’d had used as a form of warning. This was the reason of the otherwise unnecessary letter ה at the end of the word העדותה. Seeing that Moses had misunderstood the extent of the prohibition, G’d made it clear that there was no prohibition to approach the fence, as they had already been warned sufficiently not to go beyond. There was however, a prohibition not to intensify visual appreciation of the spectacle. This was the gist of the instruction: “descend; you and Aaron may ascend” (a certain distance); but the other priests as well as the people must not break through “in order to make a spiritual ascent.” The word לעלות here describes an attempt by people to comprehend by means other than those intended for the acquisition of such comprehension matters which their intellect fails to grasp. Priests and common people are considered on the same level; neither group was to attempt to comprehend what was incomprehensible. Hence the emphasis on the word לראות, “to see,” at the end of the warning in verse 21.
    It is worthwhile to examine why the Torah did not add the words את ה’ after the word לראות in that verse. After all, the Torah had written the word אל ה’ in connection with לעלות אל ה’ in our verse here!  Perhaps the reason that the Torah did not add these words in verse 21  was so as not to create the impression that it was possible to see G’d although it was forbidden. This is why the word “not to see” was placed at the end of the verse to describe the futility to even attempt to see something which could not be seen. They were to suppress any thought of gaining any visual experience beyond what had already been provided. In other words, verse 21 contains a message similar to that of G’d to Moses in Exodus 33,20: “for no human being can see Me while alive.”
    .
    
    20,1. וידבר אלו-הים את כל הדברים האלה לאמור, “G‘d spoke all these words to be relayed.” The word לאמור was added here in order to teach that all these Ten Commandments were spoken in a single utterance. This was something a human mouth would be unable to do, and a human ear would be unable to hear. We also find in Bamidbar Rabbah 11,19 concerning two apparently contradictory statements in Psalms 147,4 and Isaiah 40,26 that what G’d is able to do, man is not. In the former statement the psalmist says: “He counts each one of the stars supplying them with names,” whereas in Isaiah the prophet says: “He leads out their number as an army, each one He calls by name.” The meaning is that when G’d calls upon the stars He calls each one by name simultaneously. 
    Another way of understanding the word לאמור in our verse is that it refers to the hidden meaning of the words of the revelation. Each utterance of G’d contains meanings obvious to all as well as hidden meaning. In this instance the expression דבור, i.e. וידבר, refers to the plain meaning, the revealed message, whereas the hidden meaning is alluded to by the word לאמור. This principle may be applied to most instances where the Torah writes: וידבר ה’ אל משה לאמור, “G’d spoke to Moses, saying.” The text tells us that G’d said more than what meets the eye at a superficial reading of the words. I have already elaborated on this concept in my commentary on Exodus 13,1 (page 907 my translation, Ed.) In this instance, a moment in time when the Israelites were all of a level capable of receiving prophetic insights, G’d revealed both aspects of His words, the plain and the more sophisticated, at one and the same time to all of them. This is the meaning of Psalms 62,12: “G’d has said one (word) whereas I have heard two.”
    You should know that in the view of Maimonides (Moreh Nevuchim  section 2 chapter 33) at the revelation at Mount Sinai  the sound the Children of Israel heard (G’d’s voice) had been created for the purpose. This was a one-time manifestation of that sound and while they heard it, they were not able to separate different letters from one another. It was heard a single time and comprised only the first two of the Ten Commandments. Concerning this phenomenon the Torah wrote (Deut. 5,19) “a powerful sound without break.” The Torah also wrote concerning this sound (Deut. 5,20) “when you heard the sound.” Furthermore, in Deut. 4,12 Moses said קול דברים אתם שמעים, “you hear the sound of words.” Significantly, Moses did not say that the people actually heard words,” i.e. were able to hear distinct letters. This is also what is meant in Exodus 19,9: “in order that the people hear when I speak with you (Moses).” The meaning is that the people will hear the sound but will not be able to make out the individual words.
    Our sages (Makkot 24) say that  the Israelites heard the first two commandments from G’d’s own mouth. The wording there is: מפי הגבורה שמענום. This reflects the difference between what Moses heard and what the people heard. The people only heard קול דברים, “the sound of words,” whereas Moses heard the words themselves. This is why Moses interpreted the words he had heard to the people by separating between letter and letter and word and word. This is what Moses referred to when he said (Deut. 5,5) “I was standing between you and G’d at that time in order to tell you the word of the Lord.” Moses referred to the first two commandments which the people, though having heard them, had not been able to understand.
    This explains the way Onkelos renders both the words וידבר אלוה-הים את כל הדברים האלה לאמור, and וידבר אלו-הים אל משה לאמור, as ומליל ה’ as if both verses meant the same. He is correct because the word לאמור in each verse means that Moses was to communicate G’d’s words to the people. In 20,15 when Onkelos translates the people saying to Moses ואל ידבר עמנו אלו-הים פן נמות, “let not G’d speak to us so that we shall not die,” he translates this as ולא יתמלל עמנא מן  קדם ה’, instead of ולא ימלל עמנא. The distinction Onkelos makes between the way the people heard G’d’s voice and the way Moses perceived it is clearly reflected in his rendering  what the people had heard as מן קדם ה’. The people had been aware that what they heard was something other than words. 
    After the people had heard the first two commandments by hearing G’d’s voice their souls departed as we know from Song of Songs 5,6 (compare our comments page 1049 this volume on Exodus 19,17) נפשי יצאה בדברו, “my soul departed at His decree.” They were afraid that they would continue to hear G’d’s voice and were afraid they would die as a result. This is when they said to Moses (Deut. 5,22) “let us not die,”....(and in verse 24) ”approach you and hear what G’d says,....and tell us what G’d said.” Moses heard every one of the Ten Commandments one at a time and related them to the people. To sum up: the Israelites did hear the first two commandments at the same time and from the same source as did Moses, but they could not make sense out of them. The other eight commandments they heard from Moses just as they heard all other commandments in the Torah from Moses. This is what is meant at the beginning of Shir Hashirim Rabbah (5,6), that the words in Deut. 33,4 תורה צוה לנו משה “Moses commanded us the Torah” (not G’d), means that Moses relayed to the people 611 of the 613 commandments. The numerical value of the letters in the word תורה add up to 611. The other two commandments G’d personally commanded  the people. Seeing that the first two commandments were heard by the people as a continuous utterance (no break between letters to form words or sentences), this was what David had said in Psalms 62,12: “G’d said a single word but I heard two.” This is the opinion of Maimonides of what transpired at the giving of the Torah.
    Nachmanides is of the opinion that the entire people heard all the Ten Commandments directly from G’d. According to his view this is the meaning of our verse: “G’d spoke all these words,” as well as Deut. 5,19: “these words G’d spoke to your entire congregation at the mountain out of the fire, etc.” Furthermore, it is written: “He told you of His covenant ....and He inscribed them on the two stone Tablets” (Deut. 4,13). From this we learn that just as G’d had communicated the Ten Commandments to the entire people directly by word of mouth, He subsequently communicated them to the entire people in writing. How does Nachmanides understand the words of the Talmud in Makkot 24 that the Israelites heard the first two commandments  from G’d’s own mouth which suggests that they did not hear the other commandments from His mouth? He understands the word שמעום in the Talmud as relating to what the ear heard, similar to the meaning of the words in Proverbs 15,31 אזן שומעת תוכחת חיים, “the ear that listens to life-giving discipline.” This verse implies that the heart also understood the message as is evident from Kings I 3,9 (also Solomon speaking to G’d in his dream) לב שומע, “a heart that hears.” [Seeing that it is not the function of the heart to hear and to listen, clearly Solomon asked for something more, i.e. understanding, when he asked G’d to be granted a “heart which can hear.” Ed.] As far as the Israelites were concerned, they heard and understood only the first two of the Ten Commandments. The other eight commandments they “heard” without understanding what they heard. This is why Moses had to interpret for them what their ears had heard. This is the meaning of Deut. 5,5: “I was standing between G’d and you at that time in order to tell you the word of G’d.” This is also the meaning of 19,19: “Moses would speak and G’d would respond with a voice.” What G’d had said בקול, in an indistinguishable voice,” Moses interpreted to the people. The word עניה, which usually appears  in the form of ויען means “beginning.” We find it in this sense in Job 3,2. [In that verse the word ויען could not have meant: “he replied,” as Job’s friends were reported sitting with him for seven days without opening their mouth. Ed.] This is the way Nachmanides understands what happened at Mount Sinai.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words וידבר אלו-הים really mean וידבר ה’. The reason we do not find the attribute י-ה-ו-ה spelled out in this verse is that Israel had attained such a high level of spirituality at the time that it did not need to be addressed by an attribute which primarily represented the attribute of Mercy, i.e. an attribute which makes allowance for human weakness. The Torah had already hinted at that in verse 3 when Moses was described as ומשה עלה אל האלו-הים, that Moses ascended to  the presence of G’d in His capacity as אלו-הים. Onkelos, in his infinite wisdom, has therefore seen fit to translate the word אלו-הים wherever it appears in this chapter as י-ה-ו-ה, so that we would understand the spiritual level at which this entire episode occurred. 3[The author must have had a different edition of Onkelos, as in our editions he only renders אלו-הים as י-ה-ו-ה in 19,17. Chavell]. At any rate, the word אלו-הים is not used to depict G’d in His capacity as delegating to agents such as nature, but as the attribute of גבורה, Justice;  at the same time use of this attribute indicates that the people did not experience what we have called אספקלריא מאירה a “clear vision,” (such as was reserved for Moses) but they experienced the type of visions granted prophets of lower rank. In other words: whereas the attribute of Hashem spoke to Moses, the people heard the attribute of Elohim.
    You must appreciate  that in view of the fact that actually the attribute Hashem was speaking, the Torah should have written here: וידבר ה’ את כל הדברים האלה, just as Moses said when he recalled the event of 40 years ago to the people in Deuteronomy. At that point he said in Deut. 5,19: את הדברים האלה דבר ה’ אל כל קהלכם בהר מתוך האש הענן והערפל קול גדול ולא יסף. Also in Deut. 4,12 Moses quotes G’d as וידבר ה’ אליכם מתוך האש, 
    Seeing that that in Exodus 19,18 the Torah wrote אשר ירד עליו ה’ באש, “on which Hashem descended in fire,” and it has been explained that His great name represents the emanation תפארת, which “resides within fire,” it had now become necessary to write וידבר אלו-הים, as these words reflect that the sound of the voice emanated from the fire. In other words, the Israelites heard a sound which seemed to come out of the fire. We find a similar description [involving both the attributes Elohim and Hashem. Ed.] in Deut. 5,21: הן הראנו ה’ אלו-הינו את כבודו ואת גדלו ואת קולו שמענו מתוך האש. “The Lord our G’d has just shown us His majestic Presence, and we heard His voice out of the fire.” [Israel speaking, Moses quoting how they had perceived what they had experienced. 40 years earlier. Ed.]. Keeping all these factors in mind, when Moses mentioned וידבר ה’ אליכם in Deut. 4,12 he  immediately added the words “out of the fire.” He did the same again when referring to what had occurred in Deut. 5,19 after reviewing the Ten Commandments immediately prior to that verse. The reason is that whereas in Hebrew, and to Hebrew speakers the achievements of Israel are considered primary, in the Aramaic translation of Onkelos (which reflects the use of the language by people speaking that tongue) the achievements of Moses are highlighted. When the Torah (in Hebrew) writes וידבר אלו-הים, this reflects the spiritual level reached by the Jewish people, whereas when Onkelos translates as if the Torah had written וידבר ה’, this reflects the spiritual level achieved by Moses. Onkelos wants to make plain by his very translation of the words of the Torah that Moses had attained a higher spiritual plateau than had the people. Isaiah 26,4 writes as follows: בטחו בי-ה-ו-ה עדי עד כי בי-ה י-ה-ו-ה צור עולמים, “trust in Hashem for ever and ever, for in Yah  Hashem you have an everlasting Rock.” What the prophet means is that the name Hashem which symbolises the concept of “an everlasting Rock” may be described on occasion as Yah. When G’d is described in 20,2 saying: אנכי ה’ אלו-היך, He is described as speaking in His capacity as Yah, an aspect of the צור עולמים. This צור עולמים contains this name as we learn from Exodus 23,21 כי שמי בקרבו “for My name is within it,” the “it” being the צור עולמים. This is also the mystical dimension of אני ה’ בקרב הארץ (Exodus 8,18) a reference to this Rock.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words אשר הוצאתיך, “who has taken you out.” The Exodus, as distinct from the utterance of the Ten Commandments, was orchestrated by G’d in His capacity as Hashem. This is the reason the Torah writes (13,16 ) כי בחזק יד הוציאנו י-ה-ו-ה ממצרים, “for with the power of the hand Hashem took us out of Egypt.” The same formula is repeated in 13,3.
    When the Torah writes: (20,3) לא יהיה לך אלו-הים אחרים על  פני, generally translated as “you must not have (recognise) any other gods in My Presence,” the meaning is that the only Presence you are to recognise as divine is My Presence, i.e. פני. The wording here is similar to the wording in Genesis 31,50 where Lavan warns Yaakov not to marry any additional wives. He said: ואם תקח נשים על בנותי. Lavan meant: ”but my daughters certainly are to remain your wives.” Similarly here; G’d forbids other gods to be recognised implying that most certainly He is to be recognised as G’d. The fact that this is so is demonstrated by the use by G’d of the word פנים in Deut. 34,10 when describing His relationship with Moses as אשר ידעו י-ה-ו-ה פנים אל פנים, “whom G’d knew (intimately) face to face.” A similar use of the word פנים is found in Deut. 5,4 describing the close relationship of G’d to the whole people at the revelation at Mount Sinai. The Torah describes this as פנים בפנים דבר י-ה-ו-ה עמכם, “face to face Hashem spoke to you.” All these expressions made it necessary to repeatedly use the expression מתוך האש, in order to explain whence G’d’s voice emanated. The best way to understand these words is that the power of G’d is within another power, just as the appearance of fire, while representing a display of power, contains within it another core of power. This what is meant in Numbers 14,14 כי עין בעין נראה אתה ה’, “that You, Hashem, appeared eye to eye.” The true meaning is that though You Hashem appeared to the eye, there is an inner dimension to this manifestation which remained invisible. This is also the mystical dimension of 20,23 לא תעשון אתי, “you shall not make ‘with’ Me, etc.” The meaning is that no other so-called deity shall share על פני, “My Divine Presence.” When the Torah writes about Moses ascending the mountain (19,3) ומשה עלה אל האלו-הים ויקרא אליו - י-ה-ו-ה that “Moses ascended to G’d, and Hashem called to him,” the meaning is that Hashem called to him from within the attribute אלו-הים. This too is the meaning in Deut. 5,21 ואת קולו שמענו מתוך האש, “and we have heard His voice out of the fire.” The voice referred to there is the voice of the attribute Hashem. It was this voice which the people had been afraid of hearing again, and this is why they said: אם יוספים אנחנו לשמוע את קול י-ה-ו-ה אלו-הינו עוד ומתנו “if we will continue to hear the voice of Hashem, our G’d, again we will die.” This is also the mystical aspect of our sages’ saying (Shevuot 20) זכור ושמור בדבור אחד נאמרו, “the words זכור and שמור [one of which appears in the first version of the Ten Commandments in Exodus and the other in the version in Deuteronomy, Ed.] were said as one.” The former refers to the attribute of Mercy, i.e. י-ה-ו-ה, the other to the attribute of Justice, the attribute known best as אלו-הים. The attribute of Mercy spoke from within the attribute of Justice. This was also why there were two Tablets instead of merely one. One represented the attribute of Mercy, the other the attribute of Justice. The Tablet on which the words לא תרצח, “do not murder,” was inscribed at the top represented the attribute of Justice. (according to the view that five of the Commandments were written on each Tablet) Moses, who, as we explained had attained the level of communicating with G’d’s attribute (emanation) תפארת, heard the word זכור, i.e. as a positive commandment, an expression of the attribute of Mercy. The people who had not attained such a lofty level of communication with G’d heard the word as שמור, as a negative commandment, as an expression of the attribute of Justice.
    When we find an expression (verse 22) such as כי מן השמים דברתי עמכם, ”for I have spoken with you from the heaven,” the meaning of the word מתוך in that verse is similar to the meaning of the words מתוך האש in the verses we have already discussed. If you peruse all the verses connected with מתן תורה, you will not find a single one mentioning  the tetragram unless it is connected to the words מתוך האש. Whereas all of the Israelites heard the tetragram, no one, including the אצילי בני ישראל, who are described in Exodus 24,11 as having “seen” האלו-הים, “saw” G’d as it is impossible to “see” G’d as we know from Exodus 33,20 that no living human being can have a visual experience of G’d. If you were to counter that G’d Himself had told the people that on the third day ”G’d will descend in full view of all the people” (19,11),  the meaning is that when the people would observe this great glory, “like a fire consuming the top of the mountain,” they would understand that within that spectacle the name Hashem  would be concealed, i.e. the attribute which cannot be perceived by human eyes.  The “glory” of G’d on the other hand, is subject to being seen by human eyes, the attribute called Elohim. It is this attribute which is described as being seen both by the expression ויחזו, and by the expression ויראו in Exodus 24,10 and Exodus 24,11 respectively. Once we have established this you will appreciate that when G’d described Himself as “descending” on the third day in full view of the people” (19,11) what is meant is a “descent” to that level of His glory which could be seen by the people. The area to wich G’d had “descended,” was the area from which the word communicated itself to that attribute of glory which in turn became audible to our physical ears. This is what Moses meant when he said in Deut. 4,36 מן השמים השמיעך את קולו “out of the heaven He made you hear His voice.” We find a very similar verse in Nechemyah 9,13 (the Levites addressing G’d in the presence of the people) ועל הר סיני ירדת ודבר עמהם משמים, “and You descended on Mount Sinai to speak to them from the heaven.” You must realise that this is the G’d who is referred to also as שם (“there”, vowel kametz under the letter ש). The word שם is the “home” of the כרובים, as we know from Samuel II 6,2 להעלות מ-שם את ארון האלו-הים אשר נקרא שם שם י-ה-ו-ה צבאות יושב הכרובים עליו, “to bring up from there the Ark of G’d to which the Name was attached, the name Lord of Hosts enthroned on the Cherubim.” This was the attribute of G’d in whose honour King Solomon built the Temple as a residence on earth. This is why you find Solomon refer to it again and again as a sanctuary built לשמך, “in honour of Your name.” (Examples: Kings I 8,44: “the house I built for Your name.”  Kings I 19: “the house he will build for My name.”] The sacrifices which were offered up on the altar of that Temple were all offered to the attribuite described there  as שמך, “Your name.” Solomon’s father David had already instructed him that דע את אלו-הי אביך ועבדהו, “know the G’d of your father and serve Him” (Chronicles I 28,9). When Moses upbraids Korach in Numbers 16,9 for wanting to be a priest not only a Levite, he describes the function of the Levites as כי הבדיל אלו-הי ישראל אתכם מעדת ישראל להקריב אתכם אליו, “for the G’d of the Israelites has separated you (elevated) from the community of Israel to bring you near to Him.” 
    Nachmanides comments on Exodus 32,27 where Moses tells the Levites  to seek out the idolaters who served the golden calf and to execute them that the words אלו-הי ישראל in that verse refer to the attribute to whom sacrificial service to G’d is directed. Furthermore you find a verse in Chronicles II 29,7 ועולה לא העלו בקדש לאלו-הי ישראל, “they did not offer burnt offerings in the holy place to the G’d of Israel.” This teaches clearly that such burnt offerings were offered to the attribute known as אלו-הי ישראל.  Another explicit verse teaching us the same is found in Leviticus 21,8: כי את לחם אלו-היך הוא מקריב, “for he offers the food of your G’d,” and the attribute אלו-הים is used to describe the attribute of G’d to whom the offerings are directed.
    Additionally, it is worthwhile to reflect on the expression לחם אשה, in Leviticus 3,11 where the priest is described as the one offering such an offering to Hashem. The word אשה is derived from אש;  we have many similar expressions all referring to certain sacrifices as אשה לה’, “fire-offerings to the Lord.” The reason that the Torah does not describe such food for the altar as (לחם אש) “fiery food,” is that the word אשה is almost identical to the word אשה, woman, meaning that the recipient of the sacrifice is passive like a woman who is passive, a recipient. All of this proves that sacrifices are offered to the attribute of Justice. This is the reason that such “food,” i.e. לחם, is called לחם אשה.
    The truth is that while the sacrifices are offered up to the attribute אלו-הים, they are intended for the attribute Hashem. Similarly, when we offer our prayers in (lieu of sacrifices), we dedicate them to the attribute which is far above all our abilities to praise, and we verbalise that when we emphasise this very fact by saying that G’d is מרומם על כל ברכה ותהלה “exalted far above every blessing and praise”  (Nechemyah 9,5). The same thought is expressed in the Kaddish prayer i.e.לעילא מכל ברכתא ושירתא  תושבחתא. 
    Kabbalists do not agree. They believe that all prayers are addressed to the one and only great name, the tetragram. They believe that G’d is not beyond our ability to praise, but that He is close to all who call upon him as stated in Psalm 145,18  קרוב ה’ לכל קוראיו. There is only one condition for the “closeness” of G’d to all who call upon Him; it too has been stated in the same verse of that Psalm, i.e. יקראוהו באמת, “they must be truthful (not ambiguous) in their appeal to G’d.” Nachmanides himself mentions in his liturgical poem beginning with the words מראש מקדמי עולמים אקרא הלא תענה כי בושתי לשאול מן המלך, “l call, for are You not sure to answer? for I would be ashamed to ask (such a thing) from a king (human ruler).” We have numerous instances when the petitioner describes himself as addressing a particular attribute and at the same time expects to receive his response from a different attribute. Example: Psalms 55,17 אני אל אלו-הים אקרא וי-ה-ו-ה יושיעני, “I will call out to Elohim, and Hashem will deliver me.”—An example of a different nature which comes to mind is Psalms 6,10  where David had addressed the attribute Hashem asking not to be judged by an attribute G’d employs when He is angry. David acknowledges that Hashem answered him. There are too many examples of man addressing the attribute Hashem directly for us to have to enumerate them.
    If you will examine Solomon’s prayer more closely you will observe that he too did not address himself simply to the subordinate attribute Elohim, but that he combined both attributes in his petition addressing himself to י-ה-ו-ה- אלו-הי ישראל, “the Lord G’d of Israel.” He stressed merely that there is none like Him either on earth or in the heavens. Solomon avoided using the attribute אלו-הי ישראל exclusively when appealing to G’d. [The author errs, as in Kings I 8,26 Solomon said: ועתה אלו-הי ישראל, without referring to the attribute Hashem. Ed.] At any rate, we find that sometimes a combination of G’d’s attributes is being addressed, whereas at other times only a single attribute, be it Hashem or Elohim is being addressed
    . 
    The above will help you understand why the sages when formulating our benedictions and mentioning the attributes of  Hashem and Elohim in the benedictions we recite have at the same time not employed the grammatical formula we would have expected such as אשר קדשתנו במצותיך וצויתנו, “You have sanctified us and You have commanded us,” but have insisted on the formula “who has sanctified us and who has commanded us” in the third person. The reason is that the words ברוך אתה, “blessed are You” at the beginning of the benediction refer to the words מלך העולם in a later part of the benediction. This is an attribute more familiar to us by the name תפארת. It is a reference to a certain emanation and it is this emanation (the attribute it represents)  which “has sanctified us and commanded us.” It is this emanation which is the repository of G’d’s commandments to us. You will find what I have said confirmed in the Sefer Habahir item 184 who queries  אשר קדשנו במצותיו instead of אשר קדשתנו וצויתנו? The answer given is that all the commandments are found in two worlds. In His great Mercy G’d has given them to us in order to sanctify us so that we will merit to establish a claim to the hereafter, the עולם גדול, in the here and now. Thus far the quote from the Sefer Habahir. From there you can conclude that the relationship between the Shechinah and the people of Israel is not one based merely on the need of the common Israelite, but that it is a reciprocal relationship also satisfying a need of the celestial forces represented by the Shechinah. Seeing that the glory of the tetragram and all it stands for is disseminated by the attribute  כבוד, “glory, honour,” whenever this occurs an additional element of Holy Spirit is added to the Shechinah. This is why a prayer (Psalms 104,31)  such as יהי כבוד ה’ לעולם ישמח ה‘ במעשיו, makes sense. The meaning of these words is: “the glory of G’d is enhanced to the emanation עולם when the attribute we know as the tetragram has occasion to rejoice in the deeds of its creatures.” This means that every Israelite has the potential to strengthen or, G’d forbid, to “weaken” certain attributes of G’d by his deeds or lack of them. This idea is expressed succinctly in Deut. 32,18 as צור ילדך תשי, literally: “You neglected the Rock that begot you;” according to Kabbalists this means: “when Israel neglects the Torah, it weakens the power of the Torah.” A verse conveying a similar sentiment is Psalms 60,14 באלו-הים נעשה חיל, “we can perform valiant deeds which enhance Elohim.”
    The attribute of כבוד which we have spoken about is expressed in our verse by the words וידבר אלו-הים, “The One who spoke was the One who both writes and gives, i.e. hands over what He has written.” It is the same attribute we find referred to in Exodus 32,16 והמכתב מכתב אלו-הים הוא, “and the writing was the writing of Elohim.” When we read in Exodus 31,18 ויתן אל משה וגו’, the unnamed subject is the same Elohim who did the writing on the Tablets. The reference is to the word אלו-הים which appears at the very end of that verse. It was also this attribute of G’d which Moses (Deut. 33,12) referred to when he described Benjamin as ידיד ה’ ישכון לבטח עליו, describing that while this attribute rested on the Holy Temple, Benjamin and the entire Jewish people would dwell securely. Moses singled out Benjamin as the Holy Temple would be built on his tribal territory. This attribute was also referred to as פי י-ה-ו-ה, in Exodus 17,11 at al. This expression, i.e. “The mouth of the tetragram” means that the instructions emanated from an attribute outside the core of Hashem. 
    It was the attribute described as פי ה’ which Moses and Aaron sinned against in Numbers 20,12 when instead of having spoken to the rock Moses struck the rock. G’d spelled this out when He said  לא האמנתם בי ...אשר מריתם את  פי, “you did not believe in Me....you rebelled against פי. (Numbers 20,24) I shall explain this in greater detail when we discuss that event. 
    You will now be able to understand the meaning of the word צור when this word refers to an aspect of G’d. We have verses such as הצור תמים פעלו, “the Rock, His works are perfect” (Deut. 32,4). Another verse of that category is Deut. 33,12: צור ילדך תשי. A third word featuring the word צור occurred in Exodus 17,6 הנני עומד לפניך שם על הצור בחורב; I will explain the last verse in detail in connection with Numbers 20,8.[where only the word סלע is mentioned in contrast with the word צור in Exodus 17,6 Ed.].
    First we have to understand why G’d repeated the word צור in His instructions to Moses in Exodus 17,6 when all He had to say was והכית בו, “strike it,” seeing that He had already told Moses that the צור.was the object he was to concentrate on. This hints that the words והכית בצור, may refer to a different “צור.” 
    The attribute כבוד we have been mentioning repeatedly is the one that said to Yaakov (Genesis 31,13) אנכי האל בית-אל, seeing that it was this attribute which had been described earlier as the G’d of his father when we read of G’d (introducing) revealing Himself to Moses (Exodus 3,6) saying אנכי אלו-הי אביך אלו-הי אברהם, אלו-הי יצחק, ואלו-הי יעקב, ויסתר משה פניו כי ירא מהביט אל-האלו-הים. ”I am the G’d of your father, the G’d of Avraham, the G’d of Yitzchak, and the G’d of Yaakov; Moses averted his face as he was afraid to look at Elohim.” [the common denominator in the last two verses quoting G’d is the word אנכי coupled with Elohim. Ed.] According to Hoseah 12,5 בית אל is an attribute by means of which G’d addresses human beings. The verse in Hoseah, clearly a reference to Yaakov, reads as follows: וישר אל מלאך ויכל, בכה ויתחנן לו, בית אל ימצאנו ושם ידבר עמנו “He wrestled with an angel and prevailed; he (the angel) cried and pleaded with him. At Bet-El He  would meet him, and there He would speak with us.” [The next verse continues (not quoted by our author) “But the Lord, the Lord of Hosts  must be invoked as “the Lord.” Ed.]. When G’d said to Moses (Exodus 33,19) אני אעביר כל טובי על פניך, “I shall let all My goodness pass before you,” He referred to His capacity as the attribute כבוד. In Exodus 34,6 this is described as “Hashem passed before him.” I shall explain the apparent anomaly in this verse when we get to it. The verse in Ki Tissa refers to the attribute which is meant in verse 23 of the same chapter where the Torah speaks of the pilgrims presenting themselves את פני האדון י-ה-ו-ה- אלו-הי ישראל. 
    You have to understand the meaning of the words את פני האדון coupled with the expression י-ה-ו-ה -אלו-הי ישראל. What is meant is that the Hashem aspect is concealed within the manifestation of the attribute פני אדון. The word את פני used in connection with the pilgrimages in Ki Tissa is the mystical dimension of על פני in our verse, and it is the attribute to which Moses appealed in Exodus 32,11 as soon as G’d told him about the Israelites having made themselves a molten calf to worship. Moses’ prayer commenced with the words ויחל משה את פני י-ה-ו-ה אלו-היו. Moses pleaded with the attribute of Justice.
    It is also possible, following the approach of Nachmanides on that verse, that the word ויחל is derived from תחלה, “beginning.” In that event the meaning of the Torah’s description of Moses’ prayer is that he drew strength throughout from the beginning of his prayer until its successful conclusion known as פנים. [I suppose the word פנים in that context means that G’d was once again prepared to turn His face, i.e. goodwill, to the people at the conclusion of Moses’ intercession. Ed.] This may have been why Moses used the words למה י-ה-ו-ה i.e. the attribute Hashem in the course of his prayer as if to ask G’d: “why do You Hashem allow the attribute of Justice to exercise authority over Your people?” The attribute which Moses addressed at that time was the one we described as כבוד. We find confirmation of this in Deut. 9,26 where Moses recalls the events of that period saying:  ואתפלל אל י-ה-ו-ה ואומר אד-ני אלו-הים אל תשחת עמך ונחלתך אשר פדית בגדלך אשר הוצאת ממצרים ביד חזקה. “I prayed to Hashem and said: “My Lord Hashem/Elohim do not destroy Your people and Your heritage that You redeemed in Your greatness, that You took out of Egypt with a strong hand.” You will observe that Moses addressed the name with the letters אד followed by the name with the letters יה. [The author refers to the name printed in most editions as yud heh vav heh but read as Elohim, i.e. a combination of part of adonay and the tetragram. Ed.] Seeing Moses had addressed the attribute of Justice, he had pleaded by saying: “do not destroy Your people, etc.” If we were to sum up the meaning of the verse we would say: “Lord (אדון), You within whom is the attribute of Mercy, do not destroy Your people.” We find another occasion in the desert when Moses employed the term adonay in the same sense in Deut. 3,24 where he begins his prayer to be allowed to cross the Jordan prior to his death. At that time Moses reminds G’d that He had revealed to him at the burning bush that within the attribute of Justice there is concealed the attribute of Mercy. Yet another instance when Moses used this address was when he asked G’d to continue to be present amongst the people in Exodus 34,9. A fourth time Moses employs that attribute is in Numbers 14,17 after the debacle with the spies.
    In our daily blessing of the attribute כבוד when we recite ברוך כבוד ה' ממקומו, “blessed be the glory of Hashem from His place” (an inadequate though customary translation, Ed.], the meaning of the word ממקומו is: ”from the place from which the attribute כבוד receives its input,” i.e. from the attribute גבורה. The ultimate source of blessing is the אין סוף, the essence of the Lord. In our daily kedushah prayer we first proclaim the Holiness of the Lord, followed by ברוך, blessing Him. The reason we make a distinction between קדושה and ברכה, Holiness and blessing, is that the type of sanctity on terrestrial earth and the type of Holiness in the celestial spheres is not to be compared although we call both by the name קדושה. We do this although the blessing is derived from the Holiness in the celestial regions. The two domains must remain separate from one another.
    Midrash Tehillim 19 on the words יום ליום asks the rhetorical question: “whence did Moses know  while he was on Mount Sinai (in heaven) when it was day and when it was night?” Answer: at the time when the angels were engaged in praising the Lord using the word קדוש, Moses knew that it was daylight on earth. When the angels used the word ברוך in their praise of the Lord Moses knew that it must be night on earth. When we read in Hoseah 3,5 ובקשו את ה' אלו-היהם ואת דויד מלכם, “and they will seek the Lord their G’d and David their king,” the prophet expresses the difference between Holiness in the celestial spheres and holiness on earth. This is a reference to the respective attributes of תפארת and כבוד. The third part of the daily קדושה prayer when we recite the words ימלוך ה' לעולם אלו-היך ציון, “may the Lord reign forever, your G’d Zion,” re-establishes the joint partnership between the attributes of כבוד and תפארת, the words ימלוך ה' לעולם being a reference to the attribute תפארת, whereas the words אלוה-יך ציון are a reference to the attribute כבוד.
    We find a similar concept expressed in writings explaining aggadic material. We are told there that when the Shechinah will once again take up residence in the Holy of Holies, the inner Sanctum of the third Temple, people will acknowledge this event by reciting ברוך כבוד י-ה-ו-ה ממקומו. In the Sefer Habahir item 131 this is explained in the following way: “what precisely is this כבוד ה'? We may understand all this in the form of a parable. A king had a beautiful lady in his chamber, a lady that all his soldiers amused themselves with. The king and that lady’s children would pay daily visits to the palace blessing their father the king profusely and asking: “where is our mother?” The king replied: ‘you cannot see her just now.” The children then said: “may she be blessed wherever she is.” Thus far the Sefer Habahir.
    This “כבוד” is known generally as שכינה, and you know already that it is perceived as extending to all “extremities, endings,” i.e. all six directions [in terms of our terrestrial world, i.e. the six directions in which we shake the Lulav, Ed.] This emanation כבוד itself ranks seventh [from the bottom up in the ten emanations, Ed.] so that it “presides,” i.e. provides spiritual input for the six “lower” emanations. Basically, this is what occurred at Mount Sinai when the Israelites heard the Ten Commandments as if emanating out of the fire. This is also what the sages (Shemot Rabbah 28,4) had in mind when they said “the Torah was given with seven קולות, “voices.” The word קול or קולות occurs seven times in our paragraph. [The word קול or קולות occurs six times, the seventh time being the words וידבר אלו-הים “G’d spoke,” something obviously involving קול, “voice.”] [compare 19,15, 19,16, 19,19,(twice) 20,16. (twice)]. When you look at the second version of the Ten Commandments in Deuteronomy 5,19 you will again find that the word קול or קולות occurs seven times. I will refer to this in detail when we discuss those verses.
    On this occasion Moses attained an understanding of seven different קולות, which in kabbalistic terms are called seven emanations, and to which our sages  referred as שבעה קולות, “seven voices,” whereas in the language of our prophets these are called שבעה עינים, “seven facets.” This is the mystical dimension of Zecharyah 3,9 על אבן אחת שבעה עינים. The word עינים is related in meaning to גוונים, “varieties.” Only Moses understood the name and the full meaning of it. The people at large only heard the voice of G’d as a single קול. This is what Moses referred to when he wrote  Deut 5,19: את הדברים האלה דבר ה' אל כל קהלכם ...קול גדול ולא יסף, “these words the Lord spoke to your entire congregation.. .a great voice without addition,” The verse makes it plain that the congregation only heard a single voice, nothing additional. This was because their limited powers of perception did not allow them to distinguish nuances within that voice. You also find that David mentions seven קולות Psalms 29,3 (1); 29,4(2+3); 29,5 (4); 29,6 (5); 29,7 (6); 29,8 (7). The sequence there is understood in a descending order, i.e. from חסד-גבורה-תפארת-נצה-הוד-יסוד-מלכות.
    After Moses had attained understanding of these seven emanations, he turned to G’d asking to be granted understanding of the emanations which were still higher, i.e. the emanations  בינה-חכמה-כתר in ascending order. This is the meaning of Exodus 33,18 הראני נא את כבודך, “please show me Your כבוד. I will deal with this in detail when we discuss that verse. In the meantime you must appreciate that the Shechinah is the seventh  emanation and it exudes its influence on “seventy,” i.e. the seventy nations. As soon as the דבור left the mouth of the Shechinah it split into seven nuances, קולות, and subsequently into seventy languages parallel to the seventy nations on earth and their respective languages. As a result every single nation participated to some degree in the revelation at Mount Sinai, hearing sort of an echo of that original voice (Shabbat 88). This is also mentioned in Midrash Tehillim on Psalm 68,6 (on verse 11 in that Psalm) on the words א-ד-נ-י יתן אומר המבשרות צבא רב. “The Lord gives a command; the women who bring the news are a great host.” When G’d (attribute גבורה) spoke His words, the sound was split into seven voices which in turned were subdivided into seventy voices, i.e. the seventy languages of the seventy nations to enable all of them to hear part of G’d’s voice. The process may be compared to a person who strikes an anvil and sparks fly in all directions. This is the meaning of the words  המבשרות צבא רב.
    Having understood this it is possible to understand the mystical dimensions of שבועה and נדר, commonly translated as “oath” and “vow” respectively. The word שבועה is derived from the word שבע, “seven,”  whereas the word נדר is related to the three emanations “above” the seven represented by the קולות ה'  as we described previously. A נדר ranks higher in Jewish law than an oath, שבועה. Seeing that the Torah (in its aspect as a Book of laws) does not concern itself with matters beyond the seven lower emanations and the Torah itself is a product of those seven emanations, it makes sense that in Jewish law an oath would never be overriding one of the already existing Torah commandments, i.e. someone who swore an oath not to observe one or several of the Torah’s commandments would not thereby have obligated himself to keep his oath. Any such oath is as if the person who uttered it had not said anything . 
    Regarding a נדר the matter is quite different, seeing that basically the concept ofנדר  emanates from a domain higher than the lower seven emanations. In principle, a נדר, a vow of a certain type, is able to override a מצוה. The very wording which our sages have assigned to the respective formulations of vows and oaths reflect their legal status in Jewish law. By definition, a נדר is unlimited, i.e. person says “I accept for myself a certain duty,“ such as when David said in Psalms 56,13 עלי אלו-הים נדרך אשלם “it is up to me to pay my vows to You G’d.” There was no time-limit to that obligation, nor was there any kind of contingency which might have rendered the vow as invalid. The word נדר is related to דירה dwelling, as I will explain in greater detail on Numbers 30,3. David understands that the obligation to fulfill his vow is not contingent on pre-existing contrary obligations which would invalidate it. The same is the case in Numbers 30,7 where the Torah describes the absolute duty of a woman, who has not had a husband or the authority of a father who could have objected to her vow at the time she made it, to make good on her vow. When we will discuss the third of the Ten Commandments, I will elaborate on the seriousness of the failure to keep an oath and how it is related to the seven emanations, while in Numbers 30,3 I will discuss the difference between that prohibition and the sin of not honouring a vow one has made. Seeing that I have explained some basic principles of the Torah here I will not need to elaborate on these principles again. 
    
    20,2. אנכי ה' אלו-היך, “I am the Lord your G’d,” This is a commandment to be carried out by the heart (compare Chovot Halevavot beginning of the first chapter); it therefore is not counted except as an obligation of the heart to believe with complete and absolute faith that there is a Creator who preceded any phenomena in the universe that we are either aware of or will ever become aware of. We must similarly believe that He is alone, has no partners. (Deut. 4,35). The word אנכי always refers to a presence and the letter א at the beginning of the word alludes both to His existence and to His preceding all. The other letters (נכי) are all multiples of ten which itself is a dimension of the number 1, i.e the א. The entire word conveys “oneness, unity.” [the letter י is to multiples of the number 10 what the letter א is to multiples of the number 1 The number 1 spelled as a word, אחד, equals 81 when squared (1x1 plus 8x8 plus 4x4). This is the numerical value of the letters in the word אנכי. Furthermore, the word אנכי alludes to all the letters in the Hebrew alphabet. The א represents the three letters known as אמות (א,מ,ש); the נ represents the 12 letters known as פשוטות (ה,ו,ז,ח,ט,י,ל,נ,ס,ע,צ,ק); the letter כ represents the seven letters known as כפולות. (ב,ג,ד,כ,פ,ר,ת). This means all 22 letters are accounted for. The last letter is the י which is one of the so-called נעלמות (i.e. the letters א-ה-ו-י, letters not usually heard when a word containing them is uttered).
    An additional comment on the word אנכי found in Shabbat 105  is that the word אנכי is also an acrostic אנא נפשי כתיבת יהבית, “I Myself have written and given” (Aramaic). It is appropriate to explain why such an acrostic is necessary seeing that immediately after the word אנכי G’d spells out the fact that He gave the Torah by referring to Himself as י-ה-ו-ה אלוה-יך. You are familiar with the fact that Onkelos translates the word אנכי when applied to G’d as מימרי, except in this instance where he does not translate it but renders it in the original Hebrew. By not translating the words and simply copying them, Onkelos preserves the fact that G’d refers to the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice as having been equally involved in uttering the Ten Commandments and makes plain that the commandment which demands from us complete faith in G’d’s Oneness and being unprecedented extends to both of these attributes of His. By reminding us of the acrostic concealed in these four letters, the sages reminded us of the fact that the entire Torah was given by the attribute Hashem. Our sages (Mechilta Bachodesh section 6) have called this commandment “acceptance of the Kingdom of heaven.” Both the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy are qualities which a king of flesh and blood also has to display when judging his nation. Solomon already refers to this when he says (Proverbs 29,4) “a king sustains the land by justice.” The same Solomon writes in Proverbs 20,28: “mercy and truth preserve the king; he upholds his throne by loving kindness.” 
   אשר הוצאתיך מארץ מצרים, “who has taken you out of the land of Egypt.” He did this in order to demonstrate the miracles to establish His claim to Kingship and Divinity in your eyes. Seeing that it was all-important to G’d to remind the people of their visual experience of what He had done, He decided not to introduce Himself as the G’d Who had created heaven and earth. The people had not witnessed that, nor for that matter had anyone else. In fact, G’d used the visual experience the people had of Him to support His claim that He had created the heaven and earth. Moreover, the Exodus of Egypt was a manifestation of G’d equal to creation of heaven and earth. The miracles which occurred subsequent to the Exodus were many and variegated; the various miracles which contradicted the laws of nature were proof that only Someone Who had established those “laws of nature” could have also have been the One Who created heaven and earth. This is why G’d chose the word הוצאתיך to describe the Exodus. The word also means “to bring forth,” and has been used repeatedly in that sense in the first chapter of Genesis. It signifies that what occurred at the Exodus was a חדוש העולם, “a rebirth of the world as it had been known.” Instead of being slaves to an earthly power, i.e. Pharaoh, the Israelites would now serve an entirely different Master, the Creator, Who had adopted them as His special people. When referring to the bondage in Egypt as a “house of slaves,” G’d may even have alluded to the fact that the masters,” i.e. the Egyptians, had been shown to be only slaves themselves, subject to a higher authority, G’d. After all, the Egyptians were descended from Cham, youngest son of Noach, whose descendants had been cursed by their father Noach to be slaves. (compare the Egyptians’ genealogy in Genesis 10,7). Having become the slaves of slaves was in itself unnatural.
    It is also possible that the word עבדים in the expression בית עבדים in our verse is a reference to an object or objects. We would have to translate it as “the house of eternal slavery.” It is also possible to explain the words מבית עבדים as “from the house of horoscopes to which all Egyptians were mentally enslaved.” The reason the Torah describes the horoscopes as “slaves,” is that whereas they are like kings to those who believe in them and feel utterly dependent on their power, they are in reality servants to all the celestial forces above them. There is a hint here that actually the Israelites had been condemned to remain in Egypt for longer (according to horoscopic calculations) had not the Lord  negated the power of the horoscopes and taken the Israelites out as a miracle. This is the meaning of Deut. 4,20: “He took you out from the iron crucible” in which the Israelites had been meant to dissolve like iron being melted down. Our verse then describes that the Exodus proceeded in two stages, first G’d took the people out of the iron crucible, then out of the land of Egypt.
    
    20,3. לא יהיה לך אלוהים אחרים על פני, “You are not to have any other deities in My presence.” We are not to accept any of G’d’s agents, forces, known as Elohim as deities for ourselves, nor any of the horoscopes as guiding our fates. The word אחרים “others,” [which might suggest that there are such. Ed.] is explained in Sifri Eykev section 43 as justified by the fact that they are “different, false”  to those who serve them.
    Another explanation of the meaning of the word אחרים: the deities whom people serve differ from day to day or from year to year. One day they worship gold, another day they worship silver, a third day they worship wood. The principal reason they are called אחרים is that they derive whatever power they are presumed to possess from אחרים, from “other” sources, they have absolutely no power of their own. This is spelled out in Exodus 34,14, לא תשתחוה לאל אחר, “do not worship a deity which derives its power from another (alien) source!” You are to bow down, i.e. worship only the true source of power, the G’d of Israel who does not derive His power from an external source. This is also the way our sages (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,45) interpret Isaiah 44,6 ומבלעדי אין אלו-הים, “there is no god that exists independently of Me.”
   על פני, ‘in My presence.” According to the plain meaning of the text this means “in addition to My essence.” It is similar in meaning to Samuel II 17,11  ופניך הולכים בקרב “and you yourself are  marching  into battle.” An alternate meaning of the words על פני may be a reference to the direction, the place to which G’d turns. Seeing that G’d turns to every direction, is all-present, this means that we must not turn to deities in any direction.
    A kabbalistic approach: the mystical dimension of the words על פני is על הפנים שלי, “to My face,” similar to the meaning of Deut. 5,4 פנים בפנים דבר ה' עמכם, ”face to face did Hashem speak with you;” the mystical dimension of the word אחרים is to be found in the fact that G’d did not say לא יהיה לך אל אחר על פני, but He said אחרים in the plural. it is similar to Lavan who had said to Yaakov (Genesis 31,50) אם תקח נשים על בנותי “you must not marry other women in addition to my daughters.” I have already explained why  Lavan could not have used the word נשים in the singular, i.e. אשה, (compare page 1061).
    Nachmanides explains that idolatry may manifest itself in three different ways. 1) Some people worship the angels; 2) some people worship the celestial constellations in the sky, horoscopes and astrology; 3) Some people worship demons. During the early generations of mankind any deviation from pure monotheism occurred by the people addressing the angels as G’d’s ministers, believing that since G’d had given authority to these angels to supervise and intervene in the fates of different nations they deserved to be “worshipped,” albeit as subordinate beings. When Daniel 10,20 speaks of the שר יון or the שר מלכות פרס, he refers to the angels G’d appointed to supervise those kingdoms and their respective peoples. At that time each tribe or nation worshipped only a single such angel, i.e. the one appointed to supervise its fate. The reason that the Torah (Deut. 10,17) describes Hashem as הוא אלו-הי האלו-הים  is to make clear that Hashem was understood to be the supreme power above these angels who had jurisdiction over one nation each. This is also what Yitro referred to when he said he had learned that  כי גדול ה' מכל האלוהים, that “Hashem was greater than all the divine powers known as Elohim.” The angels are the ones described as Elohim. This is also what David had in mind in Psalm 97,7 where he says השתחוו לו כל אלהים, “all divine beings (angels) bow down to Him.” This is what our sages said (Menachot 110) that Yitro referred to G’d as the “G’d of gods.” (Exodus 18,11).
    After the period when people still worshipped the Supreme G’d but only in His capacity as a remote “boss” of the respective angels to whom He had entrusted their fate, they began to worship visible deities, horoscopes, all kinds of celestial constellations consisting of stars, and other planets. They realised that these forces exercised great influence on what goes on earth. This is the period described as people prostrating themselves before the sun, the moon and many other stars and constellations visible in the sky (Jeremiah 8,2). These people believed that by serving these forces they would increase their relative power and that this in turn would be of benefit to them. The people initiating this were very learned people who had studied what they perceived as the method of these stars exercising their influence on earth.
    Still later, people began to worship demons. This is what is meant in Deut. 32,17 אלוהים לא ידעום, “gods they had never known of.” The Torah ridicules the people who sacrifice to demons, phenomena which had never been endowed with divine powers at all, referring to them as “newcomers, recently arrived, whom your ancestors did not dread.” These forces were new to the Israelites; they had heard of them only during their exile in Egypt. Even the Canaanites had not known of their existence. Because of all these various forms of phenomena competing with G’d, the Torah warns not to place any store in any of them. The word אלהים אחרים in our verse refers to the first group, i.e. the angels.
    
    20,4.  לא תעשה לך פסל וכל תמונה, “do not make for yourself a molten image or any likeness, etc.” After G’d had warned against believing (sin in thought) in any force competing with G’d as the only Divine Force, the Torah now adds the prohibition of constructing (sinning in deed) such a substitute for Him. A person might have thought in all innocence that painting or making three-dimensional replicas of phenomena which G’d had created would be acceptable to G’d as a reminder, for instance, of miracles G’d had performed for His people. These phenomena had been used by G’d as instruments to help the Jewish people, after all.
    A  major reason why it seems reasonable for people to make such images as reminders of the miracles G’d had performed are certain ceremonial laws such as the offering and eating of the Passover lamb, the bitter herbs, the unleavened bread, all intended to ensure that the memory of that event would not be forgotten. The commandment to make and dwell in huts on Tabernacles specifically instructs us to thereby remember the fact that the Israelites dwelled in huts during their wandering in the desert. Seeing that a Jew might want to make for himself a visible memento to remind him of his faith, the Torah had to legislate that he must not do so as once he would do so he would, in due course, substitute the symbol for the real thing and begin to worship the symbol. Such idolatry would commence with relatively innocent obeisance, such as bowing down to the symbol; ultimately it would result in properly serving such symbols. This is why the psalmist (Psalms 1,1) says: “happy the man who did not walk (following) the counsel of the wicked, or did not stand still when encountering the path of the sinners, or sit in the company of the insolent.” On this verse our sages (Avodah Zarah 18) ask: “seeing he did not follow (walk with) the wicked, how would he stand? Seeing that he did not stand, how could he sit?” What David meant to warn us of is that once one walks with the sinners, one will also stand with them and eventually one will sit with the scoffers, i.e. keep regular company with them. In order to avoid this from happening one must not even go for a brief walk with them. Once a person becomes a scoffer he will qualify for what Solomon termed: “if you scoff you bear it alone” (Proverbs 9,12). People who have sunk to that level will not be welcomed by the Shechinah. In our verse the Torah also staggers the description of the danger of idolatry; first you must avoid putting faith in any phenomena besides G’d; next you must not construct something which could become an idol; third, you must watch out that you will not prostrate yourself to an idol. The Torah commences with the relatively mild sin describing how it will lead to the most serious kind of sin.
    This leads us to the apparent contradiction of the construction of the commandment in Exodus 25,18 to construct two golden cherubs, which sounds as if “the same mouth which prohibited making molten images permits them” (Ketuvot 22)  in a different context. [G’d is the only One who knows when to allow or even order the making of symbols. Seeing He allows in one context He must have His reasons for prohibiting it in other contexts. Ed.]
    The expression וכל תמונה, means: “any kind of likeness.” [not “every likeness.”] It is similar to verse 10 in our chapter לא תעשה כל מלאכה, “do not perform any kind of work.” Alternatively, the word כל in the phrase לא תעשה לך פסל וכל תמונה, could refer to the attribute כל, which would represent one of the likenesses of what is found in the celestial regions., i.e. אשר בשמים ממעל.
    The “כל” referred to is the likeness of some celestial phenomenon. The same applies in Deut. 4,23 where the Torah warns against ועשיתם לכם פסל תמונת כל, “from making for yourselves a molten image, a likeness of כל, concerning which the Lord your G’d has commanded you.” Here too the word כל may  be understood as a reference to something specific rather than as a reference to “all” or “any.”
    The words אשר בשמים ממעל, “of what is in the heavens above,” refer to images of angels or other celestial beings the likeness of which we are not to reproduce. Examples would be such angels as: Ophanim, Seraphim or Chayot Hakodesh, categories of angels which we speak about in our prayers. Even though we have not seen these angels we must not portray their likeness as it corresponds to our imagination. The words ואשר בארץ מתחת, “or those that are on earth below,” refer to three-dimensional reproductions of either human beings or animals or birds which populate the earth. The words ואשר במים מתחת לארץ, “or which are in the water below the earth,” refer to all manner of fish. We must not make accurate three-dimensional reproductions of these either. Neither must one construct likenesses of the demons inhabiting the domain under the surface of the earth. (Mechilta Bachodesh section 6)
    This verse teaches also that earth is positioned above water. This is the reason for the wording: “which is in the water beneath the earth.” We have a verse in Psalms 136,6 לרוקע הארץ על המים, “who spreads the earth above the waters” which makes this point even more directly. It is commonly assumed that the demons consist of three varieties (Chagigah 16). Some reside in the atmosphere and cause people to dream at night. Some reside within our bodies and tempt men into sinful conduct. Some reside within the bowels of the earth. If G’d had allowed these demons to surface they would be powerful enough to devastate the terrestrial universe. 
    Our sages (Mechilta Bachodesh section 6) added that the words אשר בשמים include the sun, the moon, and the stars, as well as constellations of stars, signs of the zodiac. The word ממעל  includes the angels, whereas the words ואשר בארץ include man, beast and birds. The word מתחת, includes insects, reptiles and the like. The words ואשר במים include the fish in the sea and rivers; the words מתחת לארץ include the demons. Pessikta Zutrata on our verse confirms this interpretation.
    
    20,5. לא תשתחוה להם ולא תעבדם, “do not prostrate yourselves before them nor perform any act of obeisance.” Any form of service is included, even a form of service which does not deny the sovereignty of Hashem. This verse stipulates that any form of service, adulation, recognition of a Divine Power, is to be reserved exclusively for Hashem. The author refers to a Midrash (similar to our version of the Zohar) in which even a demeaning kind of service vis-a-vis an idol is included in the prohibition the Torah expresses here. The classic example cited in the Talmud is service to an idol known as Pe-or which consists of people excreting in front of such an image. Similarly, pelting stones at Markulin, another ancient deity is equally forbidden, though within the parameter of our culture pelting stones is an insult rather than an act of worship. Even if the form of service performed is not at all the kind prescribed for honouring that particular deity, it is still absolutely forbidden. The words: “do not bow down to them or perform obeisances” does not only refer to voluntary performance of any form of worship but it includes involuntary worship even under threat of death. This is the reason that Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah refused to transgress this commandment and chose (what they thought was) death instead. Not only does the principle of יהרג ואל יעבור, “that one must rather face death than violate this commandment,” apply to deliberate, intentional  violation of this commandment, but it applies even to incidental, unintended violation, such as bending to pick up coins one had dropped in front of an idol. It is absolutely forbidden to give others the impression as if one bent down to the idol even if in fact one merely wishes to scoop up one’s coins (compare Avodah Zarah 12).
   כי אנכי ה' אלוה-יך, “for I am Hashem your G’d.” I alone; exclusively. it is not appropriate for you to exchange Me for someone else. If you do, אנכי אל, “I have power,” i.e. I am able to punish you. Moreover, I am קנא, jealous, I am jealous of preserving My reputation so that I will carry out retribution sometimes as long delayed as the fourth generation. In this instance the word פוקד does not mean that G’d remembers, considers benevolently as is the meaning of this word in the list of G’d’s thirteen attributes in Exodus 34,6-7. To make certain we do not misunderstand, the Torah here adds the word לשונאי, “to those who hate Me.” Remember that throughout the Torah this attribute of jealousy as one of G’d’s attributes occurs only in connection with idolatry. The reason is that  once the Jewish people had accepted the Torah at Mount Sinai they became an irrevocable part of G’d’s “heritage.” They had given up the freedom to opt out. If for some reason they, or an individual, decide to abandon G’d and His commandments He is entitled to relate to such conduct like a husband who is jealous of the infidelity of his wife. You will not find a single statement by our prophets concerning other nations and their relations with their deities being described in terms of such deities being jealous of their worshippers. The Torah sums up the difference between us and other nations in Deut. 4,19-20: “and you be drawn  astray and bow down to them and worship them, which Hashem your G’d has apportioned to all the peoples under the entire heaven! But Hashem has taken you and removed you from the iron crucible, from Egypt, to be a nation of heritage for Him, as this very day.”
    
    20,6. ועושה חסד לאלפים לאוהבי, “and who performs deeds of loving kindness for thousands of generations for those who love Me.” Our sages in Sotah 31 explain the word לאוהבי as meaning: “for those who perform My commandments from a sense of love (for Me), whereas for those who perform G’d’s commandments only out of a sense of fear, i.e. לשומרי מצותיו, He does perform such acts of loving kindness for only one thousand generations. They also say (Sotah 31) that seeing the word לאוהבי, “to those who love Me,” has been written next to the word אלפים, “thousands, or at least two thousand, it is appropriate that it applies to people who perform the commandments out of a sense of love for G’d. On the other hand, the word לאלף דור, “for one thousand generations” (Deut. 7,9), applies to the people who though they perform the commandments do so only because they are afraid of being punished Even though performance of the commandments by such people is not at its optimum level G’d rewards them with disproportionately high reward. In Pessachim 50 our sages interpret the difference between the words in Psalms 57,11 “for Your kindness is as high as heaven,” and Psalm 108,5 where G’d’s kindness is described as “extending even beyond heaven,” by applying the former to people who observe the commandments without the proper intent, and the latter statement as reflecting the reward due to people who perform the commandments with the appropriate intent, i.e. not for what they stand to gain by it but by wanting to fulfill G’d’s purpose. All of this has been explained by Rav who said on that folio that the value of performing the commandments without the proper motivation lies in the fact that eventually one will perform them with the proper motivation. How do we reconcile this statement by Rav with that of Berachot 17 that someone peforming the laws of the Torah for the wrong reasons would better not have been created at all? That latter statement is meant for people who teach Torah to show off their knowledge but who have no fear of the Lord. [it is difficult to know which of many textural emendations on this line is correct. I have assumed that the author agrees with Tossaphot Pessachim 50 on the correct interpretation of the statement in Berachot. Ed.]
    
    20,7. לא תשא את שם ה' אלו-היך לשוא, “do not take the name of the Lord your G’d in vain.” Why is this injunction phrased as if spoken by some outsider? Why does G’d not say: “do not take My name in vain?” Up until this point G’d had spoken in the first person! Nachmanides uses this switch to the third person to prove his point that the people heard only the first two commandments directly from the mouth of G‘d, hence they heard the “I.” From this point on all they heard was what Moses told them in the name of G’d. The Israelites had to hear the first two commandments from G’d Himself in order to rise to the level of prophecy concerning their belief in G’d and concerning the unhinkability of becoming guilty of idolatry. This is also why G’d employed His Holy Name without such a preface as שם ה', whereas from now on we find the word שם which itself is like erecting a barrier between G’d’s essence and His intermediary to the people.
    The reason the commandment of not taking the name of G’d in vain follows immediately after the prohibition of idolatry is to teach that just as it is imperative to accord honour, etc., to G’d exclusively and not to negate this by treating any other phenomenon as a lesser divinity, so it is imperative to relate with equal reverence to “the name of the Lord, not only to His essence. Anyone failing to do so is guilty of desecrating G’d’s name.
    The essence of this commandment is not to swear an unnecessry oath, similar to Leviticus 19,12: “do not swear a false oath in My name and desecrate the name of  your G’d thereby.” In this verse the Torah goes further by prohibiting an oath which is pointless, such as someone declaring on oath that the sun rose this morning.  Such a declaration does not add to our knowledge and constitutes the use of G’d’s name in a frivolous manner. An oath which is meant to pervert the truth, such as that a pillar of marble is in reality a pillar of gold, also comes under the heading of שבועת שוא, a vain oath.
    The reason the Torah uses the expression לא תשא instead of לא תשבע, “do not swear an oath,” is because this prohibition includes even mentioning G’d’s name unnecessarily without the context of an oath. It is as if the Torah had said: “do not bring this name over your lips.” The word לשוא equals לחינם, “without valid reason.”  We have a different nuance of this word תשא in Exodus 23,1: לא תשא שמע שוא, “do not carry false reports.” The reason that conveying something by one’s lips or mouth is referred to as תשא, “you raise,” is that one has to “raise” one’s voice in order to convey the utterance. We have another example of this usage of the word תשא in Psalms 16,4: ובל אשא את שמותם על-שפתי, “their names will not pass my lips.” The entire legislation has been described by our sages (Temurah 3) as מוציא שם שמים לבטלה, “uttering the name of the Lord in vain.”
    The Talmud Nedarim 10 asks: “whence do we know that if someone who is about to declare a certain animal as a sacrificial animal, he must not say לה' עולה or לה' חטאת, “for G’d a burnt-offering,” or “for G’d a sin-offering,” but must say instead עולה לה' or חטאת לה', “a burnt-offering for G’d,” or “a sin-offering for G’d?” Answer: because he may not be able to complete the sentence and would have said only the word: “for G’d,” which would be pointless. If a person who is about to utter G’d’s name when he has to must be so careful not to use it in a way that might result in it going to waste, how much more so must we be careful not to utter the name of G’d to deny the truth or make some other frivolous declaration by involving G’d’s name! Thus far Nachmanides.
    The reason that it is forbidden to swear falsely is that by doing so one negates a  basic truth as well as one’s belief in G’d; [if one ignores warnings such as “G’d will not absolve someone who takes His name in vain,” one obviously does not believe that one will be punished severely. Ed.] It is immaterial for the severity of the sin whether one held some object in one’s hand at the time one uttered the oath or if not. In either event such an oath makes the person swearing it guilty of heresy, denying the Torah and the Lord who gave it.
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra in his commentary on our verse similarly condemns people guilty of this offense and describes them as perverting the purpose of every oath. The purpose behind swearing an oath is to assure the person to whom it is sworn that “just as G’d is true, so my words are true.” If that person fails to honour his oath he is as good as accusing G’d of lying. It is the custom in Egypt (in the time of Ibn Ezra) that if one swore by the life of the king and it was found that one had perjured oneself, the person guilty of this was executed. Even if that person was willing to atone by paying his own weight in gold his life would not be spared as he had shown his contempt for the king in public by using his name in vain. If this is the penalty administered to someone who showed contempt for a mortal ruler, how much more severe is the same sin when committed against Eternal G’d?
    We have observed an example of the punishment which accrued to the Jewish people who had sworn an oath in public in the matter of פלגש בגבעה, (Judges 20,9) not to go home until they had punished the men of Givah for their vicious rape. This oath was a public declaration in the presence of Pinchas the High Priest (20,28). We find there that the people of Yavesh Gilead who had not participated in the punitive expedition against the people of Benjamin were killed, men, women and children because they had dishonoured their publicly given oath (Judges 21,10).This was a harsher punishment than is applied to people who desecrate the Sabbath. Another instance where the severity of not complying with a public oath is demonstrated was the edict of King Saul that no one was to taste any food until after the battle against the Philistines (Samuel I 14,24). Yonatan, King Saul’s eldest son, who had been unaware of his father’s decree and the public oath accepting it, had tasted a little honey in all innocence. In spite of Yonatan’s not having heard the prohibition the King was going to execute him had not the people intervened. (verses 44-45). At any rate, we learn from there that when someone deliberately violates his oath, (or an oath that he had agreed to though not initiated, he is subject to the death penalty.
    I can show you that the Torah has compared the severity of violating an oath to the sin of adultery The Torah writes here in connection with swearing a false or unnecessary oath that G’d will never totally forgive a person guilty of this. You will also find the expression לא ינקה in Proverbs 6,29 where Solomon applies it to someone who indulges in sexual intercourse with someone else’s wife. We find that G’d punished the entire nation by a famine because King Saul had failed to honour an oath sworn to the Gibeonites  by the leaders of the Jewish people under the rule of Joshua. G’d told David in Samuel II 21,1 that the famine was the punishment for Saul having killed some Gibeonites in contravention of an holy oath sworn to them at the time of Joshua. Only after this gross injustice had been wiped out by David handing over seven descendants of Saul did G’d again turn to His people with goodwill. (Samuel II 21,14). 
    Another tragedy involving non-compliance with an oath was the killing of Shimi ben Geyrah who had been sworn by Solomon on pain of death not to leave Jerusalem where he had been under house arrest since the death of David. Kings I 2,42 makes it clear that Solomon executed him for violating this oath. It is noteworthy that in all the Ten Commandments we find a specific reward promised for compliance only in connection with the commandment to honour father and mother, whereas a specific punishment is reserved for violation of the commandment not to worship idols and not to swear an unnecessary oath.
    Many people think that the sin of murder and adultery are far worse than the sin of swearing a needless oath and they wonder why the Torah has reserved its condemnation for the sin of swearing an unnecessary oath rather than for committing murder or adultery. The answer is simple. Murder and adultery are the kinds of sins which cannot be committed all the time. One needs a special opportunity in order not to be caught; in the case of adultery one also needs a willing partner. Not only that; having murdered one person whom one hates is unlikely to lead to the same person again murdering other people against whom he harbors no ill will. Similarly, it is unlikely that someone wants to commit adultery again and again with different women as his libido may not have been aroused by them. Committing the sin of swearing unnecessary oaths, however, does not satisfy one’s evil urge and is not subject to special opportunities but is likely to become a way of life with a person who has indulged in that sin without being caught. The very fact that he who commits this sin generally does not even get a feeling of special satisfaction from doing it makes it such a dangerous sin, one which is liable to become a norm rather than the exception. This is why the Torah reserved the warning that G’d will never completely forgive someone who knowingly commits this sin. If Israel were guilty of no other sin than indulging in such oaths this would be enough to add years to our collective exile. Thus far the words of Ibn Ezra on this subject.
    We find that the prophet Isaiah admonishes Israel concerning this sin in chapter 48,1-2 where he writes as follows: “Listen to this O House of Yaakov, who bear the name of Israel and have come forth from the waters of Yehudah, who swear by the name of the Lord and invoke the G’d of Israel- though not in truth and sincerity- for you are called after the Holy City and you do lean on  the G’d of Israel whose name is the Lord of Hosts.” What Isaiah was trying to explain to the people was that they had no reason to be surprised that the pagans did not honour their oaths seeing that they had not been given the Torah. The Jewish people failed to honour their oaths in spite of having been given the Torah and being perfectly aware of how G’d hated the swearing of false oaths. Isaiah referred to the Jewish people as the House of Yaakov to remind them of the introductory words of the Decalogue where Moses was told to address the “House of Yaakov” (Exodus 19,3). It was the very presence at the revelation and their acceptance of the Torah that entitled the Jewish people to bear the name Children of “Israel” and “Yeshurun,” both distinctions conferred on people who are loyal to G’d and His ethical teachings. They had observed the Majesty of G’d by a visual demonstration, i.e. His שררה, as a memento of this they were accorded the name Yeshurun. (compare Deut. 32,15 “Yeshurun” waxed fat, etc.) The words ממי יהודה יצאו, “they came forth from the waters of Yehudah” were a reference to the זרע יהודה, the “seed of Yehudah.” The reason Isaiah singled out Yehudah was because his first prophetic message had been addressed to the tribe of Yehudah, compare אשר חזה על יהודה וירושלים, “who prophesied concerning Yehudah and Jerusalem (Isaiah 1,1). When you look at the verses we quoted above you will realise that the prophet reflects on the almost unbelievable fact that a people who had enjoyed such advantages could have become guilty of such disloyalty, could still bear the name Israel. How could a people with such illustrious antecedents as Yehudah, the founder of the Kingdom of David, people at home in a Holy City such a Jerusalem have become guilty of such depravity as had the people of Israel? They were the people who should have demonstrated holiness and the characteristics of priests as had been their official purpose bestowed upon them by G’d when He said: “you will be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holyo nation!” (Exodus 19,6). The words “and they leaned on the G’d of Israel” mean that they paid lip-service to the G’d of Israel but their heart was not in their words. Jeremiah 12,2 criticises the same phony attitude of the people when he says: “You are present in their mouths, but far from their thoughts.” Isaiah had concluded his critique with the words: “the Lord of Hosts is His name.” He meant that G’d is the Supreme commander of both the armies of the celestial regions as well as those on earth. This knowledge should have been enough to inspire fear of the Lord in the people.
    A Midrashic approach to the severity of violating oaths (Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 38): violation of an oath is equivalent to violation of a חרם (matters forbidden by the Torah such as the property of inhabitants of a city in Israel the majority of whose inhabitants had worshipped idols). We know this from the example of Achan Hacarmi  who had appropriated to himself gold and other property from the city of Jericho which G’d had put in חרם, had placed out of bounds to any Israelite (Joshua 7,1-26). Achan’s sin became the cause of 36 righteous Israelites losing their lives in the first battle against Ai. When Joshua was dismayed at this G’d told him “Israel has sinned;” in other words the sin of one individual violating the terms of the חרם was attributed by G’d to the entire nation. Joshua thereupon looked at the names of the tribes on the breastplate of the High Priest and found that the guilty party was a member of the tribe Yehudah, seeing that the gemstone on which Yehudah’s name was engraved had lost its lustre. After that he drew lots to find out to which family of the tribe of Yehudah the sinner belonged. When it became clear that he belonged to the family Zevach, the individual responsible by the name of Achan ben Carmi was isolated and he admitted his guilt. He was executed.
    We have another incident involving violating a חרם, when King Saul expressed a curse against anyone who would taste food until the evening (Samuel I 14,24). We have already mentioned that Yonatan had not heard about this חרם i.e. about the curse Saul had placed on violators of this oath. (the Book of Samuel calls this חרם oath.) We read there (Samuel I 14,27) that when Yonatan put the honey to his lips his eyes “lit up”. (the word used for “lit up,” ותאור, are the same as “he was struck by the curse.” At any rate, when the battle against the Philistines started to go badly, Saul wondered if someone had violated the oath (and thus brought a curse on the soldiers). He looked at the stones of the breastplate of the High Priest and found that the gemstone with the name Binyamin had lost its lustre. This caused him to draw lots until he found that the culprit was a member of his own family (verse 41). He condemned Yonatan to death in accordance with the terms of the חרם. It was then found that Yonatan had eaten because he had not been aware of the חרם, and the people prevailed on the King to spare him (verse 45).
    We find another example of the severity of violating oaths and the comparison with violating aחרם  in connection with Joseph’s brothers. They had made such a חרם amongst themselves that none of them would reveal to Yaakov what had happened during their encounter with Joseph. They had said: “we are only nine” (seeing that Reuven had been absent when Joseph was sold). A חרם is legally binding only when it involves a minimum of ten people. They had therefore made G’d Himself a partner to their חרם in order to give it legal force. This meant that G’d Himself was constrained from revealing to Yaakov what had happened to Joseph. Reuven respected the חרם and never told his father what he knew. G’d also respected the חרם as we know from Psalms 147,19 that He מגיד דבריו ליעקב, “reveals His words to Yaakov.” Clearly, He had not revealed this matter to Yaakov. The reason was that He had become partner to this חרם. Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer.
    A kabbalistic approach to our verse: The word שם in the verse לא תשא את שם ה' אלוה-יך לשוא refers to the Shechinah. The verse tells us that Hashem the attribute י-ה-ו-ה will not exonerate anyone who trifles with the name of the Shechinah, uses it in vain. We have a similar verse in Leviticus 19,12: ולא תשבעו לשמי לשקר, “and you shall nor swear an oath in My name which is a lie;” here too the word לשמי is a reference to the attribute known as Shechinah. The verse concludes with וחללת את שם אלו-היך, “and you would (thereby) desecrate the name of your G’d.” The clear message is that even swearing in the name of any of the lesser attributes of G’d is as severe a sin as uttering the tetragram itself to confirm one’s statement on oath .
    The severity of the sin of dishonouring one’s oath is tied to the fact that the word שבועה, “oath,” is based on the word שבעה, “seven.” This is a reference to the seven קולות, different nuances of G’d’s voice, whose meaning Moses learned to understand during the revelation at Mount Sinai. Anyone who violates an oath based on these seven קולות, i.e. on the Sinaitic experience, is as if testifying that he is not entitled to life in the hereafter. By doing what he did he excluded himself from the community of people who have embraced these seven קולות as yardsticks by which to guide their lives. Our sages (Sifri Mattot item 153), when trying to illustrate the difference between שבועות ונדרים, “oaths and vows,” explain that an oath may be considered as using the “king as he manifests himself” to buttress his statement, whereas when someone formulates his oath as a vow he buttresses it by the “life of the king,” i.e. the king’s “essence.” You will appreciate this when you reflect on a verse in Kings II 2,2 where Elisha swears that he will not leave Elijah and let Elijah go to Beit El by himself. He phrases it thus: חי-י-ה-ו-ה, וחי נפשך אם אעזבך, “as the Lord lives and as you live I will not depart from you.” The expression חי ה' refers to the “king” Himself and constitutes an oath. The expression  חי נפשך refers to the “life of the king” and constitutes a נדר, a vow. It is an accepted fact that a person swearing an oath and vowing a vow simultaneously does not mention the more severe aspect of his undertaking before he mentions the aspect which is relatively easier, simpler to fulfill. This is why Elisha first mentioned חי ה', meaning that he considered this as a less demanding undertaking. Subsequently he also vowed a vow when he said: “by your life.” He considered this as the more demanding undertaking. 
    Having appreciated the above we can understand why inadvertent violation of an oath can be atoned for by a sin-offering, whereas inadvertent violation of a vow may not be atoned for by a sin-offering. This will also help you understand that the essence of the “soul” called נפש is in the lower seven emanations, whereas the essence of the soul called נשמה is within the realm of the three highest emanations. When the Torah writes in Genesis 2,7 ויפח באפיו נשמת חיים, “He blew into his nostrils the soul of life,”  this is evidence that seeing G’d blew into man’s nostrils, he received something directly from G’d’s spirit. The meaning of that verse is that some of the nobility of “G’d’s life” was infused into man. He imparted to man part of His own essence so that seeing this part emanated in the emanation בינה which is the source of the concept תשובה, return or repentance, we can understand what Solomon had in mind when he spoke about man’s רוח, “spirit” “returning to G’d who had provided it when his body dies” (Kohelet 12,7). The reason Solomon mentions the attribute האלו-הים in that verse is that  the Torah commences with the words בראשית ברא אלו-הים, “at the beginning He created Elohim” i.e. the concept of Teshuvah, (without which the universe could not have endured).  
    You should realise that from that emanation בינה the souls of the Israelites are channeled to them via the emanation תפארת, (the next lower one). They travel via what we have repeatedly referred to as theקו האמצעי,  the “central” line, route. This line is symbolic of the “east of the world” when Israel perform the will of G’d. We have a verse confirming this idea in Isaiah 43,5 where the prophet says: “I will bring your folk from the East.” If Israel are wicked, then the souls arrive from a westerly direction, i.e. from seed which already existed on earth in the form of previous life (transmigration of souls) as explained in Sefer Habahir (compare what author wrote on Genesis 2,8). [Transmigration of souls is based on a sinful person being given a chance in another body to achieve the moral and ethical objectives he failed to achieve in his first round of life on earth. The person on earth who is here as a re-incarnation therefore “inherits” an impure soul, the one described here as coming from the West instead of from the East. Souls coming from the East originate in G’d’s reservoir of “unused” souls in heaven, souls which had not had a chance to become tainted. Ed.]. The author dealt with this concept in his commentary on Genesis 2,8. This entire concept is one which is applicable only to the Jewish people seeing that all the souls of the other nations originate in the “left” side of the table of emanations. This “left” side is the attribute גבורה also known as האש הגדולה, “the great fire.”
    This is the reason behind the halachic rule that if a Gentile slaughters an animal (which is fit for consumption by a Jew as it corresponds to the requirements, such as having cleft hooves and chewing the cud), such slaughter converts said animal into an animal equivalent to one that died by natural causes or disease, an animal whose carcass confers ritual impurity on the person touching or carrying it. All of this is due to their failure (the Gentile nations) to accept the Torah which has been described by Moses (Deut. 33,2)  as מימינו אש דת למו, “On G’d’s right- law became like fire for them.” The Gentiles will be judged by the fires of Gehinom. This is the advantage of Jewish souls over those of the Gentiles. This is also what Ezekiel 23,37 referred to when he said: וגם את בניהן אשר ילדו לי, “and also their sons whom they bore for Me.” The prophet explains in that paragraph that all Israelites when born are born “to Me,” i.e. to G’d, as their souls emanated in the “right” regions.” If anyone of the Gentiles converts to Judaism his soul will be spared from having to undergo the fires of Gehinom, purgatory, seeing he has entered the קו האמצעי, “the middle line,”  from which he may return to his roots on the right side of the emanations.
    Let us return now to the subject matter under discussion, i.e. oaths and vows. Anyone who swore an oath and keeps it, honours it,  will receive his reward in the regions governed by the seven lower emanations as by keeping his oath he has as good as testified that he believes what these seven emanations resp. seven קולות, symbolise. Such a person has demonstrated a longing for G’d’s closeness to man as represented by these emanations. The reverse is the case with people who violate their oaths. Instead of being rewarded by what these seven emanations represent they will be punished by seven different degrees of fire in purgatory. Our sages in the Midrash (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2,18) have alluded to this mystical dimension when they interpreted Song of Songs 2,7 השבעתי אתכם בנות ירושלים בצבאות, “O daughters who are destined to ascend to Jerusalem I have adjured you by gazelles or hinds, etc.” Solomon means that if you will heed the warning you will ultimately wind up as illustrious as the Hosts of G’d in heaven; if you fail to heed the warning you will be like the army on earth. Thus far the Midrash. The meaning of that Midrash is that the word השבעתי is to be understood as “I give you a choice” to become attached to the seven emanations or seven kinds of fire in purgatory. The choice is up to you. Either way you will wind up as part of an army, i.e. צבאות. If you will merit it you will enjoy the seven heavens (Chagigah 12), become part of the army described as attached to the צרור החיים, “the bundle of eternal life” promised by Avigail to King David (Samuel I 25,29). If not, you will join the army undergoing seven kinds of fire in purgatory. The Lord can save people from having to endure punishment and hide them under His protective wings. May He make our share to be with the righteous who put their faith in Him.
    
    20,8. זכור את יום השבת לקדשו, “remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.” After G’d had commanded us to believe wholeheartedly in His overriding attribute Hashem, and not to exchange Him for any other deity, and He also commanded us to “honour” His name by not using it in vain, He now commanded us to make a visible symbol of His holy name by sanctifying the seventh day, the Sabbath, by proclaiming His holy name on that day. The purpose of it is to proclaim publicly that He has created the universe as something absolutely new, out of nothing. 
    An approach based strictly on the literal meaning of the text: The words זכור את יום השבת “to remember the Sabbath day,” with the word זכור as an infinitive as distinct from an imperative, mean that we should remember this thought that G’d created the world out of previously non-existent materials all Sabbath long. Not only must we not exchange Him for any other force claiming divinity status on the Sabbath, the day we spiritualise more than any other, but we must not act on the weekdays as if there were some other divinity, some other ideal that we devote ourselves to. The best way not to deviate from our basic faith is by not forgetting G’d during the week either.
     When we think of Him constantly, we will also remember the whole process of creation; once we do this we will remember that He supervises His handiwork and rewards those who are loyal to Him and punishes those who are disloyal. 
    When G’d says לקדשו, “to sanctify it,” this means that we should remember to sanctify it. We should realise that our resting on the Sabbath is an expression of the holiness of that day and we should turn away from secular concerns such as preoccupation with our bodies and devote ourselves on that day to matters of concern to G’d, by studying His ways and methods of doing things.
    On that day we are under an obligation to visit prophets or sages and scholars in order to receive instructions in the ways of the Lord. It recalls Kings II 4,23 when the husband of the Shunamite woman asks her: “why are you on the way to the prophet today? It is neither Sabbath nor New Moon?” This question shows that it was customary to visit the prophet on the Sabbath to receive spiritual uplift from him. (compare Rosh Hashanah 16).
    David is on record in Psalms 119,97 where he said כל היום היא שיחתי, “it is my meditation all day long.” We would have expected him to say: “I have meditated every day.” Clearly, David refers to a special day devoted to meditations, i.e. the Sabbath. Isaiah 58,13 calls the Sabbath עונג, “a delight,” meaning it is a delight for the soul. The reason is that intelligent people and G’d-fearing people use that day to derive spiritual delight from it. Man’s soul thirsts for G’d on that day, a thought expressed poetically in Psalms 42,3: “my soul thirsts for the living G’d.” 
    A Midrashic approach based on Shabbat 118. Anyone observing the Sabbath laws meticulously has all his sins forgiven to him. Even if he had indulged in idol worship of the type practiced by the generation of Enosh, this too is forgiven him. This is based on Isaiah 56,2 אשרי אנוש יעשה זאת...שומר שבת מחללו, “hail to the man who does this.....who keeps the Sabbath and does not desecrate it.” A story is told of the Roman governor Turnusrufus (the wicked) who encountered Rabbi Akiva on a Sabbath (compare Tanchuma Ki Tissa 33). He asked Rabbi Akiva sarcastically: “what is so special about this day compared to other days?” Rabbi Akiva replied: “how is one man superior to other men?” (that he arrogates to himself special powers and status) Turnusrufus answered: “The King of Kings evidently wanted to honour me!” Rabbi Akiva replied that the King of Kings also wanted to honour the Sabbath. Turnusrufus replied: “if so why does He Himself perform work on the Sabbath?” Rabbi Akiva: “what work does G’d do on the Sabbath?” Turnusrufus: “just as He performs work on the weekdays, He performs the same activities on the Sabbath!” [he meant that we do not observe a change in nature on the Sabbath. Ed.] Rabbi Akiva: “I know you are familiar with Jewish law and our Torah. You therefore are aware that when two people who live in adjoining houses and share the same courtyard they are allowed to carry in the courtyard if they first established a partnership called Eyruv. This means that each of them abandons his exclusive claim to his property for the benefit of the second party. If, however, a single individual lives in a house surrounded by a very large courtyard without a neighbour sharing it he may carry inside it without the need of an Eyruv. The reason is that he does not thereby infringe on the property rights of anyone else. G’d owns heaven and earth; He has no partners to whom He has to cede part of His exclusive rights. Hence He is free to let the sun rise, make the wind blow, the rain fall etc. without infringing on the Sabbath legislation.
    This is not all. The Jews who wandered in the desert and who were being supplied by G’d with manna testify to the truth of what I have just told you. The manna descended every day of the week but not on the Sabbath. This shows clearly that the Sabbath was a special day. Not only that but the river Sambatyon which is full of flame daring people to cross it, is silent and still on the Sabbath.” Turnusrufus: “as to the manna, this happened a long time ago and we cannot bring proof from there that the Sabbath is special nowadays. As to the Sambatyon river, I simply do not believe you. Who has seen the river or how it works?” Rabbi Akiva: “go to necromancers and you will find that they practice their art in consulting the dead or making them appear every day of the week. On the Sabbath they are unable to perform their tricks. Go to the grave of your own father and you will observe smoke rising from it every day except on the Sabbath. This should teach you that even the dead are aware when it is Sabbath and that the day is special. You expect the living to ignore a day which even the dead are aware of?” Turnusrufus: “maybe my father’s judgment has been completed so that is the reason no more smoke rises from his grave.” Rabbi Akiva: “Tomorrow you will have proof.” On the following day Turnusrufus again observed smoke rising from his father’s grave. He went to a necromancer and ordered his father to appear. When he did, he asked his father: “while you were alive you did not observe the Sabbath; why do you observe it now that you are dead? Since when have you become a Jew?” His father answered him: “listen my son; anyone who does not observe the Sabbath amongst you on earth is forced to observe it against his will in the hereafter.” Thereupon Turnusrufus asked his father: “what are you doing in the hereafter during the weekdays?” He answered him that on every weekday they were being judged (punished). On the Sabbath they were left alone to rest. A heavenly voice is heard in those regions at the onset of the Sabbath instructing their tormentors to let the victim rest on the Sabbath. An angel known as דומה is in charge of administering the punishments during the week. As soon as the Sabbath is over this angel shouts to the wicked to return to purgatory, explaining that the Israelites have already concluded their various Sabbath observances.” Thus far the Midrash.
     Keeping this in mind, the Jews have adopted the custom to recite the paragraphs ויהי נועם, and ואתה קדוש at the conclusion of the Sabbath services very slowly in order to afford the souls being judged in purgatory a little extra time before they have to return to that place. This may also be the reason that it is forbidden for us to drink some water at dusk before the onset of the Sabbath, as according to the Midrash this would be an act of stealing (time) from the souls in purgatory. By decreeing this prohibition the sages wanted to instill in us the belief that the souls of the sinful Israelites enjoy rest on the Sabbath even though they have been consigned to purgatory. When they are released from that place before the onset of the Sabbath they wash and dress in honour of the Sabbath. If the living drink water at that time it is considered as robbing the souls leaving Gehinom for a better place on the Sabbath of some of the water they need to prepare themselves for the Sabbath. The Rabbis have categorised a person drinking water at dusk on Fridays as robbers, and as people lacking in faith.
    This is also the reason that we do not recite the verse והוא רחום at the beginning of the Friday night service, as mention is made of three destructive angels in that verse, אף-חמה-משחית, angels who have been appointed to be in charge of the wicked and their sufferings in purgatory. These angels do not enjoy any authority over their charges on the Sabbath. Furthermore,  the purpose of this custom is in order to instill in our hearts the awareness that even the wicked enjoy rest on the Sabbath plus the fact that these angels do not enjoy authority on the Sabbath. I have found the source of this in a book called Massechet Gan Eden, a book which is similar to פרקי היכלות, פרקי מרכבות and פרקי דרך ארץ. I have found the gist of this in another version: “anyone drinking water on the Sabbath between the Minchah service and the Maariv service during the year he has lost a close relative is in effect robbing the deceased. In that book the reason given for this is that the souls leave purgatory on the Sabbath and drink from the waters of a river emanating in Gan Eden. By the bereaved drinking water during those hours one would diminish the supply available to these souls. Once the year has passed there is no need for all this as the soul’s judgment and possible period of punishment has already been completed.
    A more rational approach to the Sabbath legislation. It is well known that this physical/material world is conducted on the basis of light and darkness. Its anchors are day and night.. The reason for the alternating periods of light and darkness, day and night, is so as not to subject people to unceasing labour but to give them an opportunity to rest and recover their energy through sleep, etc. Rest, i.e. sleep, is an absolute necessity for all living creatures. Even flies are in need of sleep. If light were to prevail on earth constantly the creatures on earth would not be able to endure, i.e. the world would not be able to continue functioning as all its creatures would collapse from lack of rest. The commandment of the Sabbath therefore is also a natural law ensuring the continued functioning of the world and its inhabitants by providing regulated rest periods at regular intervals. By observing the Sabbath laws, man spends one seventh of his life in constructive מנוחה, relaxation. The reason this day occurs on the seventh day of the week  is that it represents a happy medium between the lunar cycle and the solar cycle. [The author describes four “cycles”, i.e. daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly. The Sabbath is middle ground between the daily cycle and the monthly cycle. Elsewhere he described the centrality of the day as being that we count towards it and away from it thus declaring it  in effect as the “middle” of the week, not as the “week-end.” Ed.] Many of the Torah’s laws revolve around this number seven. Although the Sabbath has been handed down as legislation from Heaven and has not been made part of natural law, and most of our beliefs are directly or indirectly connected to it (and therefore not applicable to all of mankind), this does not contradict the fact that it has world-wide significance as natural therapy relieving the tedium of life on earth. [If it had not been legislated, man would have had to invent it. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: The words זכור את יום השבת are a reminder that the Sabbath is the last emanation seeing that it completes the whole cycle of creation. It has been named כנסת ישראל. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 11,8) have illustrated this by saying that the Sabbath is the natural partner of the Jewish people (much as a woman is the natural partner of man). This is the reason we find the Sabbath referred to in much of aggadic literature as Matrona, “a lady of stature.”
    We find the following in Vayikra Rabbah 27,10: “The reason the Torah legislates that no animal may be offered up as a sacrifice until it is at least seven days old (Leviticus 22,27) is because it must first have seen the face of the Matrona. The Midrash means that an animal which has not experienced at least one Sabbath on earth must not be slaughtered as an offering. Even the life of an animal would not have been worth living unless it had experienced at least one Sabbath.
    The Sabbath is also known as ברית, covenant. Just as the circumcision and the rainbow are described by the Torah as ברית, so is the Sabbath. (compare Genesis 9,12--Genesis 17,10--Exodus 31,16) The reason the Torah writes here זכור, “to remember” is a reference to a specific Sabbath, i.e. the Sabbath known as שבת הגדול, the emanation יסוד, from which all the 248 positive commandments emanate. The numerical value of the letters  in the word זכור plus the acrostic formed by the first letters in the words יום השבת total 248. When the Torah writes שמור את יום השבת in the second version of the Ten Commandments in Deut. 5,12,  the word שמור is a reference to the מקדש, Sanctuary, aspect of the Sabbath. This is the emanation כבוד from which the 365 negative commandments are derived. They are the ones that also all women are obligated to fulfill. This is the mystical dimension of the verse את שבתותי תשמורו ומקדשי תיראו, “you shall observe My Sabbath days and My Sanctuary you shall revere” (Leviticus 26,2). [the plural My Sabbaths refers to the שבת הגדול and to the Sabbath called מקדש.] This is why the prophet warns (Jeremiah 17,24) “not to perform any kind of  work on it.” The word בה “on it,” in that verse is read one way and spelled another, i.e. it is both בו and בה, i.e. masculine and feminine. When the Torah writes in verse 10 of our chapter ויום השביעי שבת לה' אלו-היך, “and the seventh day is a Sabbath for the Lord your G’d,” the meaning is that “the Sabbath is on the seventh day because the seventh day is the foundation (יסוד) of the universe the seventh emanation the one wherein the Sabbath (the concept of the Sabbath) is located.” Our sages referred to this as הכל בכל, “for that which comprises everything (כל) is contained within the emanation known as כל, respectively יסוד. The two emanations יסוד and מלכות are inseparably linked to one another. [remember we had explained that the seventh day as such represents the seventh emanation (from תפארת down) i.e. מלכות. If the concept of Sabbath is contained in the emanation יסוד, it follows that the two are linked together. Ed]
    We find verses which confirm this in Exodus 31,15: וביום השביעי שבת שבתון קודש לה', “and on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, the Sabbath of Sabbaths, it is holy to Hashem.” The verse following the above states לעשות את יום השבת ברית עולם, “to make the Sabbath-day into an eternal covenant.” The verse refers to the seventh day which is the foundation of the universe שבת שבתון קודש לה'. At the same time the Sabbath which receives its input from that שבת שבתון is called ברית. Having appreciated all this there is no longer any reason to wonder why the sages called the benediction we recite over the wine on the Sabbath by day קדושא רבא, “the great sanctification,” (Pessachim 106) a description which has not been applied to the Kiddush we recite on the evening after the Sabbath has commenced. The Kiddush recited by day corresponds to the זכור element of the Sabbath whereas the Kiddush we recite at night corresponds to the שמור element of the Sabbath. Day is usually associated with זכור something denoting activity, whereas night is associated with שמור, something denoting passivity.
    Considering all we have said above it is clear why the prophet considers the Sabbath a delight and called it such (Isaiah 58,13) “and you shall call the Sabbath a delight.” It is a delight for the souls. David confirmed this in Psalms 42,3 when he exclaimed צמאה נפשי לאלו-הים א-ל חי, “my soul thirsted after the living G’d.” Every creature thirst (yearns) after its origin, its roots, the place it will eventually return to. The place in question is the river which irrigates Gan Eden, the foundation of the Sabbath and its root. The word ענג, delight, is an acrostic formed by the words עדן, נהר, גן. We base all this on Genesis 2,10 ונהר יוצא מעדן להשקות את הגן  “and a river emerges from Eden to irrigate the garden.” This is why the Sabbath is called ענג, as it is a delight both for the celestial beings as well as for the terrestrial people on earth.
    
    20,9. ששת ימים תעבור ועשית כל מלאכתך “during six days you shall work and perform all your activities.” The meaning of this line is: “during all the six preceding days you will be preoccupied with serving the Lord while you perform your work, just as the patriarchs who served the Lord by the work they performed with herding sheep and cattle and other physical activities. But the seventh day is Sabbath; this day will be devoted to G’d exclusively. You must not perform any labour on it at all.” This is the interpretation of this verse which I have heard attributed to Maimonides..
    
    20,11. כי ששת ימים עשה ה', “for during six days the Lord made, etc.” The plain meaning of the text is the same as if the Torah had written בששת ימים, “during the course of six days, etc.” we find a similar construction in Genesis 14,4 where the words ושלש עשרה שנה מרדו do not mean that “they rebelled for 13 years,” but that “they rebelled during the course of the 13th year,” i.e. בשנה השלוש עשרה.
    A more rational approach to the wording in this verse: G’d “made” these six days, i.e. they were part of His creative activity. Basically, the verse teaches that the concept of “time” was created during these days. Had the Torah written the words בששת ימים this would have taught that “time” preceded creation of the universe.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words כי ששת ימים are a reference to the period of time the universe will continue to function according to the rules established for it by G’d. During this period there will be interaction and reciprocal input by celestial forces on earth and man’s conduct will have its impact on the celestial regions. (compare more about this on Numbers 10,35)
    
    20,12. כבד את אביך ואת אמך, “honour your father and your mother.” Up until now G’d had instructed the people to honour the original father in heaven, i.e. Himself; now He wanted to sign this side of the Tablets with the command to honour progenitors in the lower world, here on earth. In effect, what G’d says here is “just as I commanded you to treat Me with honour and respect, so I command you this day to treat your father and mother who are My partners in creating you with respect and honour. Just as one of the most important aspects of honouring G’d is to acknowledge Him as such, so one of the most important aspects of honouring one’s parents is to acknowledge them as such. 
    Just as an important aspect of belief and faith in the Lord is the second commandment לא יהיה לך, that you must not exchange Him for another deity, so an integral part of the commandment to honour one’s father and mother is not to deny the fact that they are in fact your father and mother. Just as it is forbidden to swear a false or vain oath in the name of the Lord, so it is forbidden to use the reference to the life of one’s father or mother as a way of reinforcing one’s credibility when swearing a false or vain oath. Furthermore, it is forbidden to serve one’s father because one expects to inherit his wealth or even because one hopes to receive the honour and title one’s father enjoyed during his own life time.
    There are numerous details pertaining to the observance of this commandment which our sages have taught us in this regard. To mention but a few: the son is obligated to provide for his father with food, drink, clothing, etc., both as a financial contribution as well as being a physical support for him in case of illness, frailty in his father’s old age, etc. (Kiddushin 31). In Proverbs 3,8 Solomon instructs us כבד את ה' מהונך, “demonstrate your honouring the Lord by using your wealth.” The way one honours the Lord with one’s wealth [seeing He has neither need of it nor use for it, Ed.] is to distribute some of one’s wealth to the poor. One must set aside the various tithes the Torah has instructed us to give to the priest, the Levite, or the poor. Seeing the Torah has set aside tithes and gifts for these people who are not your next of kin, one must certainly provide for one’ parents if the need arises.
    As to the reward promised here that he who observes this commandment will enjoy long life in the land of Israel, Rav Saadyah Gaon has explained that seeing that on occasion father and son share many years together on this earth, i.e. the father enjoys in inordinately long life, and as a result the son may feel that the obligation to look after his father in addition to his obligation to look after his own wife and children has become very burdensome, this is the reason why the Torah went out of its way in this instance to promise long life to the son who observes this commandment meticulously. This is not as much a promise of reward as it is a warning not to neglect fulfillment of this commandment as failing to observe it is equivalent to playing with one’s own life. If you are interested in long life yourself, make sure that your father and mother’s lives are enjoyable.
    
    This concludes the first five of the Ten Commandments. They all appear on the same tablet, and, as we have demonstrated, there is conceptual linkage between all of them. To sum this up once more: the first commandment is to believe in the Lord, His existence, His exclusivity. In order that one should not think that it suffices to believe in the Lord and at the same time to believe that He has partners, the second commandment spells out that belief in any partner of G’d is intolerable. In order that someone should not say that seeing that G’d has no partner it does not matter if we bandy His name about needlessly, the Torah had to go on record that this is the very reverse of honouring Him, that  one must on no account treat His name as if it were something common or ordinary. Having begun to tell us what is an act of dishonouring G’d, i.e. using His name in vain, the Torah then instructed us in an example of how to honour His name, i.e. observing His Sabbath. If we really want to show that we honour Him and His name we will be meticulous in our Sabbath observance. Having instructed us in how to honour Him by honouring the Sabbath, the Torah then proceeded to instruct us to honour those who have begotten us, i.e. our parents. This concludes my commentary on the first five of the Ten Commandments and how they are related to each other.
    
    20,13. לא תרצח, “do not murder!” The five commandments on the second Tablet are all negative commandments, and I will explain to you the reason for the order they appear in and how they relate to one another. Seeing that the commandment not to worship idols was expressed as a negative commandment, G’d continues here with a list of negative commandments commencing with the commandment not to murder. This commandment and the one following it, i.e. not to commit adultery, share the death penalty for deliberate violation, but seeing the kind of death penalty applicable to these three commandments is not identical the Torah lists the sins according to the severity of the death penalty applicable in descending order. Idolatry is punishable by stoning, (the most severe kind of death penalty); murder is punishable with death by the sword, decapitation, whereas adultery is punishable by death through strangulation. Our sages always mention the following three sins in one breath, i.e. idolatry, sexual licentiousness, incest and murder. [In order to avoid committing any of these in a context of religious coercion and in public, one must choose death rather than violate either of them. Ed.]
    The seventh commandment i.e. “not to steal,” speaks of stealing people, kidnapping, not inert objects or animals (Mechilta bachodesh section 8). This kind of theft too is punishable by death through strangulation (compare 21,17). The last three commandments which all deal with different forms of theft, robbery, i.e. greed, are listed in descending order of their severity. 
    
    20,13. לא תענה ברעך עד שקר, “do not bear false witness against your fellow.”  Please note that the Torah does not write “against your brother,” as it does when forbidding charging interest, (Deut. 23,20) or when it commands you to return found property (Deut. 22,3), or in similar legislation. In all those instances our sages explain the word אחיך as excluding non-Jews. In other words, while it is forbidden to charge (or pay) interest to a Jew, it is not forbidden to charge interest to a Gentile. While one must go out of one’s way to restore lost property owned by a Jew, there is no legal obligation to spend time, energy, and even money to restore lost property to a Gentile. Here the reason the Torah fails to limit the legislation to אחיך, “your brother.” It is clear that one must not bear false testimony against a Gentile, i.e. against Egyptians. Moreover, we find in Exodus 11,20 וישאלו איש מאת רעהו, “they asked each person from his fellow;” it is clear that the word רעהו refers to the Egyptians as the verse would not make any sense otherwise. Not bearing false testimony therefore is a commandment of universal application.
    Furthermore, if the Torah had written the word אחיך in our verse we might have concluded that it is in order to testify against (or on behalf of) other relatives, whereas generally speaking a whole list of relatives are unfit to testify together (as a team), on behalf of each other or against each other. Not only is false testimony illegal in such instances but even true testimony is unacceptable.  Were this not so the Torah should have written לא תענה ברעך עדות שקר, “do not lie in your testimony against your fellow.” Such wording would have been very misleading as it would have meant that only the actual false testimony is prohibited but that someone who is in collusion with people arranging false testimony would be exonerated by the legal process. The Torah therefore uses ambiguous wording to cover as much ground as possible, i.e. in order to include as many people as possible in the parameters of guilt governing the subject of false testimony. The very word תענה means to “assist,” or “invite.” 
    
    20,14. לא תחמוד, “do not covet.” It is known that coveting something is a matter for the heart. The principal warning contained in this commandment is that one must train oneself to absolutely renounce all hope of ever acquiring things belonging (legally) to another person, be it real estate, livestock, inert objects, etc. One must not even think of these and wish for them in one’s heart. Were one to covet them one would ultimately commit murder in order to own them oneself. A classic case in point was Achan. When he confessed to having taken from the loot of the city of Jericho, this is how he worded his confession (Joshua 7,21): “I saw among the spoils a fine Shinar mantle, two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold weighing fifty shekels, and I coveted them and took them. They are buried in the ground in my tent, with the silver under it.” This act of coveting resulted in Achan being stoned to death.(ibid verse 29). Another example of the extremes to which allowing oneself to covet someone else’s property may lead was King Achav (Kings I 21, 1-24). His uncontrollable desire to own the vineyard of Navot ultimately resulted in his being slain in battle. Concerning this the Talmud Sotah 9 comments that “if someone covets something that is not appropriate for him to have, he will wind up losing even what was appropriate for him to own.” He becomes cursed. This is what happened to the serpent who seduced Chavah. It wanted to replace Adam as Chavah’s husband and instead it wound up having to crawl on its belly and to eat dust. Thus far the Midrash.
    Had it not been for the fact that robbery is an integral aspect of coveting and on account of this it deserved to be included in the Ten Commandments, the outright prohibition of robbery would have had to be included in the Ten Commandments, seeing that robbery is such a  wide-spread a sin and so severe an infraction of G’d’s laws.
    Furthermore, robbery  is a sophisticated sin similar to murder, adultery, theft, and false testimony. However, seeing that coveting conceptually includes robbery as a person does not commit robbery until he has first coveted the object he robs, it was not  included specifically in the Decalogue. The proof for the close linkage between coveting and committing robbery is found in Micah 2,2 where the prophet places the two sins side by side when he writes: “they covet fields and seize them, houses and take them away.” A further reason why the Torah preferred to include the prohibition of coveting in the Ten Commandments over the alternative of including “do not commit robbery,” is that the prohibition to covet is more all embracing and the Torah wanted to make plain that it views a person eyeing other people’s property with an eye to acquiring it as being guilty of such a severe sin that it was included in the Ten Commandments and inscribed by G’d Himself on the stone tablets. The Torah wanted man to use a little logic and to realise that if G’d took such a dim view of someone who only eyes other people’s property as something he wants for himself, how much more so would G’d react to someone who actually made a move to commit robbery to possess the property in question!
    Still, there are occasions when coveting is a character trait which is permitted. Coveting the opportunity to perform certain commandments of the Torah is not only permissible but is praiseworthy. This is what our sages had in mind (Baba Batra 21) when they said קנאת סופרים תרבה חכמה, “the envy displayed by scholars of the knowledge of other scholars who are their superiors leads to an all-round increase in wisdom.” This kind of jealousy and coveting such knowledge possessed by another is not only permissible but is rewarded by G’d. Included in this type of permissible desire is the desire for one’s friend’s (unmarried) daughter to be married to one’s son. When the Torah  writes first: “do not covet the house of your fellow,” this is a general prohibition; when it continues with detailing: “his wife, his field, his house, his servant or maidservant,” these are details. Just as these details are matters which cannot possibly become yours unless their present owner so agrees, so the same rule applies to what is described in the כלל, i.e. in the introduction to this legislation, coveting a house. This, however, excludes one’s fellow’s daughter (if she has reached the age of puberty, 12 and a half years of age) to become the wife of your son or vice versa as neither requires the permission of a second party to become married to the other party seeing they are not presently “owned” by anyone. This concludes my commentary on the last five of the Ten Commandments. I have demonstrated that they are all conceptually linked to one another commencing with the warning not to murder. 
    One must not decrease the world’s population even if one thinks the world is overpopulated. Having understood this a person might say to himself that it must be G’d’s will to increase the human population on earth even at the cost of engaging in illicit sexual relations, [even if well meant, such as impregnating a married woman with her sterile husband’s consent in order for them to have a child. Ed.] The Torah therefore warns you that any form of adulterous relationship is taboo; so much so that the penalty is death. 
    A person may then reason that if increasing the world’s population by adulterous means is forbidden, he might at least effect a population exchange by acquiring an existing human being (through stealing it). All he would be doing is to transplant that human being from one city or country to another. He would then sell such a person in a different location. He would reason that at worst he had committed a minor offense involving financial damage to the first owner. The Torah therefore included this sin in the Ten Commandments to make clear that it views such conduct as a capital offense, not merely a commercial misdemeanour. Having appreciated the seriousness of the sin of kidnapping, one might still think that an offense such as uttering false testimony is minor, seeing that it involves only  words, not deeds. To prevent us from thinking along these lines the Torah had to include the legislation that one must not be involved in false testimony as part of the Ten Commandments. Finally, even if one had understood that causing damage to a second party by deceitful use of one’s mouth, one’s words, is serious indeed, one might think that harbouring only evil thoughts such as contemplating property belonging to someone else would certainly not be considered criminal, so the Torah disabuses us of such thoughts by legislating the law of לא תחמוד as so important that it is included in the Ten Commandments.
    The reason why there are precisely Ten Commandments which were deemed fit to be engraved on these Tablets: according to the plain meaning the number 10 is a number which symbolises a closed circle, i.e. something complete. There is not a single number which does not somehow derive from the י the number represented by the number 10. [even when we count beyond the number 10 we have to begin again with the number 1, etc. i.e. we repeat ourselves to some extent.]
    A Midrashic approach: the reason that Ten Commandments were inscribed on the Tablets was that prior to the revelation mankind had known seven basic G’d-given laws which were the guidelines for man’s conduct on earth. This original number had already been increased to nine prior to the revelation. At this point G’d wanted to enable the people of Israel to earn credit for performing additional commandments; this is why He decided to reveal all the commandments starting now (Makkot 23). The matter is explained in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,4 by means of a parable: 
    A king had a large cellar wherein he stored many barrels of good wine. One of the king’s friends came to visit and the king presented him with a barrel of wine. A second friend came to visit the king, and and the king presented him also with a barrel of wine. A third friend came to visit and the king presented him with yet another barrel of wine. Eventually, the king’s son came to visit and the king was so overjoyed that he gave him the entire stock of wine in the cellar. The parable mirrors the sequence in which G’d handed out His commandments to man. When Adam had been created he had been given six commandments. They were designed to ensure the ability of the universe to endure, i.e. each commandment symbolised one of the six points of the globe known in aggadic terms as קצוות העולם (the extreme ends of the world). Fulfillment of each commandment would prevent those ends of the universe from disintegrating [due to their distance from the centre. Ed.]. With the appearance of Noach on earth and his having survived the deluge due to meticulous observance of these six commandments, G’d rewarded  him with a seventh commandment, not to consume tissue of a living animal. Avraham, who led the life of a model human being, was rewarded with an eighth commandment, that of circumcision. Yaakov, another “friend of the king,” was rewarded with a ninth commandment, that of גיד הנשה, not to eat the sinew of the femoral vein. When the Israelites arrived at Mount Sinai in their multitudes, G’d decided to reward them with the Ten Commandments which contained within them the gist of all the 613 commandments of the Torah. In order to allude to this concept the Torah writes in connection with the offerings of the princes on the occasion of the consecration of the Holy Tabernacle (Numbers 7,14) כף אחת, עשרה זהב, מלאה קטרת, “one (gold) ladle of ten (shekel weight) filled with incense.” In an allegorical sense, the verse speaks of the Ten Commandments which are represented by the golden ladle and which are filled with the balance of the 613 commandments described as “incense.” Actually, the letter ק in the word קטרת is interchangeable with the letter ד, so that the numerical value of the letter in the word קטרת would amount to a total of 613. (compare Bamidbar Rabbah 13,16. It is pointed out there also that the number of letters in the Ten Commandments commencing with the word אנכי, excluding the last two words אשר לרעך total 613. The seven letters in the last two words would represent the seven Noachide laws to which all of mankind was obligated after the deluge. (All of this reinforces the idea that the Ten Commandments are the gist of all the commandments in the Torah.)
    A rational approach: The reason that there are Ten Commandments is that they correspond to ten celestial גלגלים, “planets,” i.e. celestial spheres influencing events on earth. [This number for the major stars in the planetary system  (and what they represent in theological terms) is a departure from the number seven with which astrologers and astronomers of the middle ages used to operate. The idea of nine such planets is mentioned in Ibn Ezra’s commentary on his verse, attributed to an unnamed scholar. Expanding the number to nine involves assuming the existence of a “super-planet” which is responsible  for the orbits of the other planets. Ed] Our author has his own method of explaining the number.
    The first commandment, אנכי, corresponds to the גלגל השכל, the sphere of intelligence, the highest sphere beneath the throne of G’d’s glory [described in the essay called כתר מלכות by Rabbi Sholomoh Ibn Gabirol printed in the Yom Kippur Machzor of Heidenheim (and recited privately in many German synagogues at the conclusion of the Kol Nidrey service still in my youth. Ed.] This celestial sphere is especially effective in alerting our thinking to thoughts of the Unity of G’d, His exclusivity as the only deity, etc.
    The commandment לא יהיה לך, corresponds to the celestial sphere called גלגל המקיף by Ibn Gabirol. This commandment refers to אלהים אחרים, other deities. G’d had to take a stand against such erroneous thinking caused by people believing that though He is the Creator, seeing He is not physical, there were yet other divine forces which had a body.
    The third commandment, לא תשא, corresponds to the planet sun; the גלגל חמה, the fourth, זכור, to the planet moon, גלגל לבנה. The fifth commandment, כבד corresponds to the celestial sphere Jupiter צדק גלגל. The sixth commandment, לא תרצח, corresponds to the גלגל מאדים, the planet Mars. The seventh commandment לא תנאף  corresponds to the גלגל שבתאי, the celestial sphere of Saturn, whereas the eighth commandment לא תגנוב, corresponds to the גלגל נוגה, the celestial sphere of Venus. The ninth commandment לא תענה corresponds to the celestial sphere  regulating the signs of the zodiac, the various constellations, whereas the tenth commandment לא תחמוד corresponds to the celestial sphere כוכב, Mercury.
    There is great התעוררות, excitement, awakening of spiritual forces, connected with each of these commandments and how they interact with these celestial spheres. If you will study the subject in depth you will find that the wonders of G’d and the wisdom expressed by His creations becomes very manifest.
    There is another reason for the number of these commandments  being 10. Man possesses 10 basic organs which constitute the essence of his body without which he cannot function as a proper human being. We have mentioned repeatedly that the composition of man of 248 limbs and 365 sinews closely parallels the structure of the Torah which consists of 248 positive and 365 negative commandments. Just as the Torah considers the Ten Commandments as the irreducible minimum of man’s obligations vis-a-vis His Creator, so the ten organs which we mentioned as essential to man will be found to correspond to the messages addressed to man in the Ten Commandments. The ten organs in question are: 1) the heart, 2) the ear, 3) the mouth, 4) the brain, 5) the hands, 6) the liver, 7) the male organ, 8) the legs, 9) the eyes, 10) the kidneys. According to Rabbi Chavell, the heart corresponds to the first commandment seeing it has to be fulfilled by the heart. The ear corresponds to the second commandment as the ear must not listen to a false prophet inviting obeisance to another deity. The mouth corresponds to the third commandment not to utter false oaths. The brain corresponds to the fourth commandment as appreciation of the meaning of the Sabbath requires a brain. The hands correspond to the fifth commandment to honour parents by performing services for them with one’s hands. The liver corresponds to the sixth commandment seeing it is all blood and murder deals with blood. The male organ corresponds to the seventh commandment as one cannot engage in adultery without that organ. The legs correspond to the eighth commandment as in order to steal one employs one’s legs. The eyes correspond to the ninth commandment as testimony is based on what has been seen. The kidneys correspond to the tenth commandment seeing they are the seat of עצה, they advise how to translate the wish into reality, how to acquire what one has coveted.
    A kabbalistic approach. The Ten Commandments correspond to the ten emanations. You will find in them 613 letters corresponding to the 613 commandments which emanate from the Ten Commandments. The extra seven letters (which we discussed already) are an allusion to the seven קולות Moses heard, i.e. that he acquired an understanding of the meaning of the seven lower emanations while he experienced the revelation at Mount Sinai. When you add these seven letters to the other 613 letters the total numerical value will be 620, the numerical value of the tenth and highest emanation כתר. The seven emanations which Moses had learned to understand were all derived from that highest emanation כתר. 
    I will use this opportunity to acquaint you with some aspects of the emanations by explaining how each one relates or is relevant to one of the Ten Commandments. The first commandment, אנכי, corresponds to the emanation כתר, the highest emanation. The second commandment לא יהיה לך corresponds to the emanation חכמה. The third commandment לא תשא corresponds to the emanation תפארת; the fourth commandment, זכור corresponds to the emanation עטרה, i.e. כנסת ישראל. The fifth commandment כבד corresponds to the emanation חסד, whereas the sixth commandment לא תרצח, corresponds to the emanation פחד. The seventh commandment לא תנאף corresponds to the emanation יסוד. The eighth commandment לא תגנוב corresponds to the emanation נצח, whereas the ninth commandment לא תענה corresponds to the emanation תשובה. The tenth commandment לא תחמוד, corresponds to the emanation הוד. 
    You will have to consider this very carefully. Although the Commandments are not listed in their usual order, i.e. parallel to the sequence of the ten emanations, you will realise the reason why the commandment אנכי had to be the first one. This is because seeing that G’d is first and we have to believe in that fact, the second commandment, which ensures that we do not dilute our belief in the supremacy of G’d as the first and only מציאות at that time, had to be commandment number two although the angels were created before man and it might seem odd to command man who did not exist yet how not to relate to G’d. This might seem especially peculiar when we consider  that it was commanded in a framework  when seeing there had not been any angels or other agents of G’d, man could not have become guilty of idolatry even if he had tried.
    The angels represent second rank in the order of creation, immediately below G’d Himself. This is why they were created on the second day (see author’s comment on Genesis 1,21 under “a kabbalistic approach,” my translation page 47). This is the reason why the angels are called שנאנים based on Psalms 68,18 אלפי שנאן (from the word שני “second”). The third commandment לא תשא is the third as anyone who uses G’d’s name in vain destroys the world which is built on three pillars, i.e. Torah, service of the Lord, and the performance of deeds of loving kindness for fellow human beings. (Avot 1,2). The penalty for contravening that commandment also is threefold: Such a person destroys “his bones, his timber, and his stones.” Compare Zecharyah 5,4 who describes what G’d will do to people who swear false oaths as: “it (the curse) shall lodge in the inside of their houses and shall consume them to  the last timber and stone.” The Torah repeats the sin, concluding the commandment with the words: “who will use His name in vain,” to emphasise how severely G’d views violation of this commandment. Treating G’d’s honour as of little consequence is equivalent to shaking off the whole range of the commandments as an intolerable burden. The prophet Maleachi 1,6 phrased it thus: “If I am a father, where is the honour due Me? If I am a master, where is the reverence due Me?” The reason the commandment זכור was chosen to be the fourth commandment  is because the Sabbath is the fourth day following the fourth day, the day on which sun, moon, and all the celestial phenomena were placed in their respective orbits. The sun is the fourth of the seven (or nine) such celestial orbits revolving around the earth. [The author as well as the Kabbalists whose views he mentions lived long before Copernicus, Ed.] The moon is in a fourth orbit relative to the sun, based on the sequence שצ'ם חנכ'ל, the seven  “fixed stars” which we have mentioned on repeated occasions. The luminaries are considered מרובעים, “divided into four,” seeing the day is divided into four parts. You will also note that שבתאי, Saturn, the planet corresponding to the Sabbath is the fourth from (inside) the orbit of the גלגל השכל, the sphere of intelligence. Immediately above (outside) that sphere is the eighth sphere that of the כוכבים, the stars. Beyond that sphere is the ninth sphere, the one called ערבות, beyond which is the גלגל השכל the sphere of intelligence.
    Everything connected with the Sabbath is divided into “four.” There are four separate prayers on the Sabbath none of which is a repetition of any other. The prophet (Isaiah 58,13) when describing the outstanding features of the Sabbath and how we are to behave on it, makes his points in sentences of four words each, such as 1) אם תשיב משבת רגליך, “if you refrain from trampling the Sabbath; 2)  עשות חפציך ביום קדשי, “from pursuing your affairs on My holy day.” The fifth commandment כבד is the fifth in number as there are five contributing components which result in offspring being born, in parents becoming parents. They are father, mother, fundamentals of nature, i.e. יסודות, time, and G’d. The father contributes the sinews, the bones and everything in the human being that is coloured white; the mother contributes all the red-coloured parts, such as the blood, the flesh, the hair and the black in the pupil of the eyes. (compare Niddah 31) This black-looking colour is in reality a form of red, it has been impaired (Niddah 19). The יסודות are the four basic raw materials our physical universe is composed of. These four basic components function in various combinations, i.e. they are to a human body what a mixture of metals is in an alloy. Time is a factor as a baby’s development inside the womb is determined by the passage of a certain amount of time. Development of the embryo is not complete unless a certain amount of time has elapsed. G’d contributes the soul which is the principal contribution to man’s intelligence. Without G’d’s contribution man would not amount to anything worthwile although there had been input from 4 other sources. You will find that there are 5 different categories of living creatures in nature: man, mammals, birds, fish, and creeping creatures. When formulating the fifth commandment, the Torah referred to life on האדמה, “on the earth,” i.e. the part of nature yielding some sort of harvest. This part of the earth is divided into 5 categories, i.e. fields yielding a grain harvest; vineyards; vegetable gardens, orchards, forests growing trees for making furniture, heating, etc. There are also five basic kinds of metals that the earth yields for man: gold, silver, copper, iron and lead.
    The sixth commandment לא תרצח, was placed in sixth position as 6 different character traits may be responsible for a human being murdering another human being. They are: jealousy, greed, hatred, anger, irresponsibility, and drunkenness. The first murder was committed against a human being who had been created on the sixth day (of the week and of creation).
    The seventh commandment, לא תנאף, is appropriately number seven as there are seven forbidden sexual relationships. 1) sleeping with a woman married to someone else; 2) sleeping with any woman including one’s own when she is in a state of menstruation. 3)  A High Priest must not marry a widow. 4) An ordinary priest must not marry a divorcee. 5) sexual relations with animals. 6) homosexual relations. 7) sexual relations with non-Jews. There are seven prohibitions (6 are Rabbinic) that might lead to such forbidden sexual relations. 1) visual, i.e. a situation which may cause arousal because one has viewed what is forbidden. 2) Aural arousal, i.e. listening to the seductive voice of a woman with whom relations are forbidden. 3) secreting oneself with such a woman; 4) conversation with her. 5) touching her; 6) kissing; 7) the actual deed.
    The eight commandment לא תגנב, is in eighth place as there are eight varieties of violating this commandment. 1) wrong numbering; 2) wrong measuring; 3) wrong weights; 4) withholding found property. 5) kidnapping a Jew or Jewess. 6) stealing money. 7) גנבת דעת, deliberately misleading, i.e. “stealing somebody’s mind.” 8) “stealing for oneself,” i.e. embezzling funds entrusted to one by using them for one’s own needs in a legally permissible way such as if one is a trustee of funds of an orphan using these funds or part of them to pay for a wedding or even to become the dowry of the trustee’s son marrying such a female orphan. Concerning this way of taking advantage of one’s position as a trustee the Torah wrote (Leviticus 19,13) “You shall not defraud your fellow; You shall not commit robbery.”
    The ninth commandment, לא תענה, was placed ninth because it is well known that the ninth (highest) celestial sphere ערבות contains the throne of G’d’s glory where He stored the souls prior to assigning them to bodies; deserving souls return to that region after death. Anyone who testifies falsely denies the existence and significance of that region and as a result his soul will never return to its sacred origin. Finally, the tenth commandment לא תחמוד was placed in tenth position as anyone who covets other people’s possessions and money will not be likely not give up a tenth  of the money he already has; he will not set aside his tithes, etc. By placing this commandment in tenth position, the Torah found an elegant way of warning people that the positive commandment of paying one’s tithes is conceptually linked to the negative commandment not to covet. This commandment concludes the list of the Ten Commandments which correspond to the ten celestial spheres The fact that they have not been listed in the order corresponding to the sequence of the ten emanations is testimony to the deep wisdom of our sages who have said that the Torah is under no obligation to write matters in a chronological sequence of events These sages have displayed deep insight into how all of the 613 commandments are represented in the Ten Commandments and the 613 letters that the list comprises. They have even revealed to us the reason for the absence of the letter ט in this version, i.e. the absence of the words למען ייטב לך, a promise written in the second set of Tablets in the Book of Deuteronomy. Kabbalists suggest that the reason may have been that G’d knew that this set of Tablets was going to be smashed  and He did not want the letter ט which symbolises טוב to be smashed (compare Baba Kama 55). 
    Personally, I can think of another reason why the letter ט is absent in the Decalogue (first version). The letter used to represent an allusion to killing or the death penalty in olden days. When the Jews died (80% of them during the ninth plague) which was itself a forerunner to the tenth plague, the wholesale dying of the first born, the letter ט, meaning “killing” was far more closely associated with death than with טוב, and the Torah wanted to avoid  such allusions. at this time. [When the Israelites were given the second set of Tablets they were not standing at the mountain in mortal fear of expiring from the impact of G’d’s voice. Ed.] 
    The eating of leavened bread on Passover may have been prohibited because we left Egypt walking from deep spiritual darkness into great spiritual light, i.e. an Exodus orchestrated by the great name of Hashem, not just the “strong hand” which was involved in killing the Egyptian firstborn. At Mount Sinai the great name of Hashem was again in evidence and gave us the Torah. The sages of the Midrash had this in mind when they suggested that the letter ט is a veiled hint of the attribute of Justice. Seeing that the text of the second Tablets has the word שמור instead of  the word זכור as the operative word describing Sabbath observance,  there has already been a reference to the attribute of Justice, i.e. the negative aspect of the Sabbath observance. It is therefore not surprising that the Torah saw no need to omit the letter ט in that version when writing למען ייטב לך as part of the reward for observing the commandment to honour father and mother. The Ten Commandments may be viewed as completing the circle with the tenth commandment, i.e. just as the first commandment addresses itself primarily to our heart, so the tenth commandment again addresses itself to our heart. The author concludes by citing Avraham (reportedly) the author of the most ancient kabbalistic text, the ספר היצירה which concludes by acknowledging the insights into the emanations granted Avraham by G’d and how he learned to understand by means of the covenant of circumcision the deeper significance of the seven celestial spheres and the 12 signs of the zodiac. Understanding the ten emanations and how they were the prelude to G’d commencing the creation of a physical universe has been paraphrased by Daniel 12,3: “and the wise will shine like the radiance of the firmament and those who make the many righteous (Avraham’s missionary activities on behalf of monotheism) like the stars forever and ever.” Just as the flame is connected to the glowing coal from which it has risen, (i.e. the tangible produced the intangible) this is true in reverse for our world of the apparently tangible, physical, substantive having had its origin in the utterly intangible. [I have paraphrased the words of the author according to my understanding of them. Ed.]
    
    20,15. וכל העם רואים את הקולות, “And all the people saw the sounds (thunder), etc.” The word “saw” in this context is to be understood as “understood, comprehended,” similar to when Yitzchak spoke of ראה ריח בני “look at the fragrance of my son” (Genesis 27,27). He was well aware that fragrance just as sound cannot be seen by the eye. He meant that just as the eye is used to understand something clearly, so he experienced a clear understanding of what his son’s fragrance represented. Similarly, here; the Torah describes that the aural perceptions of the people were as convincing to them as if they had experienced the same thing with their eyes, a normally superior tool for clear perceptions. An alternative meaning could be that the Torah employed the word “saw” because these thunders were invariably accompanied by fire, something very visible to the eye. We have examples of such expressions  and meanings in Psalms 29,7: “the voice of the Lord kindles flames of fire.” The people then saw the fire not the thunder. The words of the text may then be understood literally without the Torah telling us of an additional miracle.
    
    20,17. ובעבור תהיה יראתו על פניכם, “and so that the fear of Him shall remain on your faces, etc.” Mechilta bachodesh section 8 understands this “fear” as a “sense of shame.” The reason is that fear or reverence are parameters of the heart, whereas shame is something one recognises in one’s face. This is the reason the Torah refers to it as being על פניכם, “on your faces.” The Torah adds לבלתי תחטאו “in order that you will not sin,” to teach us the psychological lesson that shame inhibits the commission of sin (Mechilta bachodesh section 9).
    
    20,18. ויעמוד העם מרחוק ומשה נגש, “The people stood from a distance, whereas Moses went close.” Why did the Torah have to write this, seeing it had already written (in verse 15) that “the people saw and trembled and stood from afar?” We may have to understand that verse 15 describes the people as standing even further distant from the area where the mountain had been fenced off. Now the Torah wanted to tell us that although in the meantime the people had been elevated to the level of being prophets, they were still not comparable to the level of Moses who could approach much closer. The word הערפל with which the Torah describes the place which Moses approached always appears as meaning “a thick darkness” as mentioned by all the commentators such as Rashi, Kimchi, Ibn Ezra, etc. Examples are: Psalms 97,2 ענן וערפל סביביו. The meaning of all this is that the attribute כבוד is not visually accessible even to the angels. This is why David writes in Psalms 18,11: “He made darkness His screen, dark thunderheads, dense clouds of the sky were His pavilion round about Him.”
    
    I believe that the meaning of the word ערפל is a very clear and brilliant form of light, the word being a composite of ערוי אפל, i.e. that the darkness was transfused, emptied out of that place. The word describes a light so brilliant that it blinds so that the viewer sees it no better than he sees darkness. It (this brilliant light) hides matters just as effectively as does ordinary darkness. In other words, the attribute of G’d called כבוד is so brilliant that it remains hidden from the eye. [Just as the human ear can hear only up to a certain number of decibels and anything beyond that number, though sound, cannot be heard by the human ear, so we have something parallel here with the intensity of light. Ed.] Proof that the word ערפל describes a form of light is  that the Torah adds אשר שם האלו-הים, “where G’d was.” Daniel 2,22 states that “light is where G’d is,” or (vice-versa). We refer to this fact in the Mussaph prayer on Rosh Hashanah in the paragraph which commences with the words אתה נגלית, “You have become revealed.” The author of that liturgical poem continues with the words ונגלית עליהם בערפלי טוהר, “You revealed Yourself to them in clouds of brilliance.” Moses did not enter the cloud but merely approached it, much like a man approaching the entrance gate of a palace. This is the meaning of the word נגש in our verse. Onkelos translates it as קרב לצד אמיטתא, “he approached the edge of the dense cloud.” In other words, Moses did not cross the boundary of where cloud ended. The Torah adds the words “where G’d was” to explain why Moses did not go any further. At that point the report of the Torah in verse one of our chapter begins, i.e. וידבר אלו-הים את כל הדברים האלה, and all of Israel heard His voice. This was the fulfillment of what G’d had announced previously in 19,,9: “Here I will come to you in the thickness of the cloud in order that the people will hear that I am speaking with you.” The subject matter of these verses here is to make clear that the people had “seen” the voices before the giving of the Torah. This is quite clear from the wording both in chapter 19 and in chapter 24,17 where the people standing at the bottom of the mountain are again described as having seen the glory of G’d in the form of consuming fire at the top of the mountain.
    
    20,19. אתם ראיתם כי מן השמים דברתי עמכם, “you have seen that I spoke with you from the heaven.” Seeing that all the Israelites had witnessed with their own eyes all the miracles G’d had performed beginning with the ten plagues in Egypt and now culminating in the giving of the Torah, G’d repeated both at the beginning (19,4) of the Decalogue and at its end the words: “you have seen.” At this point G’d wanted to clarify that though His attribute כבוד had been at Mount Sinai, the voice they heard had not emanated from Mount Sinai but from heaven, as I have already explained previously.
    
    20,20. לא תעשון אתי, “Do not make with Me.” The plain meaning of this verse is that ‘you must not make as partner with Me any reproduction in gold or silver which is supposed to represent a deity.’ G’d then repeats: “do not make it for yourselves.” This latter statement includes a prohibition to make such reproductions even if not intended as a form of religious symbol [ but merely as a form of art. Ed.]
    One may also interpret the words לא תעשון אתי וגו' to mean that “while you are engaged in prayer to Me, do not think of your gold, your silver, etc.; in other words, when you address Me I expect to have your full attention, do not share Me in your thoughts with anything else at such a time. If you were to do that, I would consider it as equivalent to your having made competing deities.”
    Rashi writes as follows on the words אלוהי כסף: “this is a warning not to construct the cherubs which were to be part of the lid of the Holy Ark in the Tabernacle to be made of silver (instead of gold). If you were to do that I would consider this as a form of idolatry, as if you had constructed them as a divine image.” He goes on: “the words לא תעשון לכם, mean that you must not construct such cherubs in your synagogues reasoning that just as the cherubs graced the Holy Temple they are appropriate symbols in the synagogues and houses of study.” 
    The Talmud Avodah Zarah 42 understands the words לא תעשון אתי to mean that that “you must not make anything which is with Me, i.e. in My universe.” This is a prohibition not to construct likenesses of what one perceives to be celestial beings i.e. different kinds of angels, אתי, “with Me, in My domain,” neither must you make such likenesses of things in the lower domain, such as the sun and the stars. Seeing that the Torah prohibited the making of images of angels which are perceived as humans with wings attached, I would have thought it would be in order to make reproductions of human heads by themselves; this is why the Torah had to add לא תעשון אתי as if it had been spelled לא תעשון אותי “do not make a reproduction of Me as the head of a human being.” The likenesses (three-dimensional, sculpture) of humans as humans or as superhumans is equally prohibited. 
    Sanhedrin 7 adds further that the words also mean that one should not appoint a judge because he is financially independent but because he possesses the wisdom to know truth from falsehood. According to this interpretation the words אלוהי כסף ואלוהי זהב mean that ownership of silver or gold in substantial quantities does not constitute a reason to deify the owner and to elevate him to a high position. Remember that the Torah often employs the term אלוהים when speaking of judges of flesh and blood.
    A Midrashic approach: (Mechilta bachodesh 10) the entire line is a warning not to apply human yardsticks to the way one relates to G’d. Humans revere people who have done them favours, i.e. they only worship and show respect to their deities if these deities treated them in the way they expected or demanded to be treated. If the deity in question did not fulfill their expectations  they do no longer show honour and respect to it. An example are the Philistines who did acknowledge their deity when they had captured Samson and gave credit for their success to their deity (Judges 16,24). When idolaters experienced disaster such as described in Isaiah 8,21: “and when he is hungry, he shall rage and revolt against his king and his divine beings,” he takes out his rage on his gods. The Torah’s message to us here is that we have to thank the Lord  both for the good and for the unpleasant (which we are foolishly assuming is evil). This is what David said in Psalms 116,13: “I raise the cup of deliverance and invoke the name of the Lord.” In the same psalm verses 3-4 he said: “when the torments of She-ol overtook me, I came upon trouble and sorrow; and I invoked the name of the Lord.” David invoked the same G’d, rain or shine, We find similar sentiments expressed by Job 1,21 who exclaimed after suffering painful reverses: “the Lord has given and the Lord has taken; may the name of the Lord be praised.” 
    A kabbalistic approach: I have already explained on 20,2 that the word אתי has a similar meaning to the expression על פני “in addition to Me.” I have to add to what I wrote then that one must imagine the word אתי as derived from את with the vowel tzeyre under the letter aleph. It is similar to ואראה את ה' in Isaiah 6,1: “and I saw the Lord.”  Clearly it does not mean that a prophet of the calibre of Isaiah saw the Lord, when G’d had told Moses that no living human being including himself could see the Lord (Exodus 33,20). Isaiah described that he saw something “with” “beside” the Lord. The wicked King Menasheh (prior to his repentance) erred when he read these words of Isaiah taking them at face value, not paying heed to the meaning of the word את. This is why he accused Isaiah of being a false prophet and executed him. (compare discussion in Yevamot 49). The Talmud explains that the reason Isaiah did not defend himself by explaining what I have explained to you was that he knew that Menashe would not accept his explanation and this would make him into a murderer instead of merely a king exercising his authority. According to the Talmud, Isaiah (after uttering the holy name of G’d) hid in the hollow trunk of a cedar. Menashe sawed off the cedar killing Isaiah in the process. Isaiah had been guilty of slandering the Jewish people when he had described himself as living amongst a nation of impure lips (Isaiah 6,5). This is why he was killed when the saw cut through his mouth. The word את or אות mean the same thing. Example Numbers 16,39 וראיתם אותו, “when you see it,” etc. (the blue thread on the fringes). The word אותו in that verse is a derivative of the word את. This is what enabled the sages in the Mechilta which we quoted to interpret the word אתי as if it had been spelled אותי.
    
    20,21. בכל המקום אשר אזכיר את שמי, “in any location where I allow My name to be mentioned.” The Torah really should have written תזכיר, i.e. “you mention.” After all, it appears that the message is that wherever man prays to G’d, i.e. mentions His holy name, He would respond.
    A kabbalistic approach. The reason the Torah writes אזכיר rather than תזכיר is that the verse provides an opening to help us understand the value of animal sacrifices. These verses (19-23) were spoken by G’d in His capacity as the tetragram. This is also 
why in verse 22 the Torah does not write ואם מזבח אבנים תעשה לו, “and if you will build an altar of stone for Him,” but it writes ואם מזבח אבנים תעשה לי “if you will construct an altar of stone for Me, any altar must be exclusively for Me in My capacity as the tetragram.” Once you offer sacrifices on such an altar I will cause My goodwill to be drawn toward you, and  as a response to these offerings I will bless you.
    The Torah’s message by writing אזכיר instead of תזכיר is that the blessings will already commence now, they will not await your building the altar that is mentioned in verse 22. The fact that the tetragram, the source of all blessings had begun to dispense it at Mount Sinai means that the whole world will benefit by it.
    The word אזכיר is associated with expressions such as אזכרתה, i.e. “a memorial portion,” something designed to channel the ריח ניחוח, the pleasant fragrance (allegorical) in the direction of the Almighty bringing to His attention the pure thoughts of the one offering the sacrifice. Expressions such as מזכיר לבונה, (Isaiah 66,3) “using incense to be remembered through it,” or Jeremiah 17,2 כזכור בניהם מזבחותם, “as their children remember their altars,” or Song of Songs 1,4 נזכירה דודיך מיין, ”let us savor it (your love) more than wine,” all refer to spiritual pleasures. The meaning of אזכיר את שמי then is similar to אריח את שמי, “I will allow My name to exude a pleasant fragrance.” Or, “I will let My goodwill follow to where My name has been mentioned in a positive context.”
    The reason the Torah wrote the letter ה at the beginning of the word מקום, i.e המקום instead of simply כל מקום, is a hint at a site which already existed and was known, i.e. the site of the Holy Temple in the future. It was the site where Yaakov had spent the night where he had the dream with the ladder. It was the site where Solomon built the Temple of which he said: והבית אשר בניתי לשמך. Had the Torah not written the letter ה in front of the word מקום we would have concluded that it would be in order to build the Temple wherever we saw fit to do so. We have been warned against offering sacrifices wherever we want to in Deut. 12,13-14: “be on guard not to offer your burnt-offerings in any place which you see, except in the place that the Lord your G’d will choose; there you may offer your burnt-offerings.”
    
    20,22. לא תבנה אתהן גזית, “do not build them hewn.” The reason for this prohibition of hewn stones to be used on G’d’s altar is to avoid stones meant to serve as an altar to be partially discarded. This would not be appropriate, would not honour G’d. This is Ibn Ezra’s reason for this commandment.
    Maimonides ( Moreh Nevuchim 3,45)  writes a reason for this in his essay dealing with underlying reasons for the command- ments which seems rather remote. He suggests that this was forbidden so that people would not make some kind of image of the parts of the stones that had been discarded and make them part of their flooring, their mosaic floors. Nachmanides supplies a much better sounding reason claiming that using instruments that are instruments of war to fashion the stones for an altar which symbolises peace would seem a contradiction in terms. Esau’s power derives from his father’s blessing ועל חרבך תחיה, “and you will survive by the sword” (Genesis 27,40). At the same time, G’d is on record repeatedly as saying that He hates Esau and what Esau stands for (Maleachi 1,3). Esau is the very antithesis of the altar. 
    Actually, the principal prohibition is not that the stones are hewn but the fact that in order to be hewn iron instruments, instruments used to wage war have to be used. This is made plain in the words at the end of the verse: “for your sword has been raised over it.” You have a similar verse in Deut. 27,5: לא תניף עליהם ברזל, “do not  raise iron above them.” If a stone which is hewn is made by use of chemicals such as the secretion of the Shamir worm or a silver hammer, the Torah would actually not object to an altar so constructed. The main purpose of the prohibition is to ensure that iron is not used in construction of or use on the altar. The reason that in our verse the word “iron” is paraphrased as “your sword,” is that the sword is a destructive agent bringing death to the world. The altar’s purpose is to ensure that peace reigns on earth. It is therefore conceptually difficult to reconcile the use of iron in building the altar. When you peruse the gifts the people brought for construction of the Tabernacle you will not find that any iron was contributed. None was used in its construction. Kings I 6,7 makes a point of mentioning that during the seven years it took to build Solomon’s Temple “the sound of a hammer, ax, or iron tool was never heard in the House while it was being built.” There is a commentary which views the words “in the House” as meaning that only inside the Temple were iron tools not heard, but they were used outside of it without restriction. This means that items requiring iron tools were constructed outside and not brought into the Temple until they had been completed.
    A Midrashic approach: (Mechilta bachodesh 11) The words “for you will have raised your sword over it,” teaches that whereas the altar’s function is to prolong man’s life, the sword’s function is to shorten it. It would therefore be incongruous if a tool designed to shorten man’s life were to be employed in building a structure whose function is to prolong man’s life on earth. This teaches that every single commandment of the Torah has many different facets, that in fact the words of the Torah are reminiscent of someone striking and smashing a rock. Splinters will fly in all directions (Jeremiah 23,29). In other words, when one studies Torah intently, many different reasons for each commandment will suddenly surface. Every one of these reasons will be of value both to our bodies and to our souls. They enrich the lives of the people who discover these reasons. This is what Solomon had in mind when he said (Proverbs 4,22) “for they are life for those who find them and healing for all his flesh.”
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   ואלה  המשפטים
    
   גם אלה לחכמים הכר פנים במשפט בל טוב. “These things also belong to the wise; it is not good to display partiality in judgment” (Proverbs 24,23). From the beginning of the Book of Proverbs up until here Solomon made it his business to admonish foolish people and adolescents. In fact, he announced his purpose at the very beginning of the Book when he said (1,4) “to give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.” Commencing with this verse he switches and admonishes the scholars, the ones who preside in the courts and dispense justice. This is why he said at the beginning of the verse we quoted above גם אלה, meaning that “also these parables” are meant for the wise. What does his admonition consist of? “It is not good to display partiality in judgment.” Solomon condemns partiality as a negative character trait. Why did we need Solomon to tell us this seeing that the Torah (Deut. 1,17) has already written: לא תכירו פנים במשפט, “do not show favouritism in judgment?” Solomon added an additional dimension to what the Torah had said in that the Torah did not mention a specific penalty for judges guilty of showing favouritism. Solomon adds (verse 24) “he who says to the wicked ‘you are righteous’ will be cursed by people, nations will abhor him.” If a judge convicts an innocent person the outrage of the people will be even greater, and he will likely be removed from his position as judge. Seeing that the entire Torah from בראשית until לעיני כל ישראל is inextricably tied to a system of justice Solomon said בל טוב instead of לא טוב parallel to what we say in Psalms 147,20 ומשפטים בל ידעום, “He did not acquaint them with a system of fair justice (the Gentiles).”
    It is a well known fact that משפט, a system of justice, is the foundation of the throne of G’d’s glory as mentioned in Psalms 89,15: “righteousness and justice are the foundations of your throne.” Anyone helping to establish true justice on earth thereby helps to strengthen the foundation of G’d’s throne. He who perverts justice undermines the foundations of G’d’s throne. By saying בל טוב, Solomon indicated that a person guilty of this will not merit טוב, will not experience “goodness in store for the righteous,” of which the psalmist (Psalms 31,20) said: “how abundant is the good that You have in store for those who fear You.” Solomon taught us in Proverbs that he who is guilty of showing partiality in judgment will be punished not only in this world but also in the world to come.
    Justice is the prerequisite for peace. This is why we find Yitro telling Moses that if he were to carry out his advice with the approval of G’d, “also this whole people will arrive at its destination in peace” (Exodus 18,23). Peace ensures the continued existence of the world This is why the sages (Berachot 64) say that the scholars add to the amount of peace in the world (seeing they are in charge of administering justice). This is also why it is forbidden to submit disputes to Gentiles and only the sages of Israel must adjudicate between Jew and fellow Jew.
    21,1. ואלה המשפטים אשר תשים לפניהם, “and these are the ordinances which you shall place before them.” The Talmud Gittin 88 understands the word “before them” to mean that these ordinances are to be submitted to the wise, the trained and not to the uninformed average Israelite. Rashi elaborates there by saying that the legislation before us was presented by Moses to the seventy elders, i.e. the members of the Supreme Court. These elders had already functioned as the highest tribunal prior to the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai. They were the people who ascended part of Mount Sinai together with Moses (24,1). The Talmud there is bothered by the fact that ordination as an elder is impossible in Babylon or anywhere else outside the Holy Land. This would appear to deprive Jewish judges in the Diaspora of their authority. The Talmud concludes that the status of such Judges as הדיוטות notwithstanding, the fact that each such judge views himself as merely an appointee of a judge ordained as such in Eretz Yisrael makes their status legal. This entire line of exegesis is based on the unusual word לפניהם, “before them,” instead of להם, “to them,” which is the normal way of the Torah telling Moses to convey legislation to the Israelites (compare 15,25 שם שם לו לו חוק ומשפט). Keeping this in mind,  the Talmud also uses the word לפניהם as a prohibition not to submit disputes to gentile courts even if these are guided by Torah principles of adjudicating disputes. Our sages of old considered the sin of submitting inter-Jewish disputes to gentile jurisdiction as consisting of a number of violations of the Torah. The author proceeds to illustrate what he means by means of an example.
    It is generally admitted that murder is one of the most severe offenses that man can commit and the Torah punishes it severely. It is a facet of the seven Noachide commandments concerning which the Torah wrote that he who spills the blood of a human being will have his own blood spilled by the hands of humans (Genesis 9,6). Sanhedrin 37 points out that by killing a single human being, very often all his potential offspring is also “killed,” i.e. prevented from ever being born. In other words, it is impossible to know the number of potential human beings who are denied life through the murder of a single human being. There was a time when Adam was the only inhabitant of the universe. Had someone, even an animal, killed him at that stage the human race would have been wiped out through a single act of murder. This puts into perspective the famous saying of our sages that anyone who kills a single human being is viewed as if he had murdered a whole world full of human beings (Sanhedrin 37). The reverse is true of someone who saves the life of even a single person. By doing so, he may be equivalent to saving the entire human race. All of this brings home to you the enormity of the crime of killing a single human being without due process of law. In spite of the severity of the crime of murder, the crime of robbery and desecration of the Holy Name of G’d is considered as even more serious. The sin of murder is subject to forgiveness if the murderer repents truly as we know from Kayin who murdered his brother Hevel and who repented and was forgiven (compare Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer who takes the words (Genesis 4,13: “my guilt is too heavy to bear” as proof of Kayin’s repentance). Not so the sin of robbery. Repentance does not wipe out the sin of robbery unless the robber had first restored the property in question to the victim. If no restitution is made his sin will never be forgiven. The same applies to the sin of desecrating the name of the Lord. This is a sin more serious than any of those punishable by death at the hands of a human tribunal or even at the hands of G’d, i.e. karet. Our sages (Yuma 86) state that if someone is guilty of a sin for which the death penalty by execution or karet is mandatory (but has not been carried out) and the sinner has repented and Yom Kippur has passed before he died or has been executed, (if there were no witnesses, or similar) then his repentance may achieve a suspended sentence and the afflictions he suffers in this world may eventually wipe out his guilt. If, however, he is guilty of desecrating the name of the Lord, none of these measures will help him achieve atonement. Only his death may eventually atone for his sin. Our sages base this on Isaiah 22,14: “then the Lord of Hosts revealed to my ears; this iniquity shall never be forgiven you until you die.” Anyone who submits inter-Jewish disputes to a gentile tribunal thereby becomes guilty (at least inadvertently) of both the sin of robbery and the sin of desecrating the Lord’s name (whose judges he rejected by implying that G’d’s justice is defective). By going to pagan judges to seek justice one enhances the reputation of pagan religions and their deities in whose name justice is meted out.
    The Torah (Deut. 32,31 ) has said: “for their Rock is not like our Rock, yet our enemies judge us.” The Torah means: “when our enemies act as our judges.” Anyone who voluntarily chooses non-Jewish courts and has read the passage we cited displays drunkenness and total confusion in his thinking. This is what Isaiah 29,9 had in mind when he spoke of: ”they are drunk but not from wine, they stagger but not from liquor.” People who act in this manner abandon primary pillars of Judaism in the hope of securing or retaining secondary values (the money or property under dispute). This is considered robbery in the true sense of the word. David (Psalms 16,4) had this to say about this kind of behaviour: ירבו עצבותם אחר מהרו, “those who have other gods will suffer many afflictions for the sake of mohar, financial gain” (compare Rashi on that verse). 
    Turning to non-Jewish courts is also considered an act of robbery. One commits unknowingly complete robbery if he is awarded money or property by that court. Seeing the recipient of such a reward considers the money so obtained as rightfully his, he will never restore it to the true owner and will remain guilty of this act of robbery. This is why he will never be forgiven.
    Concerning the word תשים, “you will  place,” an unusual word to say the least, this is to teach the judges to whom this paragraph is primarily addressed, to explain the basis for their judgment to the litigants. They have to explain which proof convinced them to rule as they did. Our sages (Sanhedrin 31) say that the word תשים is equivalent to the loser telling the judge: “please write down for me on the basis of which halachah in the Torah you have decided in favour of my adversary.”
    A Midrashic approach: (Shemot Rabbah 2) “wherever a paragraph is introduced with the word אלה, this signifies that there is no conceptual linkage to what was written now to what had preceded it immediately before. On the contrary, what follows is a contrast to what preceded it. Examples are Genesis 2,4: “these are the descendants of heaven and earth.” Up until then the Torah had described new creatures; from this point on it describes derivatives of existing creatures. It is as if G’d had said: “the former ones I did derive satisfaction from, the ones following them I did not derive satisfaction from.” “These are the descendants of Noach (Genesis 6,9).”  By writing the introduction אלה, the Torah hints that the descendants of prior generations such as those of the generation of Enosh and the people who had to be killed during the deluge did not have much in common with the descendants of Noach. We find something similar in Genesis 37,2: ”these are the descendants of Yaakov.” Here too the Torah wants to draw a dividing line between the descendants of Esau and those of Yaakov.
    On the other hand, wherever a paragraph commences with the word ואלה, this indicates that what follows is sort of a continuation of what had been related previously. When the Book of Exodus commences with the words ואלה שמות בני ישראל, the Torah endeavours to pick up the thread about what we had learned about Yaakov’s sons in the Book of Genesis, a story which had been interrupted by Israel’s death and burial. The Torah wishes to describe the children of Yaakov as sharing in the virtues which distinguished their illustrious father. Here too, the words ואלה המשפטים, indicate that just as the commandments engraved on the Tablets were received at Mount Sinai, what will be related from here on in was also received from G’d by Moses at Mount Sinai.
    The Torah comprises laws at its beginning, in the middle, and at the end (Shemot Rabbah 30,3). In Exodus 15,25 we were told that G’d gave laws to the Jewish people at Marah; moreover in 18,2 the Torah stated that judges were to be ready to dispense justice at all times convenient to the litigants. Now, after the giving of the Ten Commandments the Torah continues to present the Jewish people with a list of laws. The words ואלה המשפטים and what follows provide the framework for the Ten Commandments which were both preceded by pieces of legislation and followed by more pieces of legislation. This is what Solomon had in mind when he wrote in Proverbs 8,20: “I walk the path of righteous-ness, in the path of justice.”
    Another approach: (Shemot Rabbah 30,9) when David said in Psalms 147,19: “He issued His words to Yaakov, His statutes and social laws to Israel,” you have to carve up this phrase as follows: the words: “He tells His words to Yaakov” refer to the Ten Commandments; the words: “His statutes and social laws to Israel,” refer to our portion here, the one which commences with the words ואלה המשפטים; the words לא עשה כן לכל גוי ומשפטים, mean that “He did not do so” (give social laws to all other nations). However, He did give to Adam, and thereby to all of mankind, six statutes. When Noach appeared, He added a seventh command- ment, אבר מן החי. [seeing that after the deluge mankind had been permitted to eat meat and to kill animals in order to provide themselves with meat, this prohibition of eating flesh taken from living tissue, from a live animal had to be given at that time. Ed.]  When Avraham appeared on the stage of history an eighth commandment, circumcision of the males at eight days of age, was added to the existing range of commandments. With the advent of Yaakov, and after his successful encounter with the guardian angel of Esau, a ninth commandment, that of not eating the femoral sinew was introduced. When Israel stood at Mount Sinai they were given the Ten Commandments which symbolised the remainder of the Torah. This is the meaning of the words כף אחת עשרה זהב מלאה קטרת, (Numbers 7,14). The allegorical meaning of that phrase is: “the Torah which was given to the Jewish people from the hand of G’d to the hand of Moses is אחת, “one,” consisting of עשרה, “Ten Commandments” which in effect are מלאה קטרת, “filled with incense” a word totaling 613 (when exchanging the letter ר for the letter ד when using the system of א'ת, ב''ש etc. (compare our comments on Exodus 20,16 on the section dealing with the letter קוף being a natural alternative for the letter ד) When the Israelites stood at Mount Sinai and said: “all that the Lord has said we shall do and we shall hear,” He said to them: “here the whole Torah has been given to you.” This is what David said in Psalms 147,19 that “G’d had not given all these righteous laws to any other nation.”
    Rabbi Eliezer said: “when there is justice down here on earth, there is no justice in the heaven above (i.e. there is no need to apply the attribute of Justice in the celestial regions). When there is no justice on earth, then G’d has to invoke the attribute of Justice in the celestial regions” [to compensate for the absence of justice on earth. Ed.]  G’d said: “if I had been required to invoke the attribute of Justice for even a single hour, the universe would not have been able to continue to exist.” This is what Isaiah had in mind when he said (Isaiah 27,4) “if I were to have to march into battle, I would have to burn all of it.“ (the vineyard which serves as Isaiah’s simile). Isaiah explains in the following verse: “But if he holds fast to My refuge, He makes Me his friend, He makes Me His friend.” The prophet means that if man, i.e. Israel, will cleave to Torah law then all will be well. This is also what the sages (Tanchuma) had in mind when they said that Israel would not have lost its independence had they not failed to observe the laws of the Torah and the maintenance of a fair judicial system. They were punished by what is described in Job 4,20 as “shattered between daybreak and evening perishing forever unnoticed.” This is what would happen if the ordinances G’d placed before the Israelites in our portion would be ignored by them. The word תשים is related (at least aurally) to the word סם, which can be a poisonous or therapeutic herb. If the משפטים would be observed they would act as the elixir of life, if not, as the reverse.
    
    21,2. כי תקנה עבד עברי  “if you will purchase a Hebrew slave, etc.” The reason the Torah commences with legislation involving rules about how to treat a Hebrew slave is because the Israelites had only recently emerged from all being slaves, albeit to masters of another nationality. This legislation is also a reminder of the Exodus from Egypt. The essence of the liberation of the Jews from Egypt was to exchange their masters. Whereas prior to the Exodus they were enslaved to a mortal master, a cruel one at that, ever since the Exodus they became the charge of an eternal Master, the most kind-hearted imaginable. By liberating the Jewish people from a cruel fate G’d had established a claim to their loyalty, much as He had established an especial  claim to the loyalty of the Jewish firstborn who had been exempted from the slaying of the firstborn.
    Just as G’d had mentioned the fact that He had taken the Jewish people out of Egypt as the reason for claiming obeisance as their sole owner, (Leviticus 25,55) “for the Children of Israel are My servants,” so mention of this fact in the first of the Ten Commandments provides the justification for legislation regulating treatment of Jewish servants. This legislation is also a reminder of the fact that the Lord created the universe, as the Sabbath is the foremost reminder of that fact in the Decalogue. Just as free men are to rest every seventh day as an acknowledgment of their Creator who created the world in seven days, so the Jewish servant is no less obligated to devote the Sabbath to His master in heaven rather than to devote it to his master’s deputy, his employer on earth. The number seven permeates Judaism in more ways than one. Not only the seventh day, but the seventh month as well as the seventh year all have special significance. This special meaning of cycles of seven years culminates in the Yovel  legislation which concludes a cycle called עולם, “forever,” in the words of the Torah (Leviticus 25,20). The term Sabbath is not reserved exclusively for the seventh day, but is also applied to the seventh year, the year when agricultural work is suspended. 
   שש שנים יעבד, “he shall serve during six (consecutive) years.” The Torah speaks of a servant who has been “sold” by a Jewish court in settlement of debts incurred through thefts or robbery of things he has not been able to return to the owner (Mechilta). The Torah refers to this indirectly in 22,2: “if he does not have (money for making restitution) he will be sold to pay for his thievery.” When the Torah uses the expression יעבוד to describe the labour to be performed by such a servant, this is misleading as it reminds us of the conditions under which the Jews laboured in Egypt. The fact is that this servant is in the category of a hired hand (except that the master paid his salary six years in advance to the people to whom said servant was indebted). In fact the letter ו in the word יעבוד is missing in the Torah to signal that such a Jewish servant is not to be treated like a slave, but that he must not be assigned demeaning tasks or burdensome chores. The Torah (Leviticus 25,40) specifically writes: “like a hired hand or a resident he shall work with you.” Just as a hired hand is given only tasks which represent his specific skill, so such a Jewish servant is to be assigned only tasks with which he is familiar. Just as a resident is not expected to work at night, so a Jewish servant may not be assigned night work. (Mechilta on: “six years he shall work”).
   ובשביעית, “and in the seventh year,” this is the seventh year after he has been sold; the Torah had already written that he is to work for six years. 
   לחפשי, “to freedom,” he does not require a document showing that he has been released from service by his employer.
   חנם, “by himself.” If the servant took sick during the period of his (forced) employment the employer cannot demand to be reimbursed for working hours lost, nor can he demand to be reimbursed for medical treatment for which the employer laid out the money. In short, the word חנם means that no money will change hands at the time this servant leaves the employ of his master (Mechilta). This rule applies provided that the servant was not sick for more than three years out of the six. If he was sick for three years or more, he has to make up time lost by working it off. This is based on Isaiah 16,14: “in three years, fixed like the years of a hired hand.” Seeing that this servant has been compared to a “hired hand” in Leviticus 25,40 it follows that the minimum amount of service he must render is three years (compare also Tossaphot Kidushin 17A.).
    
    21,3. אם בגפו יבא, “if he shall arrive by himself, etc.” If he was single at the time he commenced his service he is not allowed to marry a Jewish girl while in the employ of this master seeing he is financially unable to provide the minimum material comforts for a wife which the Torah stipulates a bride is entitled to (compare verse 10). Seeing that he cannot marry during the years he is in service the Torah had to add: “he will leave alone.” His master may also not give him a Gentile slave-woman as a wife seeing he had entered service without any wife (Kidushin 20,) The Torah stipulates that his marital status when he leaves must be the same as when he enters such forced employment. [Verse 4, which describes the master as giving him a Gentile slave-woman, who, however, remains with the master when the Hebrew servant leaves, applies only if he had entered service as a married man. Ed.] 
    Another meaning of the word בגפו is that it means בגופו, “whole in body.” The verse tells us that he is to leave as he came, i.e. as opposed to the Gentile slave who is automatically freed when he loses certain organs such as an eye, a tooth, or even the bones of his finger tips (Kidushin 20). A Hebrew servant can buy his freedom by one of four methods: 1) completion of six years service. 2) advent of the Jubilee year. 3) death of his employer. 4) compensating his employer for unexpired time of service  (such as when he inherits money). If said Hebrew servant had his ear pierced because he expressed a desire to remain in service, he has only two options by means of which he can free himself. 1) the advent of the Jubilee year. 2) death of his employer (Kidushin 14). A female Hebrew servant can free herself by one or more of five ways:  (the methods already mentioned plus reaching the age and signs of puberty). She is not subject to having her ear pierced  in order to extend length of her service with her employer as is her male counterpart.
    
    21,5. ואם אמר יאמר העבד, “if the servant shall say.” In Kidushin 22 the sages use the repetition of the word  אמר as proof that unless the servant expresses this wish twice the employer is not entitled to pierce his ear to extend his period of service in his employ. The word העבד [which does not appear necessary in our context as the subject did not change. Ed.] means that he must express this desire before his period of service expired, i.e. while he was still an עבד (ibid.)
   אהבתי את אדוני, “I love my master.” Unless the relationship is one of mutual love the law of extending the servant’s service by piercing his ear is not applicable. This is based ion the words כי טוב לו עמך, “for it is good for him with you,” (Deut. 15,15) (Kidushin 22). If the master is sick while the servant is in good health, this law is also not applicable seeing that the word עמך presupposes some parallel condition between servant and master. If the servant were to be sick while the master is in good health the law would also not apply as the Torah writes כי טוב לו, “for it is good for him,” and a sick servant is not good for his master.
   את אשתי ואת בני, “my wife and my children.” If said servant does not have both wife and children he may not have his ear pierced and continue in service (Kidushin 22). If he requested to serve additional time with this master already at the beginning of his term of service he may not subsequently have his ear pierced and stay on. He must formulate his request near the end of his six year term of service (ibid.). 
    
    21,6. והגישו אל הדלת, “and he shall bring him to the door.” Had the Torah not added the words או אל המזוזה, “or to the doorpost,” I would have concluded that it did not matter whether the door be in an upright position at the time the awl was applied or not. The words או אל המזוזה provide conceptual linkage between door and doorpost. Just as the doorpost is upright, so the door must be in an upright position at the time of the piercing of the servant’s ear (Pessikta Zutrata).
   ורצע אדוניו, “and his master will perform the piercing.” only the master himself, not his son or his agent or even an agent of the court (Mechilta).
   את אזנו, “his ear;” not her ear; this excludes piercing the ear of a female.(Kidushin 15). 
   במרצע, “with the awl.”  the Torah does not say be-martzea,  with any awl, but the vowel patach under the letter ב means that there is a special awl for this procedure (kept by the court?).
   ועבדו, “and he will (continue) to serve him.” “Him” and not “his son.” This word proves that the servant acquires his freedom automatically when his master dies.
   לעולם, “forever.” According to Kidushin 21 the word means “for the duration of that Yovel cycle.” It is a fact confirmed by psychologists that a servant who keeps serving the same master is liable to get fed up with his life wishing to become free. The fact that the Torah discusses the phenomenon of a Jewish man who prefers to remain in the permanent service of a human master instead of relying only on  G’d as his master is an entirely unusual phenomenon. This is why the Torah legislated that in this instance the employer (master) in whose service this servant has chosen to remain must himself be the one who pierces the organ of a man who had heard at Mount Sinai that “the Children of Israel are My servants,” and who has yet preferred to serve a master of flesh and blood. I believe that this consideration explains why the paragraph did not commence with the words כי תקנה עבד ישראל, “when you purchase an Israelite as a servant,” but refers to such a person only as עבד עברי. The word ישראל is a compliment for a Jew. The servant in question did not deserve this compliment when he was sold for stealing, nor does he deserve this compliment if he prefers to serve a master of flesh and blood to serving exclusively the Almighty. The Jews in Egypt, the enslaved Jews, were always known as עברים instead of as ישראלים. Even Moses had referred to אלו-הי העברים when introducing himself to Pharaoh (Exodus 5,3) as the Israelites had not yet qualified for the title “Israelites.” All this explains why the Torah chose the ear of the servant which had heard G’d proclaim the commandment to be servants of G’d exclusively and had yet chosen to ignore it, to be pierced by his master whom he had chosen in order for both servant and master to realise that they had been remiss in maintaining a servant-master relationship between them. The Torah insists that this contract between the servant and the master be concluded in front of court, i.e. “his master shall bring him אל האלו-הים, “to a judge,” i.e. a court, the representative of G’d on earth. The word האלו-הים represents the attribute of Justice. This same attribute of Justice had waived its right as Master to kill the Jewish firstborn in Egypt in order to save the Israelites from bondage and from slavery, and here comes an Israelite and he volunteers to be a slave! The Torah repeats once more: “and he shall bring him to the door or to the doorpost,” the doorpost being reminiscent of the one which, when it was smeared with the blood of the Passover lamb, signified service of the inhabitant of that house to G’d rather than enslavement to man (Exodus 12,22). This is why by piercing the ear of the servant in question the master extracts some blood from it. This blood signifies the reverse of what the blood on the doorposts and lintel of the Jews in Egypt on that fateful night had signified, Then it had expressed the desire to be free, this time it expresses the desire of the owner of that ear to remain unfree. The entire procedure legislated here by the Torah is once again a demonstration of how G’d employs the principle of מדה כנגד מדה, “measure for measure.” Even though the extraction of blood from the ear lobe of the servant is not an essential part of the procedure, as piercing the ear with a chemical would also have achieved the same halachic result, the fact is that most piercing of ears is done by means of an awl and not by means of some chemical agent. The letters in the Hebrew name for the tool employed, i.e. מרצע have a numerical value of 400, as if to symbolise that the servant to whom it was applied wanted to add to the 400 years of bondage of the Jewish people in Egypt. 
    A Midrashic approach to the words והגישו אל הדלת: G’d had said: “I opened the door of the house for him to enable him to walk into freedom and he slammed the door upon himself in order to remain a slave! As a penalty he will be hit by the door.”
    You must also understand that there is a mystical dimension to the word דלת. This is the reason that the word has been used here with the letter ה and the vowel patach under it to signify that the Torah speaks of something known, not just of any door. We also find the word ובדלת in Deut. 15,17 ונתתה באזנו ובדלת, “and put it through his ear and the door,” with the vowel patach under the letter ב as if the door were one that we are familiar with.
    The door is a means of gaining entry into a house. A house without a door cannot be accessed. The very word דלת represents the letter ד in the first line of the קריאת שמע declaration שמע ישראל ה’ אלו-הינו ה' אחד, “Hear O Israel the Lord our G’d the Lord is One.” The word שמע is addressed to כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of the people of Israel. כנסת ישראל symbolises our entrance gate to the celestial regions, the “door” or דלת leading to Heaven, the gateway by which the righteous enter that domain (Psalms 118,20).  When the Torah continues saying או אל המזוזה, the word מזוזה  is a “number” representing a substitute for the same concept;  it  has a numerical value of 65, the same as the attribute of G’d as “Master” i.e. א-ד-נ-י. The Hebrew servant discussed in our portion was unaware of these deeper mystical connections between one kind of master and another; this is why he foolishly traded the Master whom he could not see with his senses for one whom he could see, hear, feel, etc. In order to eventually teach him to recognise the mistake he made he has to serve his master לעולם, until the conclusion of “this world,” i.e. until such time as לה' הארץ ומלואו, all of mankind will recognise that the whole earth belongs to the Lord.
   ועבדו לעולם, “and he will serve him forever.” Mechilta Nezikin section 2 accepted that the meaning of the word “forever” in this context is “until the advent of the next Jubilee year.” This would be the fiftieth year of the cycle during which the servant had his ear pierced. A period of fifty years has been called עולם already in ancient times and we find a reference to it as having this meaning in Samuel I 1,11 where Samuel’s mother Chanah  vows that after she had weaned her young son she would bring him to the Temple to reside there עד עולם, “forever.” Clearly, seeing no one lives forever, she did not mean that the word לעולם is to be understood as literally “forever.” She referred to the active life span of a Levite who is forced to retire at the age of 50 as we know from Numbers 8,24. Samuel was a Levite, of course. Samuel only lived for a total of 52 years, the last 50 of them after his mother had dedicated him to be a servant of G’d as she had vowed before becoming pregnant with him (Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 4,1). The Torah’s direction that the Hebrew servant be freed at the advent of the Jubilee year is effective regardless of how many or how few years before that year the servant in question was acquired.
    Another way of interpreting the word לעולם is: “as long as the world exists.” In that event the connection with the שנת היובל would be the יובל הגדול, a concept mentioned in Psalms 105,8 דבר צוה לאלף דור, “He gave a command which is in effect for 1000 generations.” A “generation” in that case would be considered a period of 50 years. When Solomon (Kohelet 1,4) spoke of והארץ לעולם עומדת, that “the earth will endure for a period called עולם,” he referred to these 1000 generations mentioned in Psalms. The word עולם in our verse then would refer to the “world of the great Jubilee.” I shall discuss this in greater detail in my commentary on Leviticus 25,8.
    
    21,7. וכי ימכור איש את בתו לאמה, “when a man sells his daughter as a maid-servant, etc.” This verse is the father’s authority to “sell” his daughter for her own benefit as long as she is less than 12 years old (Mechilta Nezikin section 3).
   לא תצא כצאת העבדים, “the terms of her release will not parallel the conditions of freedom for her male counterpart.” She will not leave the service of her master like a Gentile male slave, i.e. through loss of an organ such as an eye, a tooth, etc. (ibid). Whenever the word עבד or אמה is found in the Torah without  additional data such as “Jewish” or ”Egyptian,” Canaanite slaves are meant. When the Torah speaks of a Hebrew servant the fact that he is Jewish is spelled out (compare 21,2). The warning in our verse is addressed to the employer of such a Jewish maidservant that if he would release (kick out) his maidservant due to loss of, say an eye, he would be guilty of violating this negative commandment. Instead of releasing her from his service he has to compensate her for the loss including pain, embarrassment, etc., (based on the author of halachot gedolot). She continues in her position for the agreed upon period.
    21,8. אם רעה בעיני אדוניה אשר לא יעדה, “if she is displeasing in the eyes of her master who had designated her for himself (as a wife).” Nachmanides writes that anyone who “buys” a Jewish daughter does so with a view to marrying her. She is automatically considered as designated for her master as a wife. If, after getting to know her while she worked for him, he changed his mind, her father has to assist in her redemption (the word והפדה refers to the first subject in the verse, i.e. the word איש). It is forbidden for the girl’s father to allow her to continue in the service of a man who does not plan to wed her after the master expressly says: “I do not want her.” He has no authority to sell her to a Gentile master. Even though the Torah permitted the master of a Hebrew servant to sell him to a Gentile (compare Leviticus 25 47) where sale to a גר תושב, a resident stranger is expressly permitted, this permission does not apply to girls. This is in order to  ensure that Gentiles do not treat Jewish girls or women as inferior. This is the plain meaning of these verses. Thus far Nachmanides.
   בבגדו בה, “seeing he has betrayed her.” He would have betrayed her if he sold her to a Gentile master. He can only sell her to someone who can wed her in accordance with Jewish law.
    There is a disagreement between the two scholars Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Akiva (Kidushin 18) on the precise meaning here of the words בבגדו בה, “seeing he has betrayed her.” One of the scholars traces the word בבגדו to the word בגד, “garment,” whereas the other scholar understands is as בגידה, “betrayal.” Rabbi Akiva who holds that it is connected to בגד bases himself on the principle of יש אם למקרא that the reading of the text is more authoritative when it conflicts with the spelling. The reading is based on the word לו as we read the word לא as if it had been spelled with a ו, meaning the master had designated her for himself. By becoming betrothed to her master at the time she entered his service he had placed her under the protection of his mantle, figuratively speaking. Once her master had done this he is no longer free to sell her. Rabbi Eliezer, on the other and, believes that the spelling is of greater weight whenever there is an ambiguity in the meaning of the words, a principle known as יש אם למסורת. In our case the spelling of the word לא is with the letter א meaning “no” i.e. he had not betrothed her to himself.  Rabbi Akiva sees an ambiguity even in the word בבגדו-בה  itself, being convinced it means “when his garment was on her,” seeing that if it were derived from בגידה, betrayal, the vowel under the second letter ב should have been a chataf kametz instead of a chirik  which is proof that it is derived from בגד, a word in which the basic vowel segol always turns into a chirik when it appears in the possessive form. The word בה is to be understood as עליה, “upon her.” The word בה also means עליה in Nechemyah 2,12 הבהמה אשר אני רוכב בה, “the beast which I ride on.” Rabbi Eliezer understands the word as derived from בגידה even though the vowel pattern does not appear to support his theory. The reason is that he considers the word not as a possessive form but as an infinitive. The vowel chirik as such would be perfectly in place. A Biblical example supporting his theory would be Leviticus 26,26 בשברי לכם מטה לחם, “when I break for you the staff of bread.” The reason the Torah writes בה, (according to Rabbi Eliezer) is that the preposition used with the word בגד, betray, is always the letter ב. To quote but two examples: (Maleachi 2,14 and Maleachi 2,15) אשת נעוריך אשר בגדת בה, “the wife of your youth whom you have betrayed; or ובאשת נעוריך אל יבגוד, “and let no one break faith with the wife of your youth.” On that same folio of the Talmud Rabbi Shimon holds that we pay halachic attention to both the spelling and the reading so that we can derive two rulings from the verse.
    A Midrashic approach (Shemot Rabbah 30,5) on the words וכי ימכור איש את בתו לאמה, “G’d said to Israel: “I had an only daughter (the Torah) and I sold her to you (collectively) as a maid-servant. You are not allowed to remove her from the house unless she is securely (encased) dressed, in an appropriate ark; this is the meaning of the words following לא תצא כצאת העבדים, “she is not to leave (the house) in the manner of male servants.” G’d says: ”I charge you to treat the Torah with honour and respect  seeing that you have captured her after she had been My companion previous to Matan Torah, the giving of the Torah.” The Midrash bases itself on Psalms 68,19: “you (Moses) went up to the (celestial) heights having taken a captive.” The Midrash continues by explaining the words אם רעה בעיני אדניה, “if she becomes displeasing in the eyes of her master,”  i.e. that the Israelites have become wicked, not performing the commandments of the Torah. לעם נכרי לא ימשול למכרה, “He (G’d) never agreed to sell her (the Torah) to any other nation except to Israel;” so how could Israel betray her?!
    
    21,9. ואם לבנו ייעדנה, “but if he designated her (as a wife) for his son, etc.” If the master had intended to marry the girl in question herself, no additional act of betrothal is necessary as the money he paid to her father when he “bought” the girl  constitutes the money or equivalent a groom has to give to the father of a minor. He had to add the words הרי את מקודשת לי, “you are betrothed to me, etc.” (according to Maimonides hilchot avadim 4,7) If, however, he had not meant to marry her himself but had intended for his son to marry her, then the Torah adds: כמשפט הבנות  יעשה לה, “he has to deal with her according to the rights of free women.” She is a Jewish girl and the master acts as her father in this instance. In practice this means that her master (the groom’s father) must provide the appropriate (22,16) dowry for her from his own funds. Seeing that she is a Jewish girl, all the provisions the Torah has made in Deut. 15,14 that the master has to provide a stake for a Jewish servant who is released from service are to apply to her also. This is an act of kindness towards her by G’d.
    A different way of understanding the words: “like the rights of Jewish daughters he shall do for her,” could be that these words form the introduction to the Torah spelling out these rights in detail as שארה כסותה ועונתה לא יגרע, “she must not be disadvantaged compared to others in her entitlement to food, clothing, and marital relationship.” The master has to provide the equivalent when she marries his son. 
    Rashi explains that the word שארה refers to entitlement to be fed, whereas the word כסותה refers to her clothing allowance, and the word עונתה, refers to her entitlement to marital relations at no fewer than designated intervals.
    Nachmanides differs with Rashi claiming that the meaning of Ketuvot 47 upon which Rashi based his commentary, i.e. that the obligation is Biblical rather than Rabbinic in origin, is certainly only the opinion of a single scholar which is not shared by his colleagues. That scholar based his understanding of the word שאר on Psalms 78,27  וימטר עליהם כעפר שאר, “He rained meat on them like dust.” According to Nachmanides this is surely an isolated view as is evident from the continuation of the discussion in the Talmud on that folio. The consensus in the Talmud is that providing food is a Rabbinic right of married women and cannot be attributed to legislation in our verse. Keeping all this in mind, Nachmanides explains the word שארה to mean “her right to intimate relations.” In most other instances where the word שאר appears it means a “bodily relation, a close relative.” Our sages Yevamot 22 explained that the word in Leviticus 21,2 כי אם לשארו, means “except for his wife,” i.e. the priest’s closest bodily relation. Such a close relationship between husband and wife has already been described in Genesis 2,24 to show that it is a closer natural bond even than that between father and son, or son and mother. According to Nachmanides the word כסותה would mean “her cover,” i.e. the blanket covering her and her husband in the same bed. The word appears in that sense in 22,26 כי היא כסותה לבדה במה ישכב, “for it is his only cover, what would he lie down with?” Thirdly, the word ועונתה would refer to the period when her husband will join her for the purpose of marital relations. This then would be the detailed meaning of the caption משפט הבנות, “the rights of the young women.” The reason this last word had to be added is to assure this girl who considers herself rejected in favour of some other woman to an exclusive right of the privacy of her bed, to guarantee that a competing wife of her husband will not intrude upon her rights. On her bed her husband and she will join to become בשר אחד as envisaged in Genesis 2,24. The second choice of her husband, the wife whom the Torah describes as אחרת, will be considered the outsider, the פלגש, not she. When he will sleep with her he will have to do this on the floor, -as he would do when he entertains a whore,- not on the marriage bed which belongs to this girl to whom he had betrothed himself years ago when he “bought” her from her father.
    Our sages (Ketuvot 48) also add that the word שארה describes marital relations when one is in a state of undress, not like the Persians who do not even bother to disrobe when the men sleep with their women. The Torah used refined language to describe its meaning. The three items mentioned here are matters which man and wife have in common. The items discussed by Rashi, while entitlements of the wife, are of Rabbinic authority.
    
    21,11. ואם שלש אלה לא יעשה לה, “and if he does not perform these  three for her, etc.” If he does not marry her himself, nor give her to his son as a wife or allow her father to release her, as per the word והפדה, then she leaves the employ of her master without having to compensate him for breach of contract and her father cannot prevent her from leaving. If even her father who had the right to sell her has lost his authority over her, her master whose authority over this girl never equaled that of her father most certainly cannot detain her. All of this is contained in the words ויצאה חנם, “she goes out free.” If you were to argue that her master can demand part of his purchase price back from her father, the Torah wrote the word חנם, “without compensation,” to make it clear that the father also does not have to compensate a master who had not honoured his undertaking. If you were to say that her master has to compensate her financially for having disappointed her, the Torah adds the words אין כסף, meaning she has no financial claim on him because he did not marry her. These are the words from which our sages learned in Kidushin 4 that a maidservant acquires her freedom merely by displaying signs of puberty.
    
    21,12. מכה איש ומת מות יומת, “if someone strikes a man and he dies as a result the striker shall be executed.” Having concluded the legislation concerning Jewish servants, a subject conceptually linked to the first commandment on the first Tablet, the Torah returns to the first commandment on the second of the Tablets, the law about murder. Seeing that in the Ten Command- ments the prohibition was spelled out without the penalty for transgressing it, the Torah now announces the penalty for murder. The verse speaks of an intentional, at least potentially lethal attack.
    
    21,13. ואשר לא צדה, “but if he did not lay an ambush, etc.”  The verse speaks of unintentional killing. The word צדה means there had not been a deliberate hunt to kill the person in question by his eventual killer, however, “G’d had intervened” causing this man to kill someone because he had already been guilty for committing another capital sin which had either not been detected or could not be prosecuted. If the killer had not already been guilty of a similar crime, the Torah would not have described the unintentional killing as “an act of G’d” rather than as an act of man. This is what Solomon was speaking of when he said (Proverbs 13,23)  ויש נספה בלא משפט, “sometimes someone is destroyed for something which is not subject to justice capable of being meted out by  a court.”
    The Talmud Makkot 10 already illustrated this with the well known parable of two men, one of whom killed intentionally whereas the other killed unintentionally. G’d had arranged that these people meet at the same place at the same time; the one who had been guilty of unintentional killing ascended a ladder and fell down killing the person standing underneath it who had already been guilty of intentional killing. The person falling off the ladder had to move to a city of refuge, one of the cities set aside for unintentional killers. The reason that the Torah uses the expression איש was to let us know that only adults have to be executed, not minors. For this reason the Torah wrote in one instance ואיש כי יכה כל נפש אדם (Leviticus 24,17) “an adult who kills any human being, etc.,” in order to make clear that the death penalty applies also to someone who killed a minor. The word איש also excludes aborted fetuses, and embryos born too early to be viable.
   ושמתי לך מקום, “I shall provide a place for you.” This means that even in the desert a special place will be set aside for such unintentional killers to find refuge from a potential avenger who is a blood relation of the victim. The “place” in question was the area in which the Levites had their tents (Makkot 12). I believe that the reason the Torah wrote the word לך, “for you,” something quite unusual, is  to hint that Moses, a Levite, had himself been guilty of killing someone.
    
    21,14.וכי יזיד איש על רעהו להרגו,  “and if a man shall act intentionally against his fellow to kill him,” the meaning of the word להרגו, is והרגו, i.e. “he has carried out his intention and killed the person he intended to kill.” The Torah had to add the words בערמה, “with guile,” in connection with the legislation involving murder and its penalty as nearly every murderer makes an elaborate attempt to conceal the fact that he killed intentionally. In other words, a murder almost by definition, engages in ערמה, guile, deceit. Not only that, his sin is one that was inspired by the original serpent who wanted to make man guilty of death. The Torah had described the principal characteristic of that serpent as being that it was the “most ערום,” the most crafty of all the living beasts (Genesis 3,1). Murder then is a sin directly attributable to the influence of the serpent. According to ancient sources, the serpent had mated with Chavah and its seed had produced Kayin, the first murderer. (see author’s commentary on Genesis 5,2; my translation pages 148,149 Ed.) This is also why the sages (Sotah 21) call anyone who engages in sin after having misrepresented his intentions a רשע רע, “an evil sinner,” (as if a sinner were not evil by definition already). The attribute רע which the sages appended to the description רשע is based on Isaiah 3,11 אוי לרשע רע, “woe to the wicked sinner.” Such a sinner derives his strength from the celestial sphere Mars, which itself is described as רע, evil, as wars and murder usually take place under its aegis. (I have explained this in detail on Exodus 10,10). The prophet Jeremiah 1,14, when saying that “disaster shall break loose from the north upon all the inhabitants of earth,” also refers to the planet Mars. This planet was also referred to as רעה, by Pharaoh in Exodus 10,10.
   מעם מזבחי תקחנו, “from My altar shall you take him (to die).” The Torah implies that there is no need to tell us that a city of refuge does not offer protection to an intentional killer, and that he will have to be surrendered to the court to stand trial; here the Torah adds that even if the murderer sought refuge in sacred grounds, clinging to the altar, this is no protection for him and the authorities are instructed to remove him from there to stand trial. We find proof of this having been done in Kings I 2,28  where it is described that Yoav, David’s commander-in-chief who had sided with Adoniah in the latter’s abortive attempt to become king instead of Solomon, took refuge in the Tabernacle and held on to the corners of the altar to escape being executed for treason. Solomon commanded Benayahu to extradite him from there. When Yoav refused to leave the holy precincts, Benayahu executed him inside the sacred grounds, carrying out the instructions in our verse. The message contained in the legislation is that even someone who thinks he can call on G’d to save him from  prosecution by a human tribunal does so in vain if the sin he was guilty of was murder, (as David had explained to Solomon about Yoav prior to his death). Display of “mercy or pity” in such instances is tantamount to displaying cruelty as failure to execute a murderer deprives him of atonement in this life and he will face the whole burden of his sin after death when he comes up to be tried by a celestial tribunal.
    Rashi explains the words מעם מזבחי תקחנו למות, as meaning that even if the murderer happens to be a priest or a Levite, whose domain is the proximity of the altar, he will be taken to stand trial and will be executed if found guilty. This is based on Mechilta Nezikin section 4. The Talmud in Makkot 12 already pointed out that Yoav, who held on to the corners of the altar in order to save himself from extradition, was executed only because he thought that even the corners of the altar not only its roof were an area of refuge from prosecution by human tribunal. He had misinterpreted the fact that the Torah wrote מעם מזבחי, “from beside My altar,” instead of מעל מזבחי, “from on top of My altar,” to include any part of the altar. Alternatively, he thought that the Torah referred only to murderers who had committed murder in the presence of witnesses and after legally valid warning and who had thus become subject to trial by a human court. Seeing that he did not commit his crime under such conditions he thought he could throw himself on G’d’s mercy instead. The fact is that the words in our verse are intended to tell us that whereas under the aforementioned circumstances the court cannot convict and execute, Yoav’s guilt was also insurrection against the king. This is a crime which does not need warning and witnesses of a certain type in order for the king to execute the offender. Yoav erred thinking that when there were no witnesses or warning the altar could protect him from the king’s vengeance. To sum up: our verse teaches that if the objective  of retribution is not so much vengeance as the removal of wicked sinners from the face of the earth, G’d waives the sanctity of the altar in order to enable justice to be done to such people. 
    
    21,15. ומכה אביו ואמו מות יומת, “If someone strikes his father or his mother he shall be executed.” The blow must be such that it causes an injury involving bleeding or a bruise. (Mechilta Nezikin section 5). The situation described here is similar to Kings I 20,37: “he struck him and wounded him.” When the Torah writes אביו ואמו, the meaning is not that in order to become guilty of the penalty prescribed  the son or daughter has to strike both father and mother. The letter ו here as well as in many other instance means או, “or.” A striking example of the letter ו meaning “or” instead of “and,” is Deut. 17,3 ויעבוד אלוהים אחרים וישתחו להם ולשמש או לירח או לכל צבא השמים, “and he will go and serve gods of others and prostitute himself to them, or to the sun or the moon or to any of the host of heaven;” clearly the letter ו in the word וישתחו cannot mean that he must perform all of these acts of idol worship in order to become culpable. The Torah lists a number of alternatives any of which result in his becoming guilty of death by stoning. In our verse the death penalty for someone striking either parent is death by strangulation.
    
    21,16. וגונב איש ומכרו, “If someone kidnaps a man (person) and sells him, etc.” Rabbi Saadyah Gaon explains the reason this verse has been inserted between the one dealing with striking father or mother, and the one dealing with cursing father or mother. He writes that seeing most people who have been kidnapped and sold into slavery were minors at the time they were snatched, if or when such a person returns to his  home town after many years he does not recognise his parents. He may therefore have occasion to strike or curse someone and will do so not knowing that the person whom they strike or curse is actually his father or mother. The cause of such a sin occurring is the kidnapper. This makes the kidnapper morally guilty of the crime committed by his victim and, at least theoretically, of the death penalty.
    Nachmanides writes on this subject  that the reason the Torah wrote both these verses together is that both the kidnapper and the person striking father or mother is subject to the identical death penalty חנק, death by strangulation. Someone who curses father or mother (verse 17) however, is subject to death by stoning, as we know from Leviticus 20,9 כי איש איש אשר יקלל את אביו ואת אמו מות יומת, אביו ואמו קלל דמיו בו, “any man who will curse his father or his mother shall be executed; his father or his mother he has cursed, his blood is upon him.“ Wherever the words דמיו בו appear the death penalty referred to is stoning. The verse from which we learn this is Leviticus 20,27 באבן ירגמו אתם דמיהם בם, “they shall pelt them with stones, their blood is upon themselves.” Stoning is a more severe death penalty than death by strangulation. One of the reasons may be that the sin of cursing parents is more widespread than the sin of striking them; the Torah therefore provided for a penalty which is more likely to restrain a person from committing this offense. Or, the fact that cursing anybody involves using (abusing) the name of G’d in the process, cursing father or mother makes it a double offense. The Torah therefore threatened a more severe death penalty for violators. In the Ten Commandments the prohibition to kidnap has also been inserted between the sin of adultery and that of false testimony for similar reasons. Had the Torah mentioned that offense only at the end we would have thought that this is a relatively less serious offense than striking father or mother or cursing them. On the other hand, the Torah was unable to position the law against kidnapping earlier as it had already commenced with the penalties about murder in verse 12. This had to be followed by the law against striking father or mother. The severity of kidnapping is best demonstrated in that the brothers who had kidnapped Joseph had not been punished until more than 1000 years later when the “Ten Martyrs” died at the hands of the Romans in order to finally expiate for that sin. I have already explained the reason that the Torah repeats the words מות תמות in order to hint at death in the terrestrial as well as the celestial regions (compare my translation page 562, Ed.).
   ונמצא בידו, “while he was in his power.” The word נמצא must be contrasted with מצוי. The former is a person over whom the kidnapper had no legal authority; the latter is someone such as a teacher who does have a certain legal authority over the victim. Such a kidnapper is not subject to the death penalty (Sanhedrin 86).
    
    21,18. באבן או באגרוף, “with a stone or a fist.” The term “fist” means a hand in which the fingers have been clenched. The word occurs also in Rabbinic Hebrew such as in the Mishnah Keylim 17,12 אגרופו של בן בטיח, “someone known as big-fisted.” Members of the family of David were known to be aggressive, i.e. big-fisted (Kidushin 76). The Torah here describes two blows, one a hard blow, the other not so hard. The judges will have to consider whether either one of the blows was hard enough to cause death to most people struck by such a blow. A blow similar to a stone is the heavy blow, whereas a blow similar to that struck by a fist is considered a lighter blow. When a person dies from the “hard” blow, the striker is considered a murderer and will be executed. When the victim is only temporarily disabled but does not die, the striker must pay different kinds of compensation, primarily for loss of income and doctor’s fees.
    The full meaning of the verse is: if the victim recovers sufficiently after having been bed-bound to leave the house and walk outside any relapse is not considered the fault of the one who struck he original blow, even if the patient walked with the aid of a crutch as do people who are enfeebled. In such cases the one who dealt the blow is free from criminal proceedings and faces only civil charges, i.e. assessment of damages. Even if the victim neglected his injuries and left he house prematurely, while still weak, so that he dies as a result, the one who administered the blow is not held responsible for his death by court action. The Torah describes a situation which is usual, i.e. that the injured party does not leave the house until he has sufficiently recovered from his injury. At that point he is considered as out of danger and whatever happens to the victim  afterwards is attributed to causes other than the blow or blows he had sustained during the attack described in our verse. This is the reason for the words והתהלך בחוץ, “if he walked outside.” Had he risen from his bed but only walked inside his house before dying, the attacker would be blamed for his death and would be charged with murder. Mechilta Nezikin section 6 interprets the verse by dissecting each word; the words אם יקום והתהלך, “if he rises and walks by himself,” are interpreted as walking in the house; to make sure we do not misunderstand, the Torah added the word בחוץ, “outdoors.” Had the Torah only written והתהלך בחוץ, omitting the word יקום, I would have concluded that as long as he was able to even stagger or limp outside this would be sufficient proof that he was out of danger from the blows he had received. Therefore the Torah added the word יקום, i.e. he must have been able to get up in a perfectly normal, healthy-looking manner. Furthermore, the absence of the word ממשכבו, “from his sickbed,” makes it clear that he must have appeared to have fully recovered, without feeling the need or desire to lie down again as soon as he comes indoors. The fact that he still uses a cane is no sign that his life is still in danger from the blows received. 
    The principle of the matter is that we do not judge the degree and danger of his injuries by the wording of our verse. The medical evaluation is determined by medical experts. The Torah simply describes a scenario which reflects what happens in most of these situations. The fact that the medical experts determine the likely cause of death of such a victim is reflected in the translation by Onkelos who simply writes: על בוריה “according to his state of health.” The wording רק שבתו יתן ורפא ירפא, is carefully chosen by the Torah to forestall the injured party demanding medical expenses and then failing to consult a physician. The guilty part pays the doctor’s bill, he does not pay the victim the equivalent of what the doctor might have charged him (compare commentary by Nachmanides).
    
   ורפא ירפא, “and he shall provide for healing.” Whenever the Bible mentions the word רפואה when applied to a human being the letter פ always appears with the dagesh. For instance Jeremiah 51,9 רפאנו את בבל ולא נרפתה, “we tried to cure Babylon but she was incurable;” when we find the word used as something being performed by G’d then there is no dagesh in the letter פ. Example: Jeremiah 17,14 רפאני ה' וארפא, “Heal me O Lord and I shall be healed.” Another example is found in Psalms 147,3: הרופא לשבורי לב, “He heals the broken-hearted, etc.” There are many more examples. The reason for this distinction in the spelling of the description of the applied cure is that when man, i.e. a physician, administers a cure it is apt to be accompanied by pain and suffering, whereas a cure administered by the Lord is a painless procedure. This is part of the meaning of Proverbs 10,22: “the blessing of the Lord enriches, He does not add sorrow to it.”
    When the sages in Baba Kama 85 stated that the words ורפא ירפא in our verse constitute permission for a physician to practice his art they said so only in connection with externally visible injuries or symptoms of diseases; internal diseases, especially mental diseases are not subject to treatment by physicians of flesh and blood. They are the sole domain of the One who provides the soul to all living creatures [this interpretation seems to be based on Ibn Ezra. Ed.].
    
    21,20. וכי יכה איש את עבדו או את אמתו בשבט, “if a man (master) hits a male slave or a female slave with a stick, etc.” Whenever the Torah uses the word עבד or אמה, it refers to a Canaanite slave. Additional evidence that this paragraph deals with Gentile slaves is the fact that the Torah describes this slave as “his money,” i.e. one whose body is owned by the employer. Jewish servants’ bodies  are never owned by their employers. 
    Nachmanides writes that the word בשבט with the vowel patach under the letter ב which is equivalent to a definitive article  indicates that the master is normally walking around with such a stick as a sign of his authority. The Torah warns that although it is common knowledge that such a staff is used to discipline with, the master is not allowed to do this. The words תחת ידו, indicate that he has been hitting the slave incessantly until the slave died as a result. The Torah writes simply נקום יוקם that such a deed will be avenged without spelling out the details. The principal message of the verse is that just because the master “owns” the body of the slave he is not at liberty to abuse it, much less to kill it. The wording “he will surely be avenged” means that just a the master would be held responsible for murder, i.e. killing with lethal force, any other human being not owned by him, so he is liable when he causes death with a lethal instrument to his slave. Seeing the standard death penalty for killing with intent is by the sword the same death penalty is applicable in our case also. This is spelled out more clearly in Leviticus 26,2: והבאתי עליכם חרב נוקמת, “I will bring upon you an avenging sword,” a verse in which the close association of vengeance and the sword is clearly demonstrated.
    Rabbeinu Chananel explains the reason why the Torah in this instance uses the expression ינקם, ”he will be avenged,” as based on the fact that the master used his authority, etc., to mask the killing of his slave as merely a disciplinary measure which had had sad consequences. In fact, the master had planned to kill this slave for personal reasons and had made it appear as if  it were an accident. Seeing he himself had killed as an act of revenge, his own execution will also be considered as an act of vengeance 
    
    21,21. אך אם יום או יומים יעמוד, “however, if he will survive for one or two days, etc.” if the Torah had referred only to the possibility of this slave surviving one day we would have understood the word יום as the day of the Torah, i.e. an evening followed by night and a day, such as the days described in the first chapter of Genesis. By adding the word יומים, a day which appears as if two days is included. In other words, a 24 hour-period composed of two different daylight periods. Seeing that the words ומת תחת ידו, and he died under his hand,” gave the impression that the death penalty would apply only if the slave died as an immediate result of the beating, it had to add that if he died within the next twenty-four hours such death would still be attributed directly to the beating he had received. A survival until the third day is not mentioned as in that event the master would not be liable through court action (Nachmanides).
    At this point it is pertinent to ask why the Torah did not use this opportunity to describe what the law is when someone hits father or mother violently enough so that they die as a result of the blows sustained. The answer is that a situation occurring where the son deliberately beats the father to death is so unlikely that there was no need to legislate in the Torah for such a likelihood. Masters beating their slaves to death in a fit of anger is far more likely, however. We humans cannot always determine the intent behind the blows. When the victim survives for the period mentioned, however, we conclude from this fact that there had never been an intent to kill the victim with these blows. Seeing that one does not generally destroy one’s own property, כי כספו הוא, in such cases the master is given the benefit of the doubt.
    
    21,22. ונגפו אשה הרה, “and they collide with a pregnant woman,” the collision described was unintentional; no ascer-tainable damage occurred to the woman although she miscarried.
   כאשר ישית עליו בעל האשה, “as the husband of the woman shall assess against him.” It is not the woman who had miscarried who will assess the amount of loss she has sustained. The reason for this is that the mother has no financial standing in her offspring. Although the Torah speaks of ילדיה, “her children,” giving the impression as if she had a proprietary interest in them, this is not so. The legal position of a woman and her children is similar to the legal position of a man to whom an object or animal has been entrusted for safe-keeping. [The male who impregnated her gave her his seed as a treasure to guard. In due course he would reclaim it, compare Kidushin 59]. The Talmud phrases it as “wherever the seed may be it remains the property of the donor-husband.” This is the reason that when the matter of compen- sation comes up the father determines the amount of compen- sation he feels he is entitled to. In the event that the father makes a claim which is perceived as excessive, the matter is adjudicated before judges, i.e. ונתן בפלילים. The way this verse is interpreted in Mechilta Nezikin 8 is that if the Torah had only written the words כאשר ישית עליו, I would have concluded that the father of the prematurely born baby can demand any amount of compensation he likes. To make sure that he will not demand an excessive amount the Torah adds the words “he will give it (the man who caused the mishap) according to the decision of judges.”
    
    21,23. ואם אסון יהיה, “but if a mishap occur,“ to the mother. 
   ונתת נפש תחת נפש, “then you shall award a life for a life.” Our sages (Mechilta) are divided as to the precise meaning of these words. Some hold that they are to be understood literally, i.e. that the guilty party pays with his life, whereas others hold that financial compensation is referred to. The first group of sages consider this an involuntary manslaughter, whereas the second group view it as a classical case of someone wanting to kill A and killing B by mistake when no death penalty applies. 
    A kabbalistic approach based on Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai: The words כי ינצו אנשים refer to a struggle between the angels Michael and Samael (the angel of death). The words ונגפו אשה הרה refer to the כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of the Jewish people becoming a victim. The words ויצאו ילדיה, refer to the Jewish people going into exile. The words ענוש יענש, “he will most certainly be punished,” refer to Samael in accordance with כאשר ישית עליו בעל האשה, “G’d the husband of the כנסת ישראל will impose upon him.” This “master” is G’d who will punish Samael בפלילים in criminal proceedings.
    21,24. עין תחת עין, “an eye for an eye.” Mechilta Nezikin section 8 understands these words as “the value of an eye for an eye,” and not that the guilty party is being deprived of his own physical eye. Proof that this interpretation is correct can be deduced from verse 19 where the Torah had legislated financial compensation for injuries caused to a fellow human being. If we would inflict upon a person who had struck and caused injury to another  person a similar injury to the one he had inflicted, what would there be left for him to pay? He himself would then be in need of medical attention and he himself would then suffer loss of income while laid up?
    Furthermore, if we were to apply the principle of “an eye for an eye” literally, this would often not be justice at all. If a man ruins the only eye of a one-eyed individual and he had an eye of his removed as a penalty, the former would remain blind whereas the guilty party would still have a good eye to see with. What kind of justice would this be? Moreover, a weak individual might not survive having his eye gouged out so that he would pay with his life for having ruined a strong person’s eye. Surely this would not be justice! The only way a semblance of justice could be arrived at in the situations described  in verses 24-27 is to make financial compensation for the damage caused.
    Furthermore, the Torah writes in Leviticus 24,19-20: “and if a man inflicts a wound on his fellow, as he did so shall be done to him; fracture for fracture, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; just as he will have inflicted a wound on a person, so shall be inflicted upon him!” It is quite impossible to carry out the instructions in this verse except by accepting the ruling of our sages that what is meant is financial compensation.
    You may well ask how it is possible to fulfill an instruction such as “as he has done so shall be done to him,” unless we inflict the same kind of injury that the guilty party has inflicted? Surely giving someone money in compensation for experiencing pain and suffering is not what the Torah had in mind when writing: ”as he has done so shall be done to him?” We need to answer that the meaning of the words: “as he has done so shall be done to him” is: “as he did something evil, so something evil shall be done to him.” The proof that this is what the Torah had in mind can be appreciated through the words of Shimshon who said: “as they have done to me  so I have done to them” (Judges 15,11). When you read up you will find that the Philistines had stolen Shimshon’s wife and he had paid them back by burning their crops! There was no comparison at all between what the Philistines had done to Shimshon to the type of revenge he took upon them. The meaning of his words is obviously: “just as they have caused me personal harm and grief, so I have caused them plenty of harm.” We find something similar when the prophet Ovadiah (Ovadiah 1,15-16) prophesied about Esau “As you did, so shall be done to you (Esau). Your conduct shall be requited. That same cup you drank on My Holy Mount, etc.” You have now had a variety of ancient sources all proving that our sages never interpreted this verse of “an eye for an eye” to be understood literally.
    Rabbeinu Chananel writes as follows on this subject: The verse mentions injury of seven different kinds: 1) eye; 2) tooth; 3) hand; 4) foot; 5) burn wounds; 6) פצע, an “injury.” 7) חבורה, “a bruise.” Each of this injuries contains at least one element not contained in all the other six, thus making it impossible to omit any of these seven examples. An eye is something we have from birth; teeth we are not borne with; their loss might be considered as less serious. Teeth are also not included in the 248 organs which make up man as a healthy specimen. All the 248 organs are covered with tissue and flesh whereas the teeth appear in our mouth completely exposed. The function of the teeth is not to help man survive as a viable human being, but they are merely a tool to break down the food we eat. Just as we could not have assumed that the legislation contained in our verse applies to teeth unless the Torah had made a point of writing it, so the loss of none of the seven examples cited by the Torah would have been presumed to be a cause for the freeing of a slave forthwith. 
    
    21,26. וכי יכה איש את עין עבדו, “And if a man will injure the eye of his slave, etc.” It is a Biblical law that a Canaanite slave is set free if he lost a tooth or eye through maltreatment by his master. The reason is that they became slaves only due to “tooth and eye.” It is written in connection with Cham the father of Canaan (Genesis 9,22) “Cham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father and he told his two brothers outside.” He was first guilty with his eyes by looking and then with his teeth by telling what he had seen.” This is why he was cursed: “cursed be Canaan, the lowest of slaves shall he be to his brothers” (Genesis 9,25). Once the offending organs had been smitten the rest of the body has been released from that curse.
    Our sages Kidushin 25 say that the word ושחתה, “and destroys it,” in our verse means that there must have been an intent to destroy that eye or tooth. If the master struck the eye in the process of trying to cure it and the treatment failed and resulted in loss of that eye, the slave does not go free. The sequence of these paragraphs commences with verse 20 which speaks of killing one’s slave intentionally, a very severe sin, progressing to the description of two men fighting in the course of which the Torah discloses the legal status of an unborn baby, a death which is due to a lesser sin than that described in verse 20. This is followed by injury inflicted on Jewish  people, i.e. the meaning of “an eye for an eye.” There the Torah speaks about injury rather than death. This is followed in turn by injury caused to a Canaanite slave, the least serious misdemeanor of the list commencing in verse 20. After having dealt with injuries and death caused by human beings, the Torah turns its attention to injuries or death caused by beasts or inert objects. The Torah proceeds in a very orderly and logical manner.
    
    21,28. וכי יגח שור את איש, “If an ox shall gore a man or a woman, etc.” the Torah employs the term נגח when speaking of an injury or death caused by an ox attacking a human being, whereas when describing two beasts fighting each other the word used is נגף, “pushed with the body” (compare verse 38). The Talmud Baba Kama 2 explains that seeing the fate of a human being is influenced by horoscopic influences as well as through supervision by celestial forces of his individual fate, the Torah uses an expression indicating intent, whereas when beasts fight each other, seeing that their individual fates are not subject to such celestial influences the Torah is content to describe what happened as a result as a mere unintentional push.
   סקול יסקל השור, “the ox will be stoned to death.” The death penalty administered to the ox is not punishment for the ox but represents punishment for its owner who was guilty of negligence by not having guarded the beast so that it could not be a hazard to humans. The owner must be warned that negligence will cost him dearly. This, at any rate, is the opinion of Nachmanides.
    There is another approach to this stoning of the ox (the author does not attribute it to a specific scholar) which holds that any ox or other beast or bird even, which kills a human being did so only as it had absorbed some of the lethal powers of the original serpent which was bent on causing death to man. This is the reason we find that the sages compared the plague of pestilence (a deadly plague) to the goring of an ox as we learned at the beginning of tractate Taanit (folio 19). We have been told there that: “if three people die on the same day this is not an indication that the pestilence of plague is raging. If three people die on three successive days however, this is an indication that the pestilence of the plague is raging.“ (the halachic consequence is that people in that town must congregate in prayer to implore G’d to bring the pestilence to a halt). The law about how do deal with an ox which has gored is also connected with the dates on which this occurred. If the same ox has gored three people on the same day we do not consider that it has lost its status as a tame beast. If it has gored one person each on three successive days it has become a dangerous beast and the owner has to take extraordinary precautions to prevent this happening again. This is the meaning of the words in verse 29 “if this ox has gored yesterday and the day before.” This is the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah. Rabbi Meir does not agree with this kind of logic. He feels that  if an ox which only killed at intervals of at least 24 hours is subject to stoning, an ox which goes on a rampage on the same day must most certainly be stoned. In spite of what sounds like sound logic, the halachah has been determined according to the view of Rabbi Yehudah (Maimonides Nizkey Mammon chapter 6 halachah 1).  A further observation about the behaviour of oxen is made in Pessachim 112 based on a verse in Ezekiel. The Talmud there says that in the month of Nissan oxen have Satan dancing between their horns. It is well known that the ox derives its physical strength from the attribute of Justice. This is what Ezekiel 1,10 referred to when he described it in his vision. The face of the ox in that vision is described as being on the “left”, i.e. the traditional side assigned to the attribute of Justice. Berachot 27 relates an incident in which a rooster which had killed a human being was stoned to death by order of the court. The reason our verse mentions an ox is that oxen are the beasts most likely to cause death of humans through goring. The legislation is certainly not restricted to oxen. It is well known that in the period of the Talmud Satan was a very visible demon, so much so that eventually people implored G’d to have mercy and to conceal Satan from their eyes (compare Kidushin 81). 
    
    21,29. והמית איש או אשה, “and it kills a man or a woman, etc. “ According to Pessikta Zutrata on our verse, these words are redundant in connection with the immediate subject at hand. They are therefore available to serve as a basic premise that just as there is no difference in the treatment of man and woman if either has been gored by an ox, neither does Jewish law make a distinction between men and women in other instances of woman sustaining death or injury. Although nowadays (since the Jews were exiled to Babylon) we do not have the authority to impose financial penalties, if someone who was wronged (injured) compensated himself by seizing property belonging to the guilty party our local courts do not reverse what the injured party has done.
    Our sages in Baba Kama 30 relate a list of anecdotes describing how careful various Talmudic scholars were to ensure that their property (inert) could not accidentally become the cause of injuring people. They buried ploughshares 3 feet underground, were very careful that discarded shards should not pose a hazard to anyone, etc. Deut. 22,8 (in connection with the fence on one’s roof) states “in order that you do not place blood in your house,” as the basic warning not to become guilty of damage or injury through inadvertence. A certain individual was observed throwing stones which he did not want anymore from his house into the public domain, the street. An old man accosted this individual challenging him why he threw refuse from a place which was his own to a place which was not. The offender replied sarcastically: After some time had passed the offending individual found himself in financial straits and had to sell his house. He tripped over the stones which he had thrown out sometime earlier. He then remembered the words of the old man who had scolded him at the time and now he acknowledged that the reproof had been in place. The story is an illustration of what Solomon said in Kohelet 12,1: “remember your Creator in your youth.”
   וגם בעליו יומת, “and also its owner  shall die.” The word יומת here does not refer to execution of the owner by a human tribunal. Our sages, (Sanhedrin 15) in interpreting the word conclude that a man is executed for murder of a human being not for the killing committed by his ox. The penalty referred to in our verse is known as מיתה בידי שמים, “death at the hand of heaven,” i.e. premature death of the owner in question. The expression used for the death penalty of the guilty owner is the same as in Numbers 18,7 “and the stranger (non-priest) who enters holy precincts  will die.” Sanhedrin 83 makes clear that what is meant is death at the hands of G’d. 
    
    21,30. אם כופר יושת עליו, “if a ransom payment has been imposed upon him,” the word אם in this instance is not a conditional word, i.e. “may be yes maybe no,” but describes the duty of the court to assess  such financial damages. The word אם therefore means either “when,” or as “soon as.” The wordכופר  means atonement wherever it appears. Payment of the fine constitutes atonement for the owner. The atonement is similar to that achieved by presenting a sin-offering where the owner paid for the animal in question. The principal atonement is a matter for heaven;  the owner is not forced to appear before a court in order to be assessed damages, nor, after damages have ben assessed and he has failed to pay them is his property seized to enforce the court’s judgment (compare Ritva on Makkot 2).
   ונתן פדיון נפשו ככל אשר יושת עליו, “and he is to pay a redemption for his life in accordance with what has been assessed against him.” This teaches that if the owner of the goring ox has paid the judgment he is no longer subject to death at the hands of G’d. We base this also on Job 33,24: “redeem him from descending to the Pit, for I have obtained his ransom.” This is the law whenever someone is guilty of death at the hands of G’d such as this individual who has not committed murder or even manslaughter, but has merely been the indirect cause of death of a human being through his negligence. When a person has killed with his own hands, (directly) there is no provision for his guilt being wiped out through a ransom payment. This is what the Torah meant in Leviticus 27,29 אך כל חרם אשר יחרם מן האדם לא יפדה מות יומת, “but any condemned person who has been banned from mankind shall not be redeemed, he shall be put to death.”
    
    21,31. או בן יגח או בת יגח, “whether it gores a boy or a girl, etc.” Seeing that  in verse 28 the paragraph commenced with the words “if an ox gore a man or a woman,” the Torah adds that even if the victim of such a goring was a minor the same law applies. 
    
    21,32. אם עבד יגח השור או אמה, “if the ox gores a male or a female slave, etc.,” this again refers to Canaanite slaves; 
   כסף שלושים שקלים, “thirty silver shekels.” This is a fixed amount irrespective of the market-value of the slave in question or his sex.
    
    21,37. כי יגנוב איש שור או שה וטבחו או מכרו, “if a man steals an ox or lamb and slaughters it or sells it, etc.,” according to the plain meaning of the text we are taught here that crimes which are more common than others need to be punished more harshly in order for the penalty to have a restraining effect on the potential criminal. Seeing that the Torah decrees that an ordinary thief has to pay back twice the value of what he has stolen, it is no more than logical that in cases where the thief tried to eliminate traces of the stolen object through eating it or selling it, he should be required to pay even higher compensation to its owner. The Torah stipulates double the ordinary penalty for people who steal sheep, goats, etc., whereas theft of cows and slaughtering them is paid for by five times their value if the thief is discovered. According to Maimonides (Moreh Nevuchim 3,41) the difference is due to large animals such as oxen being the object of theft more often as the shepherd cannot guard them as well as he can guard sheep.
    According to Mechilta Nezikin section 12 the reduced penalty for stealing sheep is due to the Torah’s regard for human dignity. Whereas carrying a sheep under one’s arm is demeaning, leading an ox by a rope is not. Allowing for the thief’s having had to demean himself in order to bring the stolen sheep home, the Torah was content with the thief paying four times its value in order for him to exonerate himself.  As a corollary of this piece of legislation we learn that the Torah considers manual labour as very important as it reduced the penalty for people whose crime involved manual labour.
    The reason a thief has to pay twice the value of what he has stolen whereas a robber only needs to make restitution without the Torah adding punitive damages, our sages are already on record (Baba Kama 79) that the robber placed the owner on a par with G’d, displaying no fear of either when he robbed in broad daylight. The thief, however, displayed more fear of the owner of the animal he stole than of the Lord in heaven who watches his crime. Seeing he insulted the Lord by the attitude he displayed when he indicated that he did not believe G’d saw his deed, he has to pay twice the value of what he stole. Isaiah 29,15 illustrated this bitingly when he said: “Ha! Those who would hide their plans deep from the Lord! Who do their work in dark places and say: ‘who sees us, who takes note of us?’” We find a similar verse in Psalms 94,7: “they think that the Lord does not see it, the G’d of Yaakov pays no heed.”
    A Midrashic approach: (Shemot Rabbah 30,7) when the Israelites heard this legislation they said: “G’d has given us many commandments to help us make up for many sins we have committed; we have stolen an ox and we have made it into a golden calf;  we paid five times the value of the ox as our fathers died in the desert on account of that sin. The legislation that a thief pays four times the value of a lamb he has stolen and slaughtered is a reference to the sale of Joseph on account of which we spent 400 years as slaves in Egypt, and we have since been ruled over by four different alien empires.” Thus far the wording of this Midrash. I believe that the meaning of this Midrash needs further clarification. The words: “our father died in the desert” are a reference to the three thousand idol-worshipping Israelites whom the Levites executed in the aftermath of the golden calf episode (32.,28). These words also refer to the other Israelites who died by a plague at that time as there was no evidence against them that could be presented in a court. (compare Exodus 32,28 and 35). Seeing that the Midrash mentions the number “five,” I assume that there were five different punishments meted out in connection with that sin. This is the meaning of the words תחת השור, i.e. the letter ה in front of the word שור. The five penalties were: 1) killing offenders whose deed was witnessed by the sword. 2) The plague that struck those whom G’d knew to be guilty but man could not prosecute. 3) the embarrassment caused those whom Moses made drink the water with the dissolved parts of the golden calf (32,20), similar to what a woman suspected of marital infidelity (Sotah) has to do (32,20). 4) The destruction of the Holy Temple many years later (compare Ezekiel 40,1) based on the words וביום פקדי ופקדתי in 32,34, meaning that whenever G’d brings on a great disaster, part of it is in delayed expiation for the sin of the golden calf. 5) that although G’d generally does not punish anyone for a sin committed more than four generations earlier (34,7), this sin was an exception and it is never fully expiated. Successive generations suffer a small portion of the punishment for it at the time they qualify for punishments for their own sins. I shall explain this in greater detail on Exodus 34,7.
    
    22,1.  אם במחתרת ימצא הגנב, “If the thief is found while in hiding.” The word מחתרת suggests that he was tunneling his way into the house in the dark of night.
   אין לו דמים, “there is no blood-guilt on his account.” If the owner killed the thief believing his life to be in danger he is not accused of manslaughter. The Torah presumes that if someone breaks into a house at night he is also prepared to kill if discovered by the owner who would defend his property.
    
    22,2. אם זרחה השמש עליו, “if the sun shone upon him, etc.” If the thief entered in broad daylight or remained in the house of the victim till morning,
   דמים לו, “there is blood guilt on his account.” Anyone who kills unless his own life was in danger is subject to the penalty for murder or manslaughter. In this instance, when the identity of the thief has become known, he would not threaten his victim with death as he would be aware that he would suffer the penalty for murder. Seeing that the owner of the house was not in danger he must not kill the intruder.
    The reason why the Torah describes the sun shining by using the  feminine form of the word זרחה, rather than the customary זרח (compare Kohelet 1,5 or Genesis 32,32) is that the Bible usually does so when it describes the sun spreading its rays over the earth during the day. Examples are: Samuel II 12,11  לעיני השמש הזאת, “in view of this bright sunlight.” The sun is described as
masculine in the Bible when it is only at the beginning of its daily journey across the sky. Example: השמש יצא על הארץ, “the sun had risen over the earth.” (Genesis 19,23). The author quotes additional examples. At any rate, the meaning is that if the sun has already spread its light all over the earth and it is clear that the thief will be caught and cannot escape, דמים לו, anyone killing him will be guilty. The words have a dual meaning, i.e. they also mean that the thief has to pay compensation to the victim failing which the court will sell his labour for the next 6 years to the kind of master described in 21,2 so that the owner of the stolen property can be  compensated.
    
    22,4. מיטב שדהו ומיטב כרמו ישלם, “from the best of his field or the best of his vineyard he shall make payment to him (restitution).” The Talmud Gittin 48 uses this wording to arrive at the general ruling that when compensation is assessed by the court for damages caused willfully or through negligence, the guilty party’s most valuable agricultural property is used. If the court would be content to take comparable produce grown on inferior soil belonging to the party causing the damage this would encourage such a party to openly steal the best quality of produce of his neighbour and have the court replace it with inferior quality from his own field or vineyard. In such cases the guilty party would profit by his crime. In order to discourage a farmer from engaging in this kind of pilfering, the law is slanted in favour of the potential victim so that the potential thief will realise that it will not pay him to steal from his neighbour as the court’s order will soon result in his losing instead of profiting by his crime.
    When money is owed by a borrower who has failed to repay it on time, (an interest-free loan) the court assesses average quality of the debtor’s produce to be used to repay his debt.
    When a husband has to pay a wife whom he has divorced her marriage settlement, he is entitled to compensate her from the most inferior quality produce which his fields produce. Actually, if we were to proceed strictly according to Biblical law, the borrower would also have to be assessed only to make repayment from his most inferior produce. (They wanted to base this on Deut. 24,11) where the lender is not permitted to enter the borrower’s house to pick himself the kind of security he wants to hold onto until the debt has been paid. It is reasoned that just as in that instance the debtor will surely volunteer only the cheapest of his possessions as a pawn, so here too the Torah would take only from his most inferior produce to satisfy his creditor). However, if the sages had applied this ruling the lenders would have refused to extend loans to impecunious borrowers in the future. In order to forestall such a possibility and to help future borrowers to obtain loans, the sages decided to upgrade the kind of produce from which such a defaulting borrower has to make repayment. The sages also advance a reason based on psychology of women to explain why if her marriage settlement becomes due she is presumed as satisfied with unfavourable conditions. It is presumed that a woman’s desire to be married (and to enjoy that status) is greater than the comparable desire of her husband to marry her (Kidushin 49).
    
    22,5. כי תצא אש, “if a fire is started and spreads, etc.” by itself; שלם ישלם המבעיר את הבערה, “the party who started the conflagration must pay compensation.” The party who had started the fire is the root-cause of the damage. Had he not started it the fire could not have spread and burned standing corn or stacked, harvested grain. The sages in Baba Kama 60 use this verse to see an allusion in it to the destruction by fire of the Holy Temple. They quote G’d as saying that He Himself must compensate the Jewish people for the burning down of the Temple as He had started the fire. The sages quote Isaiah 64,10: “our Holy Temple, our pride, where our fathers praised You, has been consumed by fire; all that was dear to us has been ruined.” Seeing that the Jews attribute the destruction to their own faults, G’d was willing to describe Himself as the root-cause and assumes the burden of compensating the Jewish people as if He had started the fire (compare Rash there).
    
    22,6. כי יתן איש אל רעהו כסף או כלים, “if a man shall give money or vessels to his fellow to safeguard, etc.”  Our sages (Baba Kama 93) describe four categories of people who keep other people’s property for them. The first category is known as שומר חנם “a keeper who does not receive compensation.” The second category is a paid guardian known as שומר שכר. The third category is known as שואל, a borrower of someone else’s utensils. The fourth category is known as שוכר, someone who rents other people’s tools, etc. The laws applying to these various שומרים differ in relation to the use they get out of the items for whose safekeeping they have made themselves responsible.
    The paragraph commencing here speaks of someone who does someone else a favour by accepting something in trust by neither receiving nor asking compensation for his trouble. It is after all something quite common for neighbours to do each other such a favour. The next paragraph commencing with the words: “if someone gives his fellow a donkey or an ox, etc.,” speaks about a keeper who is being paid for his trouble. After all, animals have to be fed and cared for; most people expect to be compensated for their trouble in taking care of them. The third paragraph commencing with the words: “when someone borrows from his fellow, etc.,” clearly speaks of borrowers who use their relationship with the owner to borrow his tools or domestic beast for free. Finally, the last part of that same paragraph: “if he is a renter,” describes use of other people’s property against payment of a fee.
    You should know that as a general rule the שומר חנם is not liable to make good the loss of the item under his care if it was stolen or became lost, and most certainly not if some unforeseeable accident happened to it such as an earthquake, etc. After all, he had done the owner a favour accepting a responsibility without charging for it. The exact opposite is the case in the case of a person who had borrowed a neighbour’s tools or animal and made use of it as if they were his own. He is liable not only for theft and disappearance of the borrowed object but also if it became damaged or lost through accident. Instead of having done a favour to the owner, the owner had done him a favour by loaning the object in question to him for his use. Our sages summed up the reason for the borrower’s comprehensive liability by saying דכל הנאה לדידיה הוא “the borrower enjoys total use of this property (like the owner).” By using this logic it is clear that he who enjoys the rights of ownership is responsible for the well being of the item under discussion.
    In the case of both a person who hires the object or who rents it out, the responsibility for loss is shared depending on the nature of the loss and the manner in which it occurred seeing that both parties share in the usefulness of the item in question. One party receives financial benefit; the other party, the one using the animal or tool enjoys its use. Damages arising from theft or loss accrue to the party under whose care the animal or object was at the time such damage occurred. Accidental damage that could not be foreseen and is not attributable to negligence accrues to the owner rather than to the user (based on Maimonides Moreh Nevuchim third volume chapter 42). All the above demonstrates the fairness of Torah legislation in regulating the way righteous people ought to live their lives.
    
    22,7-8.  ונקרב בעל הבית אל האלוהים,...עד האלוהים יבא דבר שניהם. אשר ירשיעון אלוהים, “then the householder shall approach the court.....to the court shall come both their claims....whomever the court shall find guilty shall pay.” In this short paragraph the word elohim appears three times. This prompted our sages in Sanhedrin 3 to rule that a court must consist of a minimum of three judges. You will note that in the whole portion commencing with chapter 21 up until here the four-lettered name of G’d has not appeared even once. The reason for this is spelled out in Deut. 1,17 כי המשפט לאלוהים הוא, “for justice is a matter which is the domain of (the attribute) elohim.” The only time the tetragram is mentioned is in connection with the oath where the Torah defines such an oath as שבועת י-ה-ו-ה; we have already explained that theקו האמצעי  is the principal emanation associated with an oath. It is therefore logical that such an oath should be described as sworn in the name of the attribute Hashem. The word שבעה is spelled without the letter ו, to show its connection with the lower seven emanations as we have explained repeatedly in Yitro 20, 7 as well as in Genesis 21,23.
    
    22,10. אם לא שלח ידו במלאכת רעהו, “that he did not lay his hand on the property of his fellow;” the Torah refers to the object held in trust for his fellow (compare Ibn Ezra). This is also the opinion of Onkelos who translates these words as לא יושיט ידה במא דמסר ליה חברה, “he did not stretch out his hand against what his friend had given him.” The reason such a deposit is described by the Torah as מלאכה, is that a person’s wealth is often referred to as his מלאכה; one example is found in Genesis 33,14 where Yaakov explains that he has to travel more slowly than his brother Esau due to his “wealth” moving slowly. His wealth consisted primarily of his flocks and herds.
    The major point our verse makes is that the person to whom the deposit has been entrusted must not make any use of it whatsoever. If the deposit consists of beasts of burden the trustee must not use them for his own purpose; if they consist of vessels he must not use them for his own purposes either. Using such vessels would also fall under the heading מלאכה. Vessels have been manufactured for precisely the use called מלאכת תשמיש.  Our sages in Baba Metzia 41 stated that the trustee who made any kind of use of deposits of vessels entrusted to them even if they did not deteriorate in value by such use, will henceforth be liable for anything which happens to such vessels. Two scholars, Rav and Levi disagree with one another on that subject, one saying that the word שלח ידו implies that the item under discussion loses value as a result of such use. The other scholar says that it does not need to lose value in order to fit the description in our verse. The decision in the Talmud is that it does not need to lose value in order for the trustee to become liable for any damage from that point on.
    
    22,17. מכשפה לא תחיה, “You must not let a sorceress live.” The whole subject of sorcerers and their activities centers around the linking of phenomena which ought to be separate and distinct from one another. Sorcerers preoccupy themselves with establishing a link between phenomena reserved for our terrestrial world and phenomena from a higher world. When such phenomena are linked (illegally) the result represents a challenge and danger to the continued functioning of G’d’s universe. The חרטומים of Egypt, the Egyptian sorcerers, engaged in such activities and their principal knowledge consisted of producing miraculous phenomena based on their intricate knowledge of the laws of nature.
    When the Torah forbade the joining of linen and wool and the wearing of such products by Jews (except the fringes with the blue wool thread in a four-cornered garment) this is a small hint that there are elements which Torah law wants to keep apart. (compare Nachmanides on Leviticus 19,19). The Talmud Sanhedrin 67 explains that the reason these people are מכשפים and the products of their activities are called כשפים is that they deny the פמליא של מעלה, the existence and effectiveness of celestial forces. A denial of such forces consists of combining elements in our terrestrial world which were clearly meant not to be joined together. The orbit of the various celestial spheres and their failure to collide are proof of things existing in the universe which are meant to remain apart. It is appropriate for human beings to allow the world to function as it was meant to function as this clearly reflects the will of the Creator. Interference with G’d’s blueprint for the functioning of the universe is an act of heresy and insurrection (compare Nachmanides on Deut. 18,9).
    Rabbeinu Chananel in his commentary on that folio in Sanhedrin explains the matter of מכשפים differently. He claims that such sorcerers cannot perform any supernatural feats unless G’d specifically wants them to succeed. He bases his view on a reply given by Rabbi Chaninah to a woman who was trying to extract soil from beneath the feet of that Rabbi in order to perform acts of sorcery. Rabbi Chaninah told her that in the event she would enjoy help from G’d in her efforts and succeed he would still not be concerned as there is no one beside the Lord (Deut. 4 4,35). Rabbi Yochanan questioned this saying that the reason these sorcerers are called מכשפים is because they deny the power of celestial forces. In that case, Rabbi Chaninah did have something to be concerned about! The answer given by the Talmud is that Rabbi Chaninah had so many merits that he personally did not have what to worry about. Concerning the above, Rabbeinu Chananel writes that although the Talmud gave such an answer it is not to be taken seriously.
    If you were to ask that assuming, as Rabbi Chaninah said, these activities of the sorcerers can succeed only if especially approved by G’d, why does the Torah bother to outlaw these activities and to make their practitioners subject to the death penalty? The answer is simply that by doing so, or even attempting to do what they have in mind they commit an act of rebellion against G’d and the rules He has established for His universe. Consider simply this: if an act of rebellion against a mortal king of flesh and blood is punishable by death, surely an act of rebellion against the King of Kings must carry the death penalty! Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel.
    Seeing that during their long stay in Egypt the Israelites had been constantly exposed to acts of sorcery and it was likely that some of them at least would have a tendency to credit these sorcerers with knowledge of matters of substance, the Torah had to come out explicitly forbidding such practices and legislating the death penalty for people ignoring the Torah’s prohibition. In order to show us how seriously the Torah views these activities the Torah was not satisfied with the usual command to execute such practitioners of sorcery but it wrote: “you must not allow a sorceress to remain alive!” In other words, inactivity, not bringing such a sorceress to justice, is an additional sin committed by anyone who is aware of such people practicing their nefarious art. The only other place where the Torah uses such strong language is in connection with the seven nations occupying what was to be the land of Israel. There too the Torah writes: לא תחיה כל נשמה, “you must not allow a single soul to remain alive” (Deut. 20,16).
    The reason the Torah writes not to let a sorceress live instead of writing “do not let a sorcerer live,” is that most of the people practicing this art are women. Certain activities such as those attributed to אוב are carried out exclusively by women. This is what the Torah writes (Leviticus 20,27) “and any man or woman in whom there shall be the sorcery of Ov or of Yidoni shall be put to death, etc.” [apparently a man cannot perform these tricks unless he is assisted by a woman. Ed.] According to information available to us from books dealing with such practices a woman is required to stand over (in) the grave of the dead person above his head whereas her male partner takes up his position at the feet of the deceased. A youth must stand in the middle; the lad holds a kind of rattle with which he makes rattling sounds. In previous ages this appears to have been a widespread practice. The rattles (church bells) which are common in the Kingdom of Edom (Roman Empire) and which are pealed in their towers (cathedrals) appear to have their origin in that practice.
    
    22,19. זובח לאלוהים יחרם, “anyone bringing a sacrifice to the gods shall be put to death.” Seeing that in the second of the Ten Commandments this prohibition has already been mentioned in general terms, the Torah now spells out the penalty. The expression יחרם is similar to Leviticus 27,29 כל חרם אשר יחרם מן-האדם לא יפדה מות ימות, “any condemned person who has been banned from mankind shall not be redeemed, he shall be put to death.” The word יחרם has been chosen by the Torah to demonstrate the principle of “the punishment matches the crime.” The guilty party has offered a sacrifice to something which is condemned to be destroyed; hence he will himself be subject to destruction. The fact that the Torah speaks of actual slaughter of a sacrifice to such idols is not to be construed as limiting the death penalty for idol worship. If the person in question had merely prostrated himself in front of that idol or had kindled incense, etc., etc., he is subject to the same penalty. We have already explained that even if an obeisance made to an idol appears in our eyes as an affront rather than as an act of paying homage, the perpetrator is subject to the death penalty (Mechilta Nezikin section 17). Rashi explains that the vowel patach [actually kametz, but meaning the same as a patach in words where the first letter is not followed by the letter א. Ed.] under the first letter ל in לאלוהים makes it unnecessary to add the word אחרים after the word לאלוהים. The definite article which this kametz represents is a reference to the second commandment (20,3) where idolatry, even if the obeisance is made to an angel in his capacity as the Lord’s angel has been forbidden.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word לאלהים is an allusion to the mystical dimension of animal sacrifice. Consider Numbers 28,2 את קרבני לחמי לאשי , “My offering, My food, My fires.” Our sages  said that in the event someone thought that the Torah speaks of G’d consuming actual food (לחמי), the Torah corrects such an impression by adding the word לאשי  as “My fires.” This teaches that the animal (or other) sacrifices the Jewish people present are given to an attribute He calls “fire.” The truth of the matter is that  whereas the offerings will be consumed by G’d’s “fire,” they were addressed to G’d’s essence, to Hashem. This is why the verse adds בלתי לי-ה-ו-ה- לבדו, “exclusively to Hashem alone.” This is also reflected in Onkelos translating these last three words as לשמא דיי בלחודוהי, “to the name of the unique G’d only.”
    
    22,20.  וגר לא תונה, “and you must not take advantage of a stranger.” The word תונה refers to disadvantaging him with words, whereas the following word ולא תלחצנו refers to physically taking advantage of his status such as robbing him of money which is his (Mechilta Nezikin section 18). The Torah writes many times about the need to treat a proselyte fairly seeing that he is alone in a country in which he has no roots, no family who could protect him. The word גר for a stranger is derived from גרגיר, an isolated berry at the far end of a solitary branch. People have a habit of insulting strangers and belittling them. G’d therefore warns us not to think that such a stranger has no one who takes up his complaints. The Lord Himself will fight his fight for him. The Torah reminds us that we of all people should have empathy for strangers seeing we had been taken advantage of in Egypt because we were strangers. G’d implies that just as He took pity on us as we had no one else to turn to, He will do the same for such strangers if the need arises. Interestingly, the Torah (23,9) did not write אתם ידעתם את הנר, but ואתם ידעתם את נפש הגר. “you know the soul (feelings) of a stranger,” You are aware that every stranger has low self-esteem, and he has no one to turn to except Me.” The Torah mentions immediately afterwards that we must not oppress widows or orphans, both of whom have been bereaved of their human protectors. Both categories are often taken advantage of by callous people. Baba Metzia 59 describes them as prone to weeping. Seeing that the “gates of weeping are never locked,” i.e. G’d is ready to respond to people who feel so wretched that they turn to G’d with their tears, G’d warns offenders that He, personally, will exact retribution from people who exploit the weakness of either widows or orphans. To avoid becoming the object of such retribution we must be especially careful not to give widows or orphans cause to complain to G’d against us. Isaiah 58, 7 and 10 warns: “share your bread with the hungry, take the wretched poor into your home, when you see the naked clothe him....offer your compassion to the hungry and satisfy the famished creature.” He means that if you have bread you can give the poor do this; if you do not have what to share at least display some sympathy for the suffering creatures so that they will regain hope and confidence. The reason the Torah speaks about כל אלמנה, “every widow,” is to include wealthy widows in the commandment not to take advantage of them. She too is prone to shedding tears and is liable to feel embittered.
    
    22,22. אם ענה תענה אותו, “if you were really to cause him pain,” The Torah goes to the trouble to again spell out each group of potentially affected people such as the widow, the orphan, although they had been mentioned in verse 21 as people that were not to be oppressed. [the repetition ענה תענה is perceived as applying to widow and orphan individually. Ed.] The reason the Torah repeats so many words in this legislation (ענה תענה, צעק יצעק, שמע אשמע), is that most such people when they suffer indignities endeavour to obtain redress by appealing to a variety of socially responsible organisations. Being widows or orphans however, they do not rely on such organisations but appeal to G’d at the same time. The Torah reflects this situation by describing them as appealing for help on two different levels. The Torah assures them that G’d too will respond on two different levels, i.e. שמע אשמע את צעקתו, “I will hear (respond) his outcry repeatedly.” If G’d is faced with appeals from a variety of people which He will respond to, the appeals by widows and orphans will enjoy priority. This is similar to what Solomon said in Proverbs 23,11: “for they have a powerful redeemer; He will fight their battles against you.” Seeing that unfortunately it is the way of people to constantly oppress the widows and orphans the Torah informed us that G’d will help these people more than anyone else.
    We would have expected that the words ענה תענה would be followed by the word אותם, “them,” not אותו, “him,” as the Torah writes here. The reason is that the Torah warns not to oppress the same widow or the same orphan again and again. Were this to happen, if even only one victim would appeal to Me צעק יצעק אלי   שמע אשמע צעקתו, “I will surely listen to the outcry of each one of these people who have been abused.” We usually find the response by G’d to appeals to Him described in a manner reflecting the urgency or intensity with which they were presented to G’d. Example: Psalms 39,13 שמעה תפלתי ה’ ושועתי האזינה, “hear my prayer O Lord, give ear to my cry.” A prayer which is uttered by lips is referred to as requiring שמיעה in response, whereas a prayer which reflects deeper anguish by the petitioner and which is described by the psalmist as שועה, requires a correspondingly more profound attention and response, hence the psalmist says of it האזינה, “give ear.” Such a type of listening goes beyond mere שמיעה, which registered merely the sound of the prayer. Finally, in that same verse, David adds: אל דמעתי אל תחרש, “do not remain silent in response to my tears!” Tears are an expression of a human being having humbled himself before the one to whom they are addressed, in this instance, of course, to G’d. The meaning of אל תחרש is that that the petitioner wants to secure G’d’s goodwill. From the above you can appreciate how meticulous G’d is in dealing with different nuances of human behaviour, responding to each person in accordance with his individual level of piety, distress, etc. 
    There is a Midrash which expresses a similar sentiment. Job 33,23, (Elihu speaking), אם יש עליו מלאך מליץ אחד מני-אלף להגיד לאדם ישרו, “if he has a representative, one advocate against a thousand to declare man’s uprightness.” [the speaker goes on to demonstrate how easily G’d will respond to favourable data about the petitioner. Ed.] The Midrash draws attention to the fact that Elihu did not say  מלאך אחד מני אלף, but מליץ אחד מני אלף, not “one agent (angel) amongst a thousand,” but “one advocate among a thousand.” Elihu meant that if a single merit can be shown on behalf of a person against whom there may be one thousand demerits this suffices to elicit a positive response from G’d.
    Another way of explaining the words שמוע אשמע צעקתו could be that the first word (שמוע) means “I, the Lord, will compensate you for the harm done to you by your fellow;” the word אשמע then would mean that “I, the Lord, will deprive the one who slighted you of an amount equivalent to that which he has stolen from you.” This would be in line with the last verse (26) in this paragraph והיה כי יצעק אלי ושמעתי כי חנון אני, “it will be when he cries out to Me, I shall listen, for I am compassionate.” The word חנינה is a reference to the attribute of Justice being employed against the one who caused the petitioner to cry out to G’d, and G’d as a result suppressing His compassion with such a person.
    
    22,23. וחרה אפי, “and My anger shall blaze forth.” This is the same attribute of Justice which smote the Egyptians because they maltreated you taking advantage of the fact that you were strangers. The words והרגתי אתכם בחרב are aimed at those guilty of abusing the stranger whereas the words והיו נשיכם אלמנות are the warning to the people taking advantage of widows. The words ובניכם יתומים, are aimed at people abusing orphans. Each offense will be punished by the מדה כנגד מדה principle, punishment fitting the crime. All the time you are careful not to offend the sensibilities of any of the three groups of naturally sensitive people, any part of the attribute of Justice which would be turned against you (for other sins) will be reversed and will express itself instead as an arm of the attribute of Mercy (Sotah 16). This will enable you to enjoy many years on the land, both you and your children in the presence of your G’d. Practice of righteousness saves from death as we know from Proverbs 10,2. We also have a promise in chapter 12,28 of Proverbs: “there is life in the path of righteousness, there is no death on its path.” Practicing charity is considered a greater ethical/moral achievement than offering of sacrificial animals to G’d as we read in Proverbs: 21,3 “G’d prefers the performance of righteousness to the presentation of sacrificial offerings.” 
    
    22,24. אם כסף תלוה את עמי, “when you lend money to My people, etc.” Proverbs 21,14 extols the virtue of people doing charity anonymously. Solomon says: מתן בסתר יכפה אף, “a gift in secret pacifies anger.” On the other hand, ושוחד בחיק  חמה עזה, “a bribe in private makes G’d very angry.” Solomon set out to extol the virtue of people practicing the attribute of charity which deflects many problems which we might otherwise have to face and which altogether cancels negative decrees if such charity is practiced with discretion. The ideal way of fulfilling the concept to give charity anonymously is to ensure that the recipient is unaware of the donor and the donor remains unaware of who the recipient of his charity is. This avoids embarrassment to both parties. It is well known that there are eight different ways of giving charity (as listed in Maimonides’ tractate of Matanot La-aniyim chapter 10). These eight variants represent eight different levels of piety in ascending order. The lowest form of giving charity is to respond to a direct request by the recipient while making plain that one gives reluctantly. The next higher level is that one gives gladly in response to such a direct appeal but one does not give adequately. The third level is to give to the poor person before he has a chance to actually ask for the handout. The fourth level is to give to the poor in such a way that he knows from whom he receives but the donor does not know who the recipient is. This is the level employed by many scholars in the period of the Talmud who dispensed charity by letting the coins drop behind their prayer shawls as they were walking the streets. The poor would pick it up. The scholars did not disdain contact with the poor but they wanted to remain unaware of the identify of the recipients. The fifth level involves people who are aware of who receives their money but the recipient is not aware of who the donor is. This was a method of people known as חסידי עליון, (definition found in Maimonides describing very pious individuals). These people would throw their contributions into the doorways of the recipients’ houses. The sixth level of dispensing charity is to preserve the mutual anonymity of both donor and recipient. This is what can be described as performing a commandment for its own sake. This was the purpose of the collection boxes in the Holy Temple into which donations were thrown which eventually were distributed by officials appointed for the purpose (compare Shekalim 5,6). Nowadays contributions to a charity fund administered by trustees who keep the names of the recipients a secret are of a similar level. This level of charity is capable of warding off impending disasters. This is what Solomon was talking about in Proverbs 21,14 and 17,8. This level is precisely the reverse of what Solomon described in that latter verse, i.e. bribing someone secretly in order to pervert the course of justice. The positive message of Solomon’s statement is that if someone deprives himself of part of his wealth by giving it to charity, this very deprivation is what keeps away disaster that had already been lurking around the corner for him. As a result of his good deed he can turn in any direction and be successful. Solomon tells us that he who imagines that he will profit by bribing someone secretly to pervert justice in his favour will ultimately deprive himself as he thereby angered G’d exceedingly. To sum up: what may be perceived as a financial setback at first glance, i.e. the giving away of money, will in fact turn out to have been the cause of financial gain while the reverse is the case when one thought one had profited by illegal and deceptive ways.
    The eighth method of performing the commandment of charity, the most laudable of them all, is to extend a loan to the needy; a person who receives a loan has no cause to feel embarrassed or to lose his self-respect as the one extending the loan has proved to him that he thinks he will be repaid. This is why the Torah legislates in our verse that it is a positive commandment to extend such loans. Our sages have stated unequivocally that the word אם in this verse is not conditional but an exhortation similar to Exodus 20,28 where the Torah introduces the law not to use iron tools to build an altar with the word אם. Similarly, the word אם in Exodus 21,30 אם כופר יושת עליו does not mean “if an atonement payment has been assessed against him,” but “when an atonement payment has been assessed against him.”
    The meaning of our verse then is: “when you extend loans of money to fellow Jews, certain categories of people enjoy priority claims to such loans.” The words את עמי, for instance, mean that if a Jew has a good friend who is a Gentile and a fellow Jew whom he hardly knows who both request a loan then the Jew takes precedence if he is unable to extend loans to both men. The words את העני עמך mean that if a request for a loan is received by the same party from a wealthy Jew and from a poor Jew, the request from the poor Jew takes precedence. Similarly, a local Jew’s request takes precedence over that by a Jew from a different town. This is based on the meaning of the word עמך, i.e. the one who resides with you, near you.
    The words את העני, mean “with the poor,” i.e. if someone who is in a position to extend a loan refuses to do so he may wind up poor himself, i.e. “the poverty will be with you” (compare Tanchuma Mishpatim section 15). The words לא תהיה לו כנושה, “do not be to him like a creditor,” mean “do not behave as if the recipient of the loan is socially inferior to you because he is in your debt.” The typical relationship between lender and borrower has been described in Proverbs 22,7 as “the borrower is a slave to the lender.” The Torah deplores this and forbids lenders to behave in that fashion. The words לא תשים עליו נשך, ”do not impose interest upon him,” refer to interest in its various forms whether as monetary payments, food, or in any other form (compare Deut. 23,20). The loan is supposed to be an act of loving kindness; one is not even to exploit it in order to secure some intangible advantage such as receiving honours not normally accruing to one. Even being greeted first by the borrower is considered such an intangible form of  prohibited interest. This is why in Deuteronomy Moses added the words כל דבר, “in any shape or form.” (compare Baba Metzia 75).
    A Midrashic approach to our verse based on Shemot Rabbah 31,15. The words: “when you lend money to My people,” are a reminder that all of G’d’s creatures are constantly borrowing from each other as well as lending to one another. The day borrows from the night and the night borrows from the day. They did not need to resort to litigation on account of this, ever. This is the meaning of Psalms 19, 3-4: “Day to Day makes utterance, Night to Night speaks out; there is no utterance, there are no words whose sound goes unheard.” The moon borrows from the stars and the stars borrow from the moon; whenever G’d so desires He does not display either of them. This is the meaning of Job 9,7: “Who commands the sun not to shine; who seals up the stars.” Light borrows from the Sun and the Sun borrows from Light; this is the meaning of: “sun and moon stand still on high;” (Chabakuk 3,11). Wisdom borrows from Understanding, and Understanding borrows from Wisdom as we know from Proverbs 7,4: “Say to Wisdom “you are my sister and call Understanding a kinswoman.” Heaven borrows from Earth and Earth borrows from Heaven. This is the meaning of Deut. 28,12: “The Lord will open for you His bounteous store, the heavens, to provide rain for your land at its appropriate season.” His creatures borrow from each other and repay each other. Contrast this with the behaviour of man who lends only if he can swallow the borrower through charging him interest. This is why the psalmist described an upright individual, as someone “who does not lend his money by charging interest nor accepting bribes against the innocent” (Psalms 15,5).
    Please note that anyone who is wealthy and who gives charity to the poor and does not charge interest on the loans he extends is considered as if he personally had kept all the recipients alive. This is what David meant when he said (Psalms 15,5) “he who does all these will never be shaken.” Who was an individual who fitted the description mentioned by the psalmist? This was Ovadiah, who was both wealthy and a supervisor of the treasury of King Achav, King of Israel. We read in Kings I 18,3: “Achav called Ovadiah who was in charge of his palace.” He was exceedingly wealthy, spending all his money on charitable deeds as we know from verse 13 in that same chapter in Kings where he told the prophet Elijah: “I have hidden one hundred of G’d’s prophets, fifty and fifty in two different caves each. I have supplied all of them with bread and water (food and drink).” When the famine decreed by Elijah materialised this man was forced to borrow from Yehoram, Achhav’s son, (paying him interest) in order to ensure the continued survival of these prophets. Actually, Ovadiah had not meant to pay the interest to Yehoram. This is the meaning of  כספו לא נתן בנשך, “he did not give his money as interest”. Yehoram had a different idea, however. He had every intention of collecting the interest agreed upon. This is why G’d dispatched Yehu to kill him. This is the true meaning of (Kings II 9,24) “Yehu drew his bow and hit Yehoram between the shoulders so that the arrow pierced his heart and he collapsed in his chariot.” In this way we can understand the statement of Ezekiel 18,13: “he has lent at advanced interest or exacted accrued interest—shall he live?” To warn us of all this the Torah here exhorts us  by writing: “when you lend money to My people you must not charge interest.”
    An alternate approach (based on Shemot Rabbah 31,10) the unusual formulation in our verse where the Torah writes עמי, “My people,” is a hint that G’d considers the poor as “My people” by excellence. The word עמו “His people,” is found in Scripture repeatedly in reference to the poor. Examples: Isaiah 49,13 “for the Lord has comforted His people and has taken His afflicted ones in love.” Or, Isaiah 14,32: ”that Zion has been established by the Lord. In it the needy of His people shall find shelter.” It is a characteristic amongst people not to want to be saddled with poor relatives. This is what Proverbs 19,7 describes as: “all the brothers of a poor man hate him;” in chapter 14,20 Solomon expands on this further when he writes: “the poor man is hated even by his own neighbour, but the rich has many friends.” Contrast the way G’d relates to the poor. He is certainly wealthy as testified to by Chronicles I 29,12: “Riches and Honour are Yours to dispense; You have dominion over all.” Or, Chagai 2,8: “Silver is Mine and gold is Mine- says the Lord of Hosts.” Nonetheless He extends His cover and protection only to the poor as we know from Isaiah 14,32: “that Zion has been established by the Lord. In it the needy of His people shall find shelter.” This is the message of the verse commencing with the words: “when you lend money to My people.”
    
    22,25. אם חבול תחבול שלמת רעך עד בא השמש תשיבנו לו, “If you take your neighbour’s garment in pledge you must return it to him before the sun sets.”  The verse speaks of a garment worn by day (Mechilta Nezikin 19). [the meaning is that if you took such a garment (as collateral, with the court’s approval) but during the day, you have to give it back and take it only after sunset when the owner does not need it. Ed.]
    Shemot Rabbah 31,10 writes as follows on our verse: here the Torah describes the meaning of Jeremiah 6,30: “they are called ‘rejected silver,’ for the Lord rejected them.” You find that when the Israelites were exiled from Jerusalem that their captors led them in iron collars. Their enemies said: “their G’d has already despised them as He said concerning them that they are rejected silver.” Just as silver needs refinement before it can be trans-formed into usable vessels, and it has to be melted down and be refined again in order to make a different vessel out of it, eventually it will be used up and returned to the soil as it is of no further use, this is what happened to Israel who are of no further use.” As soon as Jeremiah heard this he exclaimed: “Have you then rejected Yehudah? Have You spurned Zion?” (Jeremiah 14,19) The matter is best explained by means of a parable. A king punished his wife, striking her; her friend said to him: ‘how long will you keep on hitting her? If you want to divorce her, go on striking her until she dies; if however, you intend to take her back eventually, why are you so exact in your demands of her?” The king replied: “even if my entire palace were nothing but a sword, I would still not divorce her.” This is what Jeremiah said to G’d: “If You want to divorce us, keep hitting us until our memory is wiped out.” This is what he meant with the words “Have you utterly despised us, etc.?” If not, why do You inflict punishments for which there is no cure?” G’d answered him: “I will not divorce Israel until the time comes when I will destroy My Universe.” This is what is reflected in the words of Jeremiah 31,37: “Thus said the Lord: ‘if the heavens above could be measured and the foundations below could be fathomed, only then would I reject all the offspring of Israel for all they have done- declares the Lord.’ In spite of their being wayward I have made a pledge to them when I said: “I will give My sanctuary to be amongst you.” Instead of reading the word משכני to mean “My sanctuary,” you can also read it to mean משכוני, “My pledge, My collateral.” This is what Bileam had in mind when he referred to the Tabernacle saying מה טובו אהליך יעקב משכנותיך ישראל, “how goodly are your tents o Yaakov, your “pledges” o Israel” (Numbers 24,5). When the Tabernacle (Temple, Sanctuary) is in ruins its concept remains as the pledge that  Israel is not permanently out of favour with its G’d. G’d, so to speak, said to Israel: “I do not offer you as a collateral, (captive) to the Gentiles because I love them but because your sins against Me.” This is what the prophet meant when he quoted G’d as saying: “where is the document of divorce of your mother whom I dismissed? And which of My creditors was it I sold you off to? You were only sold off for your sins, and your mother dismissed for your crimes.”
    The Midrash continues elaborating on the words אם חבול תחבול, saying: “when the Israelites transgress the commandments I will sell them as two pledges. (this is a reference to the destruction of both the first and the second Temple). How long will they be in the pawnshop? עד בא השמש, “until the Messiah will arrive.” Of that Messiah it is written (Maleachi 3,20) “a sun of victory will shine to bring healing to those who revere My name.” It has also been written (Psalms 72,17) ”while the sun lasts may his name (Messiah) endure.” When that time arrives the Jewish people will be taken back by G’d as His “wife.” Thus far the Midrash.
    It is well known that the people of Israel have been described as ריעים, “companions” of the Lord as we read in Psalms 122,8: “for the sake of My kin and friends.” The Holy Temple has been compared to G’d’s “mantle” (reading the word Shlomoh as Salmoh instead, i.e. with the letter ש having the dot on its left side).  By the same token Solomon himself referred to the Temple as יריעות, (Song of Songs 1,5) a word which can mean either “draperies” or be a reference to this companionship we mentioned. Moses has referred to it asלבנון  in Deut. 3,25 where he says: “this good mountain and the Lebanon.” Onkelos translates the word לבנון as בית מקדש, “the Holy Temple.” Yuma 39 understands the words “this good mountain” as a reference to Jerusalem whereas “Lebanon” is a reference to The Temple Mount and the Sanctuary.
    
    22,26.ושמעתי כי חנון אני , “I shall listen for I am compassionate.” Nachmanides interprets these words to mean: “in order that no man should reason that the poor man whose garment was taken as a pledge was not worthy in the eyes of G’d and taking his garment would therefore not be sinful even if he did not return it to him at the time he is need of it.“ This person might reason that G’d would not answer his outcry seeing he was not worthy. G’d therefore goes on record that He would listen to such an outcry not because it was necessarily justified or that the petitioner was worthy, but because G’d Himself is compassionate. The word חנון is derived from חנם, “for free, without recompense.” It is similar to Exodus 33,19 וחנותי את אשר אחון, “I will show grace to whoever I decide to show grace.” According to Berachot 7 this means that G’d reserves the right to listen to people who entreat Him regardless of merits we are aware of. 
    
    22,27.  אלוהים לא תקלל, “you shall not curse a judge.” This is a warning for the party who has been convicted of a crime or sin not to curse the judge who convicted him. This subject follows the subject of the need to extend loans to fellow Jews as on occasion disputes arise over whether a loan has been repaid, the debtor either denying he had received it or the lender claiming that he had not been repaid. Such disputes are submitted to judgment. It is quite possible that the party whose claim is rejected (if he feels that he has been wronged) will curse the judge who has wronged him. This is why the Torah has to warn that one must not engage in such conduct.
    
   ונשיא בעמך, “nor a prince amongst your people, etc.” This refers to the legally appointed king who has thereby been elevated above the people. The Torah warns his subjects that if the king found them guilty they must not curse him. Solomon issues a similar warning (Kohelet 10,20) “do not revile a king even amongst your intimates! Do not curse a rich man even in your bedchamber, for a bird of the air may carry the utterance, and a winged creature may report a word.” The reason the Torah first lists the prohibition against cursing a judge is  because by reason of his position he must be wise and should not have erred in judgment. We also have this order of precedence in Horiot 13 where the Talmud ranks a scholar ahead of a king.
    The Talmud in Sanhedrin 66 interprets our verse as a warning not to curse G’d even by not referring to Him by His holy names. The word elohim is understood as a reference to the Supreme King, i.e. the Almighty, whereas the word נשיא בעמך refers to the mortal king appointed by the people. This too would be in accordance with Proverbs 24,21 where Solomon writes: “fear the Lord my son and the king.”
    A Midrashic approach (based on Shemot Rabbah 31,8): there is a conceptual linkage between verse 27 not to curse people in authority and the following verse which deals with the setting aside and handing over of the various tithes, etc. If people will fall into the habit of cursing their judges and their king the result will be crop failure, i.e. they will not have any tithes to set aside. The Midrash cites as a case in point the beginning of the Book of  Ruth which commences with the words ויהי בימי שפוט השופטים, which is understood to mean that the period during which this story occurred was one when the common people “judged” the judges, i.e. were openly disdainful of them. In the verse following we are told of a major famine in Eretz Yisrael which led to the emigration of Elimelech and his family. This is an illustration of how one sin results in other sins. From verse 28 in our portion we are to learn that it is not enough to set aside the various gifts for the priest, the Levite, the poor and the destitute, but they must be set aside in their proper sequence commencing with Terumah, followed by the first tithe, followed by the second tithe.
    The Torah promises reward for setting these tithes aside on time and in their proper sequence by implying that he who does so will have a first born son, i.e. בכור בניך תתן לי, “the firstborn of your sons you shall give to Me.” Clearly, this commandment applies only if you do have firstborn sons. The Torah follows this promise with “so you shall do to your ox, to your flock.” The message is that if the Jewish farmer sets aside what he is supposed to set aside in accordance with Torah legislation, these gifts far from depriving him will actually result in his giving away what is G’d’s as G’d has already blessed him with produce and flocks and herds. 
    As a result of complying with these various regulations the Torah writes (verse 30) ואנשי קודש תהיו לי, “and you will be people of holiness to Me.” G’d will make the Jewish people into the תרומה, the symbolic heave-offering of the world. This is the meaning of Jeremiah 2,3: קדש ישראל לה’ ראשית תבואתו, “Israel was holy to the Lord, the first fruit of His harvest.” Seeing that the Jewish people are Terumah, G’d’s heave, they are not allowed to consume animals which are diseased or mutilated, i.e. טרפה, as is stated in verse 30 of our chapter. G’d furthermore decreed that we must give such animals to the dogs in acknowledgment of the fact that during the fateful night preceding the Exodus all the dogs kept silent and did not take up a hostile attitude towards the Israelites (compare 11,7). This is why the Torah legislates here “throw it to the dogs!” Thus far the Midrash.
    
    22,28. מלאתך ודמעתך לא תאחר, “do not delay your fullness-offering and your priestly heave-offering. This verse is a warning concerning the heave-offerings of liquids, i.e. oil and wine. The word מלאתך refers to the liquid made from grapes as described by Numbers 18,27 וכמלאה מן היקב, such as the “flow from the vat,” whereas the word דמעתך describes the liquid secured from the olives which are being squeezed much as tears are the product of one’s squeezing one’s eyes. This is why the product of the olives is called דמעך, “your tear.”
    
    22,30. ואנשי קדש תהיון לי, “and people of holiness shall you be for Me.” Actually we would have expected to find the word קדושים, “holy” in the plural, seeing the subject are אנשים, “men,” in the plural. The verse alludes to the fact that the spiritual concept כנסת ישראל, the community of Israel as a collective unit, is the true strength of Israel. The reason this concept is called קדש, holy, is that it is a direct derivative of the emanation חכמה which has its origin in the letter י of the tetragram, the name י-ה-ו-ה. This is the reason the Torah had to add the word לי, “for Me,” The meaning of the word לי in this verse is similar to the meaning of the word לי in Exodus 25,2 ויקחו לי תרומה, “they shall take a heave-offering for Me,” (i.e. bring contributions for the construction of the Holy Tabernacle.”) Israel are considered as if sanctified for the Holy Name of Hashem. Seeing that their spiritual level is so high, they are not to eat meat of diseased or mutilated animals as that meat is the product of the destructive powers rampant in the universe, the power which opposes sanctity and holiness.
    The Torah adds the word בשדה, “in the field,” in order to underline the origin of such treifah meat. Esau’s predominantly evil nature had been described by the Torah as איש שדה, “a man of the field,” i.e. he represented the murderous instincts of Kayin the first murderer, whose evil deed was described by the Torah as occurring בשדה, “in the field” (Genesis 4,8). This is another reason that the dogs are entitled to eat this meat as their characteristic is close to that of Esau’s.
    
    23,1. לא תשא שמע שוא, “Do not  accept a false report.” The instruction of the Torah to judges is that they shall not accept an oath from people whom they suspect of being prepared to violate it. They must first investigate the matter under dispute to evaluate if an oath would amount to perjury. Another way of explaining these words: “do not accept testimony by one litigant as he may change his testimony when confronted by his antagonist.” (Mechilta Kasspa section 20). If the first party testifying in the absence of his antagonist had lied, he might feel forced to deny this by repeating his original statement and confirming it by an oath. Solomon says something along these lines in Proverbs 18,17: “the first one to plead his case appears to be right, until his neighbour comes and examines him.”
    Our sages (in the Mechilta already mentioned) understand our verse as a warning not to accept defamations from anybody concerning anybody else. This is also why Onkelos translates the words as: “do not accept untrue reports.”
   אל תשת ידך עם רשע, “do not extend your hand with the wicked.” This refers to a trumped up charge, to which someone undertakes to act as a false witness.”
    
    23,2. לא תהיה אחרי רבים לרעות, “do not be a follower of the majority for evil;” the plain meaning of these words is that even if you see a vast majority of people acting in a forbidden manner, do not make the fact that they constitute the norm an excuse to follow in their footsteps.
    Our sages (Sanhedrin 20) explain the wording to mean that a majority of only a single vote in matters involving capital punishment is not sufficient to convict the accused. The meaning of the word לרעות, which is in the plural,- and a reference to the people voting “guilty”- is  that such a verdict must be arrived at by a majority of at least two votes. However, a majority of one is sufficient to exonerate an accused. This is the meaning of the words following, i.e. אחרי רבים להטות.
   ולא תענה על רב, “and do not respond to a grievance, etc.” this is a warning to the judge not to argue on behalf of any of the litigants. It includes a warning to all other non-litigants present not to argue on behalf of either of the litigants. Only the actual litigant is allowed to present arguments on his own behalf. The claimant presents his arguments first and the accused replies to his arguments. Nobody else intervenes in a litigation to which he is not a direct party (Baba Kama 46). Sanhedrin 36 adds the comment that seeing the word for litigation, strife, ריב is spelled defectively, without the letter י so that it could also be read rav, i.e. a scholar, we derive from this that the customary courtesies of someone having to stand in front of a scholar, his Rabbi, etc., are dispensed with when both the Rabbi and the student are facing each other as litigants. The student does not have to display any deference for his opposite number. [Rabbi Chavell interprets our author to mean that junior members of the tribunal must not challenge a ruling made by senior members after it has been made. Ed.]
    
    23,5. עזוב תעזוב עמו, “you shall help him with it (even repeatedly).” This concerns the commandment to unload the beast (Baba Metzia 32). The interpretation is based on the verse being superfluous as we could have deduced this message from the words in Deut. 22,4 where the Torah writes about a similar situation הקם תקים עמו, “help him to stand it up.” If the Torah commands us to help someone load his beast, how much more would it be in place for the Torah to command us to help unload a beast which broke down under an overload! Nonetheless, the Torah writes both laws in order to teach that there are different considerations which determine the legislation in these two situations. Help in unloading must be extended without charge, whereas help in loading may be charged for. The reason one may not charge for helping to unload the beast in our verse is because alleviating pain of animals is a Biblical commandment, may have to be performed even without the assistance of the owner.
    
    23,7. ונקי וצדיק אל תהרוג, “and do not execute the innocent or the righteous.” The word נקי, innocent, refers to a wicked person which the court was unable to convict. Subsequently, evidence turns up on the basis of which this person could be convicted on a second trial. The Torah prohibits a retrial. The Torah assures us that if a guilty person escapes human justice, not to be upset as he will not escape divine justice, i.e. כי לא אצדיק רשע, “I, G’d will see to it that the wicked will not wind up being considered as righteous.”
    
    23,10. ושש שנים תזרע את ארצך, “and for six successive years you will sow your land.” It would have seemed appropriate to phrase this in the third person, i.e. את הארץ, “the land,” instead of ארצך, “your land.” Similarly, in the reference to the vineyard and olive plantation we would have expected the words כן תעשה לכרמים ולזיתים instead of כן תעשה לכרמך ולזיתיך (verse 11). You will note that the Torah uses direct language when speaking about either the Sabbath (day) or the Sabbath (year), whereas when speaking of the Jubilee year יובל, it uses the third person, speaking in more general terms. Compare Leviticus 25,11: “you shall not sow, you shall not harvest its aftergrowth, and you shall not pick what was set aside of it.” Seeing that immediately after the Sabbath one may resume work and immediately after the shmittah year the farmer may recommence his usual activities of ploughing, sowing, etc., the Torah used direct language as the farmer considers the land as his own. After he seventh year preceding the Jubilee year which was also a shmittah year, i.e. a year when he did not work his field, the farmer must now wait another year before he can again treat the land as if it were his own. That is why the Torah hinted at this factor by using indirect language in speaking of the land in question.” Even the manner in which the Torah describes abandoning the land during the shmittah, i.e.תשמטנה ונטשתה , “leave it untended and leave it unharvested,” indicates that  the land has ceased to belong to the farmer (during that year). The relationship between us and the land during the shmittah year is that whereas we abandon it, it does not abandon us. The reason is that we will once again resume our activities on it demonstrating that it is ours. The same is not the case in the case of the Jubilee year, as many fields will return to owners who had previously been forced to sell them for one reason or another. It is therefore appropriate to speak of such land in the third person, i.e. not addressing a specific owner.
    
    23,12.  למען ינוח שורך וחמורך,“in order for your ox and your donkey to enjoy rest.” The meaning of the words: “so that your ox and donkey can rest,” is the tail end of the legislation that you shall work for six days and shall rest on the seventh day. As a result of your resting, your man-servants, maid-servants, oxen and donkeys will rest also, as well as your stranger. The objective of the legislation is not aimed at rewarding your donkeys, etc., with rest but if you do all your work during six days so that you will rest on the seventh day, then also your labourers and your beasts of burden will rest on that day. We find a similar construction in Deut. 16,3 למען תזכור את יום צאתך ממצרים, “on account (of this) eating of unleavened bread, etc., you will remember the day you went out of Egypt.” 
    
    23,14. שלש רגלים תחוג לי בשנה, “three  pilgrimage festivals shall you celebrate for Me during the year.” The Torah repeats this once more by legislating that the males of the nation have to make three appearances annually on those festivals in Jerusalem (or the place where the Tabernacle stood) on the festival of unleavened bread, on the festival of weeks, and on Tabernacles. In Deut. the Torah only writes; “Three times” without specifying on the festival of Tabernacles (Deut. 16,3). In Deut. 16,16 where the Torah writes שלש פעמים, the same once more, the reason the dates had to be spelled out once more for these appearances is that had the Torah only written the words שלש פעמים, I could have thought that as long as each male appears in the Sanctuary three times a year at times of his choosing, he would have complied with this commandment. This is why the Torah had to add: “on the festival of unleavened bread, etc., etc.” If so, why did the Torah in our verse write רגלים instead of פעמים, suggesting that coming by foot was of the essence? This was to exempt people who do not have feet or legs and have to travel on stumps or prostheses from this commandment. It is also to exempt the blind and the lame  who are unable to make this pilgrimage on their own.
    A Midrashic approach:  we find the expressions שלש רגלים, as well as שלש פעמים, as well as the expression תרמסנה רגל רגלי עני פעמי דלים, ”to be trampled underfoot, by the feet of the needy, by the soles of the poor” (Isaiah 26,6). This is a warning to the Israelites not to make this pilgrimage in carriages but on foot. This is also alluded to in Song of Songs 7,2: “How lovely are your feet in sandals.”
    
    23,15. למועד חודש האביב, “at the appointed time in the month of spring.” This wording prompted Pessikta Zutrata to state that the Passover must only be brought after the spring equinox. If the crops have not sufficiently advanced for the new barley offering of the Omer to be able to be offered the sages will have to insert an additional month of Adar. The words: “you shall not be seen before Me empty-handed,” refer to the sacrifice. Any pilgrim has to offer at least one burnt-offering and one peace-offering.
    
    23,17. אל פני האדון ה’. “before the Lord, Hashem.” These three festivals occur during three separate seasons. Passover occurs in spring, Pentecost in summer, and Tabernacles in fall. All three festivals are also in recognition of different harvests. On those festivals we are to express our gratitude for the bounty of the earth. We must thank the Lord who provides sustenance for His creatures, and the entire universe.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words את פני האדון (34,23): I have already explained this on 20,1.
    23,18. תזבח על חמץ דם זבחי לא, “do not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread.” Nachmanides queries why the Torah did not write לא תשחט על חמץ זבחי, “do not slaughter My sacrifice with unleavened bread,” seeing that blood is not being “slaughtered.” The formulation of the Torah teaches that the Passover must not be slaughtered at a time when consumption of leavened bread is still permitted, i.e. on the morning of the 14th of Nissan (compare Mechilta Kaspa 20). The verse has to be understood as follows: “do not slaughter while leavened bread abounds in order that the blood of My sacrifice not be offered at a time when your leavened things have not yet been destroyed or sold.”
    23,19.  ראשית בכורי אדמתך,”The choicest first fruit of your soil.” These first fruit are forbidden for secular use by their owners. Our sages state that this is the reason that this legislation was written immediately prior to the prohibition of boiling a kid in the milk of its mother. Just as that legislation prohibits secular or any use by its owner of such a dish, so first ripe produce is also prohibited for profane purposes. Another reason offered for the aparently unrelated sequence of this verse and the one following it, is that first fruit must not be offered either when they have been boiled or in an unripe condition.
   לא תבשל גדי בחלב אמו, “do not boil a kid in the milk of its mother.”  This verse, identically worded, appears three times in the Torah. (compare Exodus 34,26 and Deut. 14,21). Our sages (Chulin 115) interpret this to mean that the prohibition is threefold: 1) not to boil it together. 2) not to consume such a mixture. 3) not to use it in any other form, sell, it, etc. The reason that the Torah chose to word the prohibition in this way is that the Biblical injunction is boiling these two matters together. Consuming meat and milk which was boiled together is a Biblical prohibition punishable by 39 lashes if violated intentionally. Eating meat and drinking a glass of raw milk with it, while forbidden by rabbinic decree, does not carry this penalty. This is the opinion of my teacher (Rashba). We could ask why the Torah did not simply write the words לא תאכל, “you shall not eat,” a formula which traditionally includes the prohibition to enjoy such a substance in any other form (compare Pessachim 21). The reason is that if the Torah had written those words I would have assumed that culpability for eating such a mixture occurs only if one enjoys eating it, as is the case with other prohibitions of that kind. By not using the word: “do not eat,” the Torah implies that even if a mixture of cooked meat and milk was consumed while it was too hot to enjoy, or even burned one’s tissue, the prohibition and culpability for it still apply. Seeing that the Torah was unable to use the words לא תאכל, “do not eat,” It became necessary to write the same verse three times in order to convey to us all the aspects of this prohibition. Nonetheless, the penalty of 39 lashes is applied only to boiling it or eating it even without enjoying it. Other aspects of the prohibition such as selling the mixture is not punishable though prohibited (compare Pessachim 25).
    There are only two prohibitions of eating something which do not provide one with some enjoyment or satisfaction for which a Biblical culpability exists. One is  our verse, the other is a mixture of grapes and some other seed planted too close to it. In accordance with this the sages in Pessachim 24 stated that all scholars are agreed that the penalty of 39 lashes is applicable to someone who deliberately eats fromכלאי הכרם , this mixture of grapes and other species planted right next to the grapes even if eating from the mixture was of no benefit or pleasure to the person eating it. The reason advanced for that ruling is the fact that in prohibiting that mixture the Torah refrained from using the words: “do not eat,” but it wrote פן תקדש המלאה הזרע אשר תזרע ותבואת הכרם, “lest the growth of the seed that you plant and the produce of the vineyard become forbidden” (Deut. 22,9). In Kidushin 56 the words פן תקדש are understood as פן תוקד אש, “so that no light be lit with it,” i.e. so that no use be made of it.
    According to the plain meaning of our text the reason for this whole commandment is that the practice of boiling the kid in the milk of its mother is apt to deaden feelings of compassion in the human heart. It coarsens one’s entire personality. After all, milk is a derivative of (the animal’s) blood. Consumption of blood coarsens a person’s personality, causing a person to develop feelings of cruelty. One of the reasons consumption of blood is prohibited to Jews by the Torah is the fact that contrary to other parts of the animal, blood does not become assimilated by the body of the person eating it in the same manner as do other parts of the animal’s tissue. In other words, the negative influence of blood remains in the body without being sublimated. Even though in the meantime this blood was been converted into milk and when by itself does not transport the negative elements of blood to people drinking the milk, the moment it is mixed again with flesh and boiled together it reverts to its original negative character-coarsening properties. Doctors believe that the same is true when fish is mixed with cheese and boiled together. [this would account for the prohibition in Yoreh Deah item 87]. Not only would consuming a dish prepared by such ingredients in such a manner produce coarseness of character but it would also produce some form of leprosy. 
    The reason that every time we find this verse it appears in connection with the pilgrimage festivals is in order to warn the pilgrims who come to Jerusalem three times a year,- the holy site where prophets are active,- not to coarsen their hearts by consuming forbidden foods but to ensure that their physical bodies remain as pure and conducive to positive character building influences as is possible. Their hearts must remain receptive to the positive spiritual influence which abounds in Jerusalem.
    Maimonides, in his Moreh Nevuchim third part chapter 48, writes concerning this prohibition that seeing it was a custom of the pagans to eat milk and meat in their temples on their festivals the Torah forbade this practice and wrote it twice in connection with the three pilgrimage festivals in order to remind us not to behave on these festivals as did these pagans. The Torah is at pains to implant in us the awareness of how radically different the observance of festivals for our G’d is from the way the pagans worship their deities. This is what Maimonides writes as the reason for this commandment. Although I have not quoted his words  verbatim I have presented his meaning faithfully.
    It is fairly clear that these various reasons are not an adequate explanation for such a basic legislation. Maimonides did not mean to advance this as the deeper meaning of the legislation. He only wanted to show the questioner that this commandment could be understood in terms of weaning the Jewish people from pagan practices.
    The fact is that the entire legislation belongs to the category of חקים, the statutes for which no logical reason can be found, just as we cannot fathom a reason for the legislation of the red cow. The true meaning of these statutes will not be revealed to us until after the arrival of the messiah. The law about the scapegoat on the Day of Atonement is of a similar nature. All our attempts to understand it only touch the surface and do not reveal the true purpose G’d had in mind when He legislated it other than that by observing these laws we are to demonstrate our belief in His superior wisdom of what is good for us. Seeing that in the period following the arrival of the messiah there will neither be paganism nor coarseness of our character and bloodthirsty people, and there is no reason to believe that this legislation will then be abolished, it is clear that its true meaning is something far beyond what we have been given to understand. In the meantime we rely on the promise of Deut. 30,6 that there will come a time when the Lord will circumcise our hearts after the end of all exile and persecution when we will be able to comprehend what we cannot comprehend now. A similar promise has been spelled out in Tzefaniah 3,9: ”for then I will make the peoples pure of speech, so that they will all invoke the Lord by name and serve Him with one accord.” In the meantime it suffices to know that there is a mystical dimension to this commandment.
    A kabbalistic approach: You are aware that all the commandments are divine and reflect something parallel to conditions which exist in the celestial regions. The same applies to the commandments known as חקים. They are called thus as they reflect matters engraved, חקוק, in the celestial regions. The legislation of meat and milk is an example of this. Just as each of these components by itself is permissible and only mixing them is prohibited, so the Torah had to be especially stringent in its prohibition against mixing two perfectly permissible items with  one another. Were this not so we would find it difficult to understand  that joining two permitted substances and making one out of them is so harmful to the condition of G’d’s universe. It is like a lesson not to confuse the kind of holiness which exists in the celestial regions with the sanctity which exists, or is the aim of the Torah to establish, in our terrestrial world. Even when optimum conditions of sanctity exist in our part of the universe, this does not mean that these two types of holiness can be part of the same “brew,” can be mixed as if they were all the same. As long as there is a יצר הרע, an evil force at work in our world, G’d and His name are not one and the same. These two kinds of holiness are still apart and do not mix. It is our task to strive in this world to bring about a merging of these two kinds of holiness. When our sages  (Massechet Gan Eden) said that in the future G’d will reveal to us the meaning of the legislation in His Torah including the reason for the prohibition of mixing milk and meat, what they meant was that although these commandments have been given to us to fulfill in this terrestrial world, the condition of this  world is not such that it is appropriate to reveal to us the mystical dimension of this legislation as long as this world is infested with the יצר הרע. If G’d were to reveal this information to us in our present state of spiritual/intellectual imperfection it might sow doubt in our minds rather than an additional resolve to observe the commandment meticulously. We might, G’d forbid, conclude that there are two competing divine powers which control the universe. In the future, after the power of the evil urge will have been broken, and when there is no fear that we would therefore misunderstand the reasons for this legislation, G’d will reveal it to us. This will be the period when the deserving dead will be resurrected. Only then will the concept of והיה ביום ההוא יהיה ה’ אחד ושמו אחד, “on that day the Lord and His name will be one and the same, they i.e. the two levels of sanctity will merge.” In fact, at that time the prohibition of mixing meat and milk will become redundant. This explains why the angels who visited Avraham could eat butter and meat at the same time as it appears from Genesis 18,8 that Avraham served it both simultaneously. Seeing that the angels do not have an evil urge (Shabbat 89) this restriction does not apply to them. Once the evil urge will have been abolished there will therefore be no need for this commandment. This is what prompted our sages (Yuma 67) to say in explaining Leviticus 19,19 את חקותי תשמורו, “you shall observe My statutes,” as meaning: “I have engraved them and you have no right to investigate their meaning or criticise them as any such criticism would undermine this terrestrial universe in which the evil urge is still rampant.” This is why in a similar verse in Leviticus 18,4 the verse concludes with the “justification: “I am the Lord.” 
    The plain meaning of the verse in Zecharyah 14,9: “on that day the Lord will be One and His name will be One,” is a reference to mankind worshipping. The message is that from that day onwards all of mankind will serve only the Lord, there will no longer be any competing religions. The word אחד means that at that time we will pronounce the tetragram as we read it not by substituting the letters א-ד-נ-י because we are not worthy to utter the word י-ה-ו-ה (compare Pessachim 50).
    
    23,20. הנה אנכי שולח מלאך לפניך, “Here I am about to send an angel ahead of you, etc.” The plain meaning of these words is that G’d announced to Moses that the Israelites would commit the sin of the golden calf at some time in the future; this is why He said that “this angel will not forgive your sin”  (verse 22). He spoke of a single sin, פשעכם, not a variety of sins such as לחטאותיכם, sins committed inadvertently. The sin of the golden calf had been committed in full knowledge of it being a violation of the second of the Ten Commandments. G’d told Moses that seeing the people were not worthy that the Presence of the Lord, “Shechinah” would travel with them, He would send a lower ranking angel instead. Due to the power of Moses’s prayer this decree was rescinded at least during his lifetime so that the angel spoken of here did not make his appearance until Joshua (Nachmanides).
    The words לשמרך בדרך, “to guard you on the journey,” mean that the angel would protect the Jewish people while they were in the desert. The words אשר הכינותי, “which I have prepared,” is a reference to the place G’d had readied for His own residence. The wording is similar to what we have found in the song Moses composed after crossing the Sea of Reeds, (Exodus 15,17). It is a reference to the Holy Temple. The wording is the one used by David when he said (Chronicles I 29,19) ולבנות הבירה אשר הכינותי, “to build the Temple for which I have made provision.”
    According to the opinion of Rabbeinu Chananel the angel spoken of here was the angel Michael, known as השר הגדול  described in Daniel 12,1 “and at that time there will stand, Michael, the great heavenly prince, who stands to support the children of your people.” We also have a verse in Daniel 10,21: “And no one reinforces me against these, except your heavenly prince, Michael.” This was the angel who appeared to Joshua and said to him (Joshua 5,14) “I am the prince of the Hosts of the Lord, now I have arrived.” Our sages (in Tanchuma 18 Mishpatim have said that the words כי שמי בקרבו, “for My name is within him” in our verse here mean that this is why he is called שר צבא ה’, “the prince of the army of the Lord.” This would be parallel to Kings I 8,15 כי שמך נקרא על הבית הזה, “because Your name has been associated with this house, which is called the house of the Lord.”
    As to the words כי לא ישא לפשעכם, “for he will not forgive your sin,” these words are a warning by G’d that although He is sending along this angel to protect the Israelites they must be careful not even to commit unintentional sins as this angel has no authority to forgive any sin. The reason is that the authority to forgive is one that G’d has reserved to Himself as we know from Isaiah 43,25: “it is I, I, who-for My own sake-wipe your trans-gressions away and remember your sin no more.” Thus far Tanchuma.
    Also Ibn Ezra understands the angel in this verse as being Michael. I have seen one of the Kabbalists who believes that the angel mentioned here is identical with the Seraph seen in a vision of Isaiah, i.e. Michael. He writes: it is most likely that this is the angel normally charged with forgiveness, displaying loving kindness, the שר החסד. G’d had to state that in this instance this angel would not have authority to extend forgiveness precisely because on other occasions that is his function. Had this angel not normally been charged with doing just that, i.e. forgiving sins, there would not have been any need for the Torah to tell us that this time he would not be allowed to do this. This angel had appeared to Isaiah in Isaiah 6,6 where the prophet writes: ויעף אלי אחד מן השרפים אשר בידו רצפה, “and one of the Seraphim flew to me and he had a live coal in his hand;” it is clear that this was Michael as our sages in Berachot 4 explained that the description of the power of Michael is of an angel with greater powers than the archangel Gavriel seeing he is described as flying, whereas Gavriel is described as needing two flights, i.e. resting in between as we know from the words Of Daniel 9,21: “he was lifted in flight” (compare Berachot 4, Rashi). The reason Michael is described in Daniel as Seraph, an angel which is associated with water, is no problem. This angel is associated with different elements according to the context in which he appears. Moreover, we must consider the timing of when Michael was referred to as a Seraph. Here in the Torah, when G’d tells Moses about the consequences of the sin of the golden calf, the attribute of Mercy which had guided them had been exchanged for the attribute of Justice. This is what the angel Michael’s arrival at that time would represent. In Isaiah the very reverse process is the subject of the prophet’s vision. In verse seven the prophet has been advised that the time had arrived when he could represent the attribute of Mercy and lead people to repentance. We know that as G’d had  said to Isaiah (Isaiah 6,10) “dull that people’s mind, stop its ears, and seal its eyes- lest seeing with its eyes and hearing with its ears it also grasps with its mind and repents (regresses in view of what its eyes and ears will be tempted by) and weakens itself.” Previously, in verse 7 the Seraph had  said: “now that this (flaming coal, רצפה has touched your lips  your guilt shall depart and your sin will be purged away.” There is therefore no contradiction in the appearance of Seraphim on both occasions and their respective functions being different.
    At any rate, the verses in Isaiah prove that far from being by definition “unforgiving,” the angel Michael is usually the one who introduces repentance and forgiveness. In our verses the Torah reminds the people that such a benevolent function of the angel occurs only with G’d’s prior approval. In this instance G’d warns that no such prior approval has been given so that the Israelites should not count on the forgiving nature of this angel that they had been used to. Perhaps there is an allusion to the function of the angel Michael in the wording of our verse, i.e. G’d saying (verse 23) כי ילך מלאכי לפניך, seeing that the letters in the word מלאכי are the same as those in the name of the angel מיכאל. It may be a hint that G’d Himself will accompany that angel. At any rate, the negative fallout of this decree was neutralised all the time during which Moses remained alive until this angel presented himself to Joshua as we have already mentioned. The words עתה באתי, “now I have come,” with which the angel introduced himself to Joshua were a reminder that he had been supposed to take up his duties 40 years earlier but that the time for his intervening in the progress of the Jewish people had been put off until now. 
    A Midrashic approach to our verse (Shemot Rabbah 32,2). From the words: “Here I am about to send an angel ahead of you,” we learn that G’d meant that had the Israelites been worthy He Himself would have continued to be at their head as He had been at the Exodus when the Torah testified “and the Lord Himself was walking ahead of them by day,” etc., (13,21). Now that they had proven unworthy G’d handed them over to an agent. This is the meaning of: “Here I am sending an angel ahead of you.” You will observe that as soon as the Jewish people had said כל אשר דבר ה’ נעשה ונשמע, “all that G’d has said we shall do and we shall hear (learn it)” in 24,7, G’d responded by saying: “I granted Adam eternal life for performing the single commandment I had given him not to eat from the tree of knowledge.” This is the meaning of Genesis 3,22: “here this Adam who had been just like one of Us, (i.e. immortal celestial being).” “These Jewish people who have undertaken to observe 613 of My commandments are surely entitled to eternal life!” The Midrash derives this from the words חרות על הלוחות, “freedom on the tablets” instead of reading it merely as “engraved on the Tablets” (32,16). We find a dis-agreement between Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Nechemyah in the above quoted Midrash as to the precise meaning of the word חרות if read as meaning “freedom.” Rabbi Yehudah understands it as freedom from the oppression of mortal rulers, i.e. exile, whereas Rabbi Nechemyah understands it as freedom from the authority of the angel of death. He bases this on Numbers 21, 18-19 וממדבר מתנה, וממתנה נחליאל, ומנחליאל במות, “and from the wilderness- a gift. From “the gift”- my heritage became G’d. From the heritage called G’d- elevated heights.” Rabbi Nechemyah understands the verse not as describing physical landmarks describing where the Israelites rested on the way, but as spiritual landmarks and the gradual recapture by the entire people of Adam’s spiritual stature before the sin when he had still been immortal. The progression was as follows: through the experience of marching in the desert the Israelites merited the gift (מתנה) of Torah. Through the gift of Torah they inherited a relationship to divinity אל)) forever. Through this relationship they acquired immortality. After they had said to the golden calf: “these are your gods O Israel,” they again forfeited this new-found immortality. G’d said to them: ”you followed the same foolishness that Adam was guilty of who had proven unable to resist the temptation of the tree of knowledge for more than three hours. I had said: ‘you are divine (Psalms 82,6-7)-however you will have to die like humans.” In the past you were able to experience the Holy Spirit directly through Me. From now on you will be able to experience it only through the intermediary, the angel.” This is the meaning of “here I will send My angel ahead of you.” This is reflected in what Jeremiah 3,19 had in mind when he said: “I had resolved to adopt you as My child, and I gave you a desirable land- the fairest heritage of all nations; and I thought you would surely call Me “Father,” and never cease to be loyal to Me. Instead, you have broken faith with Me, as a woman breaks faith with a paramour, O House of Israel- declares the Lord.” G’d laments the fact that the Israelite people allowed Him to interpose the Gentile nations between Himself and the Jewish people. The words איך אשיתך mean a separation being established. The word is used in that sense in Genesis 30,40: “he set a separation between each flock.” When G’d referred to the “desirable land,” ארץ חמדה, He meant that it is a land which the great men of the world (the patriarchs) expressed a desire for. Avraham had pleaded with the sons of Chet to sell him a burial plot (Genesis 23,4). G’d had told Yitzchak: “reside in this land” (Genesis 26,3). Yaakov had expressed the wish to be buried in that land and claimed to have dug it with his own hands (Genesis 50,5). The reason Jeremiah quoted G’d as referring to the land of Israel as נחלת צבי, is that  just as the skin of a deer shrinks after it has been removed from its carcass so that it does not cover it anymore, so the land of Israel displays similar lack of elasticity, not being able to accommodate itself to G’d’s bountiful harvests but flowing over with it. The expression צבאות גויים, “of the hosts of the world,” is a reference to the fact that all the kings on earth expressed a desire for this land. How do we know this? We find that the city of Jericho had its own king and that the town of Ai less than three miles removed also had its own king. The kingdoms in the land of Canaan each covered very small amounts of territory. In fact if a king ruled over a vast tract of land outside of the land of Israel but did not have a small kingdom inside the boundaries of the land of Israel he was not even considered as entitled to describe himself as “king.” [Proof of the truth of this is the fact that Joshua made war against and defeated no fewer than 31 Kings all in the narrow land called “the land of Israel,” not even including the coastal areas inhabited by the Philistines. Ed.] 
    There is an interesting comment by Rabbi Parnach in the name of Rabbi Yochanan (Tanchuma Mishpatim 17). The words spoken by Achan ben Carmi in Joshua 7,21: וארא בשלל אדרת שנער, “I have seen amongst the loot (of the city of Jericho) a cloak from Shinor.” He understands the words literally as a cloak belonging to the King of Babylon (Shinor). He considered it as so valuable that he wore it only in Jericho. 
    When Jeremiah 3,19 continues: “I had hoped you would  call Me father,” he referred to G’d thinking that seeing He had taken the Israelites out of Egypt, and split the sea for them that surely He was entitled to the respect of a father. Instead, they had made the golden calf. Considering further that G’d had provided the Israelites with all their needs in the desert, they in turn had been unfaithful to him. When the Gentile nations had become unfaithful to G’d, He had appointed agents to look after their welfare instead of doing so Himself. Similarly, with the Jews. Now that they had become unfaithful, He would appoint this angel to look after them instead of continuing to do so Himself. This then is the meaning of the words: “Here I am going to send an angel ahead of you.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words הנה אנכי שולח מלאך לפניכם לשמרך, “Here I will send a messenger ahead of you to protect you,” do not refer to a disembodied being which we usually call “angel.” These “angels,” though disembodied, are sometimes sinful as we know from Job 4,18 ובמלאכיו ישים תהלה, “and He casts reproach against His angels.” The reproach concerned the fact that these angels in saying to Lot (Genesis 19,13) “we are about to destroy the city (Sodom),” made it appear as if it were up to them to decide if and when to destroy the city instead of their acting under G’d’s instructions. Rather, the agent G’d is speaking about in our verse here is one of those known as נטיעות, a superior kind of angel who is not subject to sin [and therefore has no understanding for sinful creatures? Ed.] This is why Tanchuma Mishpatim 18 explains the words: “for he will not forgive your sin” as “because he belongs to the category who do not sin.” This is the angel Mattatron, the one appointed to generally run G’d’s universe on His behalf. He is also known in kabbalistic lore as שר הפנים, “the Minister of the Interior.” This is why the Torah adds the words לשמרך בדרך which are translated by Onkelos as למטרך, i.e. the same as Leviticus 5,35 משמרת, This angel is in effect the executive arm of the attribute of Justice. This explains why G’d added the word לפניך, which suggests the same as in Chabakuk 3,5: לפניו ילך דבר ויצא רשף לרגליו, “Pestilence marches before him and plague comes forth at his heels.” When the Torah says in verse 23 כי ילך מלאכי לפניך, “for My angel will walk ahead of you,”  this reference to “My angel” indicates that it is the one most beloved of G’d, the one by means of whom G’d has become well known in the world. It is about this angel that the Torah says in 33,14 פני ילכו, “My Presence will go,” in response to Moses’ request in 33,14 הודיעני נא את דרכך, “please let me know (understand) Your ways.” Moses requested an attribute by means of which G’d had manifested Himself, and he was told פני ילכו, that indeed this attribute would travel alongside the Jewish people. This is what Isaiah 63,9 had in mind when he said ומלאך פניו הושיעם, “and the angel known as פניו (His Presence) delivered them.” In order to make this point clear G’d says (verse 22) וצרתי את צורריך, “I will be the enemy of your enemies (by means of this angel), and the Torah continues והכחדתיו, “and I will annihilate them.” It requires the attribute of Justice to completely annihilate the enemies. As to this agent being called מלאך, we must appreciate that this is not a reference to the disembodied beings because it is used to be active in our terrestrial part of the universe on a regular basis, i.e. it is a manifestation of the attribute of Justice.
    The words השמר לך, “take heed,” are most appropriate as a person always has to take heed not to become a target of the attribute of Justice which would punish him for sins committed. This is why the Torah uses the root שמר, as well as the word  פנים saying ושמע בקולו, “and listen to his instructions.” This is a specific warning not to commit sins of a heretical nature. In order that we do not misunderstand, the Torah adds immediately אל תמר בו, “do not rebel against him.” Seeing that the word תמר is very similar to אל תמירני, “do not trade Me,” i.e. do not treat any other deity as if it were divine, we might be correct in translating the words אל תמר בו as “do not exchange Him.” In other words: “this “angel” and I Myself are quite inseparable from one another.”
    The words כי לא ישא פשעכם are a continuation of the warning; although this angel does have the power to forgive your sins he will not do so if your sin is of the type described by the words אל תמר בו. The message is that anyone who rebels against this angel is in effect rebelling against Me Myself seeing My name is within him. When David said in Psalms 130,4 כי עמך הסליחה, “for forgiveness is something with You, (reserved for You),” and our sages in Tanchuma Mishpatim 18 say that this means that G’d did not authorise any angel to dispense forgiveness, this simply means that the angels known as נפרדים, “disembodied beings,” the ones who are able to sin (as we explained earlier) have not been authorised to extend forgiveness.
    The words כי שמי בקרבו, “for My name is within him,” is a reference to the tetragram, the one normally described as  כי ביה י-ה-ו-ה. This is also how Onkelos translates it when he writes ארי בשמי מימריה. The meaning of these words is that “whatever this angel says he says only in My name.” in other words: “his voice is the voice of the Supreme G’d.” This explains why our verse (22) speaks about  listening to the “voice” of this angel rather than “listening to what he says;” he does not have anything of his own to say. By writing ושמע בקולו, the Torah wants to make clear that G’d Himself is the active part of the message, the משפיע, whereas the angel is only the echo, i.e. the מושפע. You will find that when dealing with creatures in our terrestrial world  man is the active force whereas woman is the passive force as we know from Adam saying when he first beheld his wife as a separate entity לזאת יקרא אשה כי מאיש לוקחה זאת, “this (one) will be called woman for she was taken from man.” He did not say anything about his wife being someone initiating things. Woman’s role is essentially responsive.
    In this connection it is interesting to note that the מנחה offering, though feminine, is always spelled as if it were masculine when the Torah refers to it as מנחה הוא instead of as we would expect מנחה היא. [Compare Leviticus 2,6 and 2,15 for example. The same is true of אשה הוא in Exodus 29,28 describing the fire-offering, where we would have expected that the spelling should have been אשה היא. Compare also Leviticus 8,21 and 8, 28 where we read about עולה הוא, although we read the word as היא. In the case of the מנחה the anomaly is even greater as the Torah when referring to it refers to אותה not אותו which would have been appropriate if we were to treat it as masculine. Perhaps the most telling example of this phenomenon is found in Deut. 17,5 where the Torah speaks of the death penalty being administered to both the man and the woman who have committed a similar sin, writing והוצאת את האיש ההוא או את האשה ההוא instead of את האשה ההיא]. This whole matter becomes clearer when you consider that  our verse starts with the letter ה in the word השמר and ends with the letter ו at the end of the word בקרבו. These two letters represent the female and the male elements respectively. Their position in this verse may be designed to teach us that in this instance there is no difference between the masculine and the feminine attributes of G’d, that essentially they are all one. 
    This whole subject has been alluded to by Nachmanides in connection with Leviticus 2,11: כל המנחה ...לא תקטירו ממנו אשה לה’. When the Israelites committed the sin of the golden calf this angel who had previously accompanied them disappeared. This is the true meaning of the words in 33, 3 כי לא אעלה בקרבכם, “for I will not ascend in your midst.” As long as this angel of whom we have been told that the Holy Name of G’d was בקרבו, within him, in his midst, G’d never said כי לא אעלה בקרבך. As long as that angel was by our side He Himself was by our side. The angel  who made his appearance during the time of Joshua and who would assist in driving out the Canaanites was Gavriel, one of the disembodied beings. As soon as the people had been informed that G’d would not ascend in their midst they went into mourning (33,4) seeing that the angel who carried within him the Holy Name of G’d had left them. They became afraid for their own survival fearing that they were now potential prey for their enemies as their enemies also could call on the support of those angels whom we have described as the נפרדים, the ones who had been assigned, one each, to each of the seventy nations. The statement by Tanchuma Mishpatim 18 that as long as Moses was alive the Israelites had no angel with them, is in full agreement with this kabbalistic view, meaning that the angel called שר הצבא was not with them seeing that they had a superior angel, the one we described as one of the נטיעות, a category of angel unable to sin.
    When the Torah writes in 33,2 ושלחתי לפניך מלאך וגרשתי את הכנעני, “and I will send ahead of you an angel and I will drive out the Canaanite,” etc., this refers to a category of angels belonging to the נפרדים. This promise/threat by G’d was never carried out during Moses’ lifetime as his prayer succeeded in cancelling this decree. He, Moses, became the substitute for that angel. After Moses died, this void had to be filled and the angel spoken of by G’d in 33,2 then appeared to Joshua announcing that he had at that time begun to assume the task assigned to him already originally in Exodus 33,2. We know that Moses fulfilled the role of that angel during his own lifetime from the fact that whenever he raised his hands in supplication the Jewish people succeeded in driving back Amalek (Exodus 17,11). When this angel materialised before the eyes of Joshua with a drawn sword in his hand he made it amply clear what his function was to be. When, subsequently, we read in the Book of Joshua (10,11) of gigantic rocks dropping out of the sky (heaven) upon the fleeing Canaanites  this was part of that angel’s doing. When the kings were killed (Joshua 10,28) the description of the utter destruction wrought upon all the living souls in these various cities was beyond anything Moses had done during his own lifetime. When Moses conducted war the Torah mentions that the victims’ bodies were destroyed. We never find, as we do constantly in the Book of Joshua, that the souls of the victims were destroyed also. (contrast description of Deut. 3,6 with Joshua 10,28-39). In order that we do not misunderstand the wordנפש  in those verses as applying only to the animalistic life-force of the Canaanites, we are told in Joshua 10,40 ואת כל הנשמה החרים, “he utterly wiped out every soul.” This was why this angel had to accompany Joshua on his campaign.
    
    23,23. והביאך אל האמורי והחתי והפריזי והכנעני החוי והיבוסי, “and He will bring you to the Amorite, etc. etc.” The seventh tribe, the Girgashite, was not mentioned here as, according to our tradition recorded in Jerusalem Talmud Sheviit 6,1 that tribe emigrated, nort waiting for a disastrous confrontation with Joshua and the Jewish people. There was therefore no need for the Israelites to campaign against them.
    
    23,25. ועבדתם את ה' אלו-היכם, “and you will serve the Lord your G’d.” Seeing that the Gentiles believe that if they serve their various deities this in turn will assure them of success in their lives on earth, the Torah added the words: “but you will serve the Lord your G’d” as a contrast at this point. It is simply a reminder that it is not appropriate for the Israelites to serve any other deity which cannot grant them their desires anyway. The Torah adds: “for He blessed your bread and your water.”
   והסירותי מחלה מקרבך, “and I will remove illness from amongst you.” There are certain sicknesses which result from the intake of certain foods, illnesses not visible on the surface of one’s body. There are other external illnesses which are due to changes in climate, etc. This is why the Torah assures the Jewish people that when they serve the Lord G’d will bless their food and water so that their bodies will be able to resist the sickness which may normally result from the consumption of food and drink containing invisible but harmful ingredients. This means that the righteous person will not have to have recourse to a physician.  This is the meaning of Chronicles II 16,12: “but even though he (King Assa) was ill, he did not turn to the Lord but to physicians.” (this was sinful and the reason he was not cured.) The word מחלה, “sickness,” includes such deficiencies as sterility, propensity to not carry out an embryo for its full term, etc. Actually, the verse should have written the word והסיר, “and He will remove (in the third person) instead of והסירותי, “I will remove.” After all the previous reference to G‘d in that verse such as וברך, “and He will bless,” is in the third person. However, the correct interpretation of the whole verse is: “for the Lord will remove all manner of disease from our midst if we serve Him by addressing ourselves to His exclusive attribute, the tetragram” (compare Nachmanides on the end of verse 25).
    
    23,27. את אימתי, “the fear of Me, etc.” This is the attribute of Justice. The word is the same as in Exodus 15,16 תפול עליהם אימתה ופחד, “may fear and terror befall them.” The צרעה which verse 28 speaks of is a kind of flying insect similar but bigger than a bee. The term צרעה includes many species of a similar type all of which sting people. Just as there were many different kinds of locust during the plague of locust in Egypt, so there are many different kinds of צרעה. The Talmud Sotah 36 claims that this insect injected its poison into the Canaanites who became its victim, blinding them and killing them almost instantly. This insect entered the Holy Land together with Joshua, crossed the Jordan as is reported in Joshua 24,12: “I sent a plague  ahead of you.”
    The reason that in verse 28 only three of the Canaanite tribes are mentioned as being driven out by this צרעה is that these three tribes were the strongest ones amongst the seven tribes residing in tall fortresses and fortified towns. The Torah wanted to inform us that such mighty warriors in such protected habitats became the victims of such tiny creatures as the hornets. It is an object lesson for us demonstrating that G’d will bring down the strong by using the weakest of His creatures as His agent.
    
    23,30. מעט מעט אגרשנו מפניך, “little by little will I drive them out before you.” The meaning of the verse is that the hornet will drive these people out due to the power of the attribute of Justice so that they will constantly decrease in numbers (in contrast with you who will steadily increase in numbers). This process will continue until you can take possession of the whole country.
    
    23,31. מים סוף ועד ים פלשתים, “from the Sea of Reeds as far as the Sea of the Philistines.” The Sea of Reeds is in the South and the Sea of the Philistines is in the West (Mediterranean). We know this also from Joshua 1,4: “as far as the great Sea where the sun sets will be your borders.” The sea described as the “great Sea” is not the ocean (Atlantic or Indian ocean) as the ocean surrounds all land masses. The words וממדבר refer to the eastern side whereas the words עד הנהר  refer to the river Euphrates in the north.
    
    24,1. ואל משה אמר עלה אל ה', “and to Moses He had said: “ascend to the Lord, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text this occurred prior to the giving of the Torah. This is why the Torah wrote that Moses was to approach the thick cloud all by himself (verse 2), although the instruction to ascend included Aaron, Nadav, and Avihu, as well as the seventy elders. The meaning of the word אל ה' in verse 2 is אל הערפל, “to or towards the thick cloud” within which the Presence of G’d had wrapped itself (compare 20,21). The whole paragraph relating that the people “saw the thunder” (20,18) also occurred before מתן תורה. [the important word at the beginning of this paragraph is the word אמר instead of ויאמר. The word אמר, meaning “He had said,” as distinct from ויאמר “He said,” indicates that this paragraph speaks of matters which had occurred some time previously. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: The words ואל משה אמר refer to Moses having been addressed with this instruction by the attribute of Hashem. The meaning of the words עלה אל ה' (which obviously cannot mean that Moses was to ascend to the region of Hashem) is that he was to ascend to the level of the angel Mattatron, the angel whom we have already described as the שר הפנים, “the Minister of the Interior,” the angel to whom G’d normally entrusts the running of His universe. 
    This is also what our sages in Sanhedrin 38 meant when they said that the reason this angel is called Mattatron is that this word combines two meanings (in two separate languages). They are אדון and שליח. The reason that this is so is because in the language of our sages (a mixture of Latin and Greek at the time of the Mishnah) a lady who commands great authority is called Matrona. The word also means שליח, “agent, emissary,” as in Greek such a messenger  is known as Mentaur. There is still a third meaning which is associated with the word מטטרן which is the Aramaic equivalent of the Hebrew משמרת, “custody, guard.”  The name of that angel is Mattatron as it is the custodian of the world on behalf of G’d. who is also known as the שומר ישראל, “the guardian of Israel.”
    Seeing that we have established from the meaning of his very name that he is the master of all that is below him in rank, all the heavenly hosts as well as those on earth are at his command and under his control. He acts as the agent of the One Who is above him, the One who has given him this authority. His name is אדון לביתו ומושל בכל קנינו, “master of His household and governor of all His possessions.” You ought to appreciate that in accordance with the meaning of the word אדון, “master,” the letter ט in the name מטטרון appears twice. The reason for this is that the two letters ט when combined have a numerical value of ח'י an allusion to the חי העולמים an expression of supremacy. Alternatively, the extra letter ט is an allusion to the ninth emanation which derives its potency directly from the highest emanation, the tenth emanation.
    It is well known (in kabbalistic circles) that another description of this angel Mattatron is נער. This is the reason the firstborn of the Israelites have been referred to as נערים in verse 5 of our chapter where the Torah writes: וישלח את נערי בני ישראל ויעלו עולות, “He sent the youths of the Children of Israel and they offered burnt-offerings, etc.”
    It is well to realise that at this time it was not an ascent to G’d which G’d had in mind, as if it had been that there would not have been a point in including Aaron, his sons and the elders in any part of this instruction. When the Torah writes here in verse 2 that Moses was to approach the ערפל all by himself, the meaning is also that he would approach the angel Mattatron who was at that time within the thick cloud described as ערפל. Actually, the Torah should have written: ונגשת לבדך “you are to approach all by yourself,” if the Torah had meant for him at this time to ascend all the way to G’d. At this point G’d’s words were directed only at Moses seeing that what was said about Aaron, his sons, and the elders was in the third person, i.e. quite obviously not intended for their ears at this time. G’d had told Moses that Aaron and the elders were to remain at a distance when they would prostrate themselves.
    We need to understand why the direct form of the speech in verse 1, i.e. עלה אל ה' was changed to indirect speech in verse 2 where the Torah writes in indirect speech “and Moses shall approach theערפל .” We must assume that the words in verse 2 for Moses to approach the  ערפל all by himself were not spoken by G’d but by the angel Mattatron. In that event he spoke of Moses approaching himself (the angel) within the thick cloud. The entire verse then was primarily a command for Aaron, his sons, and the elders not to approach but to prostrate themselves from a distance. As a consequence of these instructions, the Torah adds immediately that these people who had not approached beheld what is reported in verse 10 i.e. ויראו את אלו-הי ישראל ותחת רגליו כמעשה לבנת הספיר וכעצם השמים לטוהר,  “they experienced a vision of the G’d of Israel in the form of a likeness of bricks made of sapphire under His feet, being as pure as the essence of heaven.” In the interval, Moses alone approached more closely to the ערפל, as he had been told in verse 12  עלה אלי ההרה “ascend to Me to the mountain and remain there, etc.” This additional ascent (additional to what was commanded in verse 1 represented an additional spiritual elevation on the part of Moses until he actually entered the cloud. The next step occurred in verse 18 where the Torah reports Moses as entering the cloud, ascending the mountain and remaining there for forty days.
    You are already aware that this (angel) is the one who was the cause of Elisha ben Avuyah making a grievous error, resulting in his heresy  when he formed the opinion that there are two domains of divinity (compare Chagigah 15). The same is liable to happen to anyone who does not exercise extreme care in contemplating these verses. Perhaps the reason that this paragraph has been written immediately after the previous paragraph concluded with the word מוקש, “a trap,” in 23,33, is to warn that this chapter must be read with more than ordinary care. It is a veiled warning that he who is not extremely careful when studying this chapter is liable to fall into a theological trap. The error committed by the people who served the golden calf, by Nadav and Avihu (compare our author’s comments on Leviticus 10,1), may be traced to misreading what is written in our chapter. Of all the great scholars delving into the matter only Rabbi Akiva escaped with his mind and body completely intact (Chagigah 14). How was it that only Rabbi Akiva succeeded where others had failed? This is what our sages  meant when they said that Rabbi Akiva realised that there are other powerful angels of the calibre of Mattatron thus precluding the error that because Mattatron was unique he was a divinity. The sages based this on Deut. 33,2 אתה מרבבות קודש, that when G’d gave the Torah “He had come with some of the myriads of holy beings.” The reason G’d is called ה' צבאות is precisely because He is the Master of all these holy beings.
    
    24,3. ויבא משה ויספר לעם את כל דברי ה', “Moses came (back) and told the people all the words of the Lord.” This is a reference to the commandment to separate from their wives in anticipation of G’d’s revelation, as well as the instruction to fence off the mountain. When our verse mentions ואת כל המשפטים the reference is not to all the social legislation which has been in the preceding pages of Parshat Mishpatim. We have already proven that this chapter deals with matters which occurred prior to Matan Torah. The expression המשפטים in our verse refers to the legislation introduced at Marah (i.e. laws about the red heifer, rules about litigation and parts of the Sabbath legislation 15,25)
   כל הדברים אשר דבר ה' נעשה, “all the words the Lord has said we shall do.” Rabbeinu Chananel writes that the word  נעשה includes the positive and the negative commandments. The reason for this is simple. Anyone who deliberately refrains from violating a negative commandment thereby performs a positive commandment. There is an explicit verse in Psalms 119,3 making precisely this point. The psalmist says: “they have done no wrong but have followed His ways.”
    
    24,4. ויכתב משה את כל דברי ה', “Moses wrote down all the words of the Lord.” This refers to the conditions spelled out in 19,5: “it will be if you listen to My voice, etc.”
   וישכם בבוקר ויבן מזבח תחת ההר, “he arose early in the morning and erected an altar beneath the mountain.” This occurred on the fifth day of Sivan.
    
    24,5. וישלח את נערי בני ישראל, “He sent the youths of the Children of Israel, etc.” These were the firstborn. The reason the Torah refers to them as נערי, “youths of,” is  that they were ritually pure, ready to perform sacrificial service. They had never committed a sin, had not had sexual intercourse with a woman. This is what our sages said in Berachot 43 when they described that in the future these  בחורי ישראל, “young men of the Jewish people,” who had never committed any sin would exude a fragrance like that of the Lebanon. They based this on Hoseah 14,7: “His beauty shall be like the olive tree’s, his fragrance like that of the Lebanon.” With the bringing of this sacrifice the covenant signifying the giving of the Torah was concluded. There were three separate occasions when the Israelites were committed through conclusion of a covenant. 
    One was circumcision; the second was immersion in a ritual bath; the third is the offering of a communal sacrifice. The circumcision occurred prior to the Exodus from Egypt. All of them had first been circumcised as we know from the fact that they could not eat the Passover unless they had been circumcised. We also have a specific verse in Joshua 5,5 stating that all the Israelite males who had departed from Egypt had been circumcised.
    Immersion in a ritual bath was part of the process of sanctification commanded by G’d in 19,10. The offering of a communal sacrifice is what is referred to in our verse. When someone wishes to convert to Judaism he must fulfill all these three rituals. This is based on the Torah comparing natural-born Jews to newly converted Jews when it wrote in Numbers 15,15 ככם כגר, “one teaching for you as well as for the proselyte.” The Jewish court is obligated to administer and supervise circumcision and ritual bath of the converts. When the Temple will be rebuilt, each convert will then offer his sacrifice to complete the procedure of his conversion (Maimonides Hilchot Issurey Biah 13,5).
    Our sages in Yevamot 47 state that prior to circumcision and ritual bath the proselyte receives instruction in some of the laws of the Torah, especially those dealing with the various tithes imposed by the Torah on the Jewish farmer. One also makes such a proselyte familiar with the penalties he incurs for violating laws of the Torah. The reason is that the mixed multitude who joined the Jewish people as converts at the time of the Exodus were the ones who initiated the sin of the golden calf. They were also the cause of the death of 14,000 Israelites on the occasion when the people had demanded meat after expressing their dissatisfaction with the manna diet (Numbers 11,4). The Torah had described the instigators of that affair as האספסוף, ‘the 
collection of rabble.” The Talmud Yevamot 43 adds that the absorption of proselytes is a very difficult task for Israel, as difficult to stomach as ספחת, psoriasis, as we know from Isaiah 14,1 ונספחו על בית ישראל, “and strangers shall join them and cleave to the House of Yaakov.” The reason that these proselytes are so hard to absorb is that their inexperience with Jewish laws and customs produces the result that Jews learn from their customs instead of vice versa.
    Another interpretation of why the Talmud says that one informs the prospective converts of some of the penalties which are in store for people who deliberately violate Torah laws is that  they should not be able to say at a later point that had they been aware of these penalties they would never have converted. If this were to happen then the conversion would retroactively turn out to have been based on the wrong premise. It is therefore incumbent upon us to ensure that when someone converts he does so wholeheartedly, aware of what obligations he takes upon himself. When the Talmud speaks of the proselytes being קשים לישראל, we must not understand this as a slight aimed at the proselytes, rather it is a rebuke to the Israelites. The fact hat G’d will look at the tremendous challenge that these converts took upon themselves when joining Judaism, leaving their families, their homeland, etc., this is compared to natural born Israelites who did not have to undergo such difficulties and still do not serve the Lord their G’d wholeheartedly.
    We find this approach confirmed by Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish who is quoted in Tanchuma Lech Lecha 6 as saying that the converts at this time are morally/ethically on a higher plane than the natural born Israelites. The latter had witnessed the revelation at Mount Sinai and all the miracles which this entailed. The converts had not witnessed anything in the nature of miracles  and still they had come to place themselves under the protection of G’d Almighty although it involved great initial hardship for them.
   זבחים שלמים לה' פרים, “as feast peace-offerings for Hashem, bulls.” As long as the Israelites were in the desert they always experienced some fear of the attribute of Justice seeing they found themselves in a part of the earth which was desolate, reflected destruction of nature, etc. This is why they slaughtered bulls as their offerings. [the standard sin-offering of High Priests, or the communal sin-offering for the whole people when the occasion demanded it. Ed.]
    24,8. ויקח משה את הדם ויזרוק על העם, “Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people.” He sprinkled the blood on them in order to enable them to enter the covenant with G’d by means of blood. The bloodstain which remained on each of their garments was called עדי, “jewel, ornament,” as this stain was a sign of distinction and honour for them. It served as testimony that they had entered into a covenant with the Lord. This is the reason why after they had sinned at the golden calf, i.e. had violated that covenant, G’d told Moses to tell the people to remove עדיך, “your jewelry.” G’d meant that the people were to take off the garments with that bloodstain which so far had served them as jewelry. When we read in 33,6: “the Children of Israel were stripped of their jewelry,” this means that they divested themselves of the garments they had worn at the time of the revelation. 
    Why did G’d employ blood as the instrument by means of which He made the covenant with the people?  it was a hint that as long as the Israelites were to be loyal to the covenant and they would observe the commandments all well and good; if they were to fail to do so G’d would permit their blood to their adversaries. This is the view of Rabbeinu Chananel
    Rashi writes in a similar vein saying that Moses sprinkled part of the blood on the clothing of the Israelites as a sign of distinction similar to when he had been told to sprinkle blood on Aaron, his garments,  and Aaron’s sons and their garments at the time they were being consecrated as priests (Exodus 29,21).
    
    Onkelos appears to understand the words על העם, which he translates as על מדבחא לכפרא על עמא, “on the altar as atonement for the people,” as meaning that the word על does not mean “on” but “on behalf of.” There is also a commentator who understands the word על figuratively, i.e. “in the direction of.” The blood fell short of them, did not stain their garments. A similar meaning of the word על would be found in Genesis 1,20: ועוף יעופף על הארץ על פני רקיע השמים, “and fowl that fly over the earth towards the expanse of the heaven.”
    
    24,10. ויראו את אלו-הי ישראל, “and they ‘saw’ the G’d of Israel, etc.” The Torah refers to the attribute כבוד which we have discussed at length earlier saying that according to Pessikta Zutrata this is another name for what is popularly known as Shechinah. We know that it is impossible to experience a vision of the attribute of Hashem, as Hashem told Moses specifically that His attribute of Hashem cannot be seen by any living human being (Exodus 33,20). This is why Onkelos translates these words as וחזו ית יקר אלהא דישראל. This is the same attribute כבוד which the prophet Ezekiel experienced in a vision in Ezekiel 1,26 as the appearance of a human being above (the other chayot). First he had seen the חיות הקודש, and the אופנים beneath next to the חיות. When he looked again he saw the sky suspended above the heads of the חיות. Then he saw the throne of the Lord above the sky. Above that he saw a likeness resembling that of a human being, still higher above the throne.
   ותחת רגליו כמעשה לבנת הספיר, “and beneath his feet the likeness of a brick made of sapphire.” According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of this entire verse is that Moses, Aaron, his sons, as well as the elders now experienced a vision of G’d, the G’d of Israel, seated on His throne above the sky. This was the same sky which had previously been described as an expanse covering the חיות. The words ותחת רגליו refer to what was beneath the throne, i.e. the sky. This corresponds to the translation by Onkelos who writes: כורסא יקיריה כעובד אבן טבא, “a splendid throne just like the work of a gemstone.” The reason that the elders saw something looking like כמעשה לבנת הספיר is that this is the way Ezekiel describes what he saw (1,26). ספיר is a whitish gem-stone according to the opinion of Rav Saadyah Gaon quoted by Ibn Ezra. This is why the Torah writes the word לבנת, i.e. a derivative of לובן, the translucent whiteness of the white in the egg. The remarkable thing the Torah tells us then is that it was a great compliment for these people to behold something which emits its light behind it.
    However, the opinion of Ibn Ezra is that ספיר is blue. He does not agree that the word לבנת is a derivative of the word לובן, but that we must understand it as similar to Ezekiel 4,1 ואתה קח לך לבנה, “and now take for yourself a brick.” According to Ibn Ezra the elders and Aaron saw instead of an ordinary brick, a brick-like image made of the finest blue sapphire. Whereas in Ezekiel 1,26 Ezekiel had seen אבן ספיר כמראה, something like a sapphire stone, the elders saw an image of something like that. Proof of the fact that this is the correct interpretation is the fact that Ezekiel compared what he saw to אבן ספיר “a sapphire-coloured stone,” clearly not the white of an egg. Proof for Ibn Ezra is the fact that our verse describes the structure of the object as כמעשה, “like the work of,” a description which would not fit something fluid like לובן. According to Ibn Ezra then the meaning of the whole verse is that these people saw the throne of G’d’s glory as a structure made of sapphire-like brick of the utmost clarity and purity and beneath this sapphire-based structure they saw the pure and clear sky. This was the same as the sky seen by Ezekiel in his famous vision which was above the heads of chayot described there as “awesome ice” (Ezekiel 1,22). The sky mentioned here was also beneath the throne, and the throne beneath the G’d of Israel, just as in the vision of Ezekiel, except that the Torah did not bother to write all these details in our verse. The idea that our verse was shorter and more concise is the opinion of Nachmanides who states that above the chayah is the sky (heaven), and above the heaven the throne, and above the throne is the G’d of Israel. 
    The reason that in our verse instead of רקיע the Torah describes the appearance of that phenomenon as like עצם השמים and the chayot are not mentioned at all, may be that the Torah deliberately wanted to conceal these aspects of the vision of these אצילי ישראל, “nobles of Israel” (verse 11), seeing that these additional words were the ones that led to the sin of Israel and the removal of one of the four supports of the Merkavah supporting the Shechinah as a result of their worshipping the golden calf (compare our author’s comment on Exodus 32,4 ).
    A Midrashic approach (based on Jerusalem Talmud Sukkah 4,3) to  the words: “like the structure of a brick made of sapphire.” This image recalled to them the fact that the Israelites’ heavy slave labour in Egypt consisted of their making mud bricks. Seeing such an image in the heavens proved to the people viewing it that when the Israelites suffer persecution by the Gentile nations in the terrestrial world the Shechinah shares their suffering in the celestial spheres. This reflects the statement by Sifra Parshat Behar 9,4 that whenever the Israelites are being enslaved in our world it is as if the oppressor does the same to the Shechinah in the heavenly regions. This explains Exodus 3,3 where G’d said to Moses כי ידעתי את מכאוביו, “for I am intimately familiar with its (Israel’s) pains.” This is why the Jerusalem Talmud in Sukkah  had drawn our attention to the fact that the Torah did not write מעשה לבנת ספיר, but כמעשה לבנת ספיר, i.e. not merely an actual brick made out of sapphire but something additional such as the molds and tools required to make such bricks. Thus far the Jerusalem Talmud in Sukkah.
    The seventy elders of which the Torah speaks here were the overseers of the Israelites in Egypt who had allowed themselves to absorb beatings by the Egyptians rather than enforce harsher conditions imposed after Pharaoh responded cruelly to Moses’ first interview by making brick making harder for the people (5,16). This is why they were rewarded by having this vision of bricks made of sapphire.
    A scientific approach to the words כמעשה לבנת ספיר: this is a reference to a vision of the original substantive matter in the universe, which exists immediately beneath the throne of G’d (compare Maimonides Moreh Nevuchim section 1 chapter 28). It looked to them like snow. Our sages in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer 3 ask the rhetorical; question: “whence (from what raw material) was the heaven created?” Answer: “from the light of His (G’d’s) garments.” This is what David meant when he said (Psalms 104,2) “You are wrapped in a robe of light. You spread the heavens like a tent cloth.” The earth was created out of the snow beneath the throne of glory. We have proof of this from Job 37,6: “He would command the snow: ‘become earth!’”
    Onkelos, who translated the words as ”a splendid throne like the work of a gem stone,” understands the words “under His (its) feet” as a reference to the oceans which form the legs of that throne. The words רגליו means “its causes.” We encounter the words רגל in that sense in Ezekiel 1,7 ורגליהם רגל ישרה, or ועמדו רגליו in Zecharyah 14,4. The meaning in these verses is that the raw material emanates from beside it (G’d’s throne) and its proximity is the reason (cause) that it exists and endures.
    Applied to our verse here, the word כמעשה, means that just as in the instances mentioned by Ezekiel and Zecharyah, these prophets were granted insights, these אצילי בני ישראל were granted these insights by means of the visions they experienced at this time. The word לבנת is a reference to the white of the egg which was beneath the throne of G’d and formed the original raw material from which earth was constructed. The reason the Torah did not write כלבנת ספיר but כמעשה לבנת ספיר, was to warn us that raw material is something passive, subject to outside influences, but unable to exert its own influences. It may have one colour one day and another colour on a different day depending on external stimuli. A ספיר is not white. If it were white it could not then have become all kinds of colours. Similarly, a raw material does not have a specific shape or form. This is why potentially it can assume any shape or form. This is the opinion of Maimonides in chapter 26 of the second part of his Moreh Nevuchim. I have copied his words. [a perusal of that chapter will reveal that Maimonides understands Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer as distinguishing two basic raw materials, one “beneath the throne,” i.e. materials used to create what is in the terrestrial universe, and the other “materials” used for the creation of the celestial universe. Maimonides came to this conclusion in order for the wording of Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer not to mislead us into thinking that he thought that the raw material preceded G’d the Creator. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach on the words כמעשה לבנת הספיר. It is well known in the circles of the scholars dealing with celestial beings that the throne of G’d is based on three foundations: they are; אש, רוח, מים, “fire, wind, and water.” These three materials are emanated from three attributes of G’d חסד, דין, רחמים. They  have three different colours, i.e. white, red, blue. Remember that the word לבנת in our verse refers to the colour “white.” The word ספיר alludes to the colour “red.” The word שמים in the expression כעצם השמים לטוהר refers to the colour “blue.” This is why Onkelos translated  as he did. His translation reflects what our sages said in Sotah 17: “the blue of the ציצית is similar to the blue colour of the ocean; the blue colour of the ocean is similar to the blue of the sky. The blue of the sky is similar to the colour of the throne of G’d.”
    It is important that you understand how Onkelos’ translation reflects the fact that there were actually two thrones, one underneath the other, and that the words תחת רגליו כמעשה לבנת ספיר refer to the lower of the thrones which is described here as “beneath its feet,” i.e. beneath the feet of the higher throne. The lower throne appeared to these nobles of The Children of Israel as מעשה לבנת ספיר. (The concept of the two thrones appears already in Chagigah 14) It is a fact that there are two thrones. This is why our verse wanted to make clear to you that beneath the upper throne there is a lower throne to which the description of the vision seen by the nobles of the Children of Israel became privy as a result of their vision.
    The three foundations of G’d’s throne which we mentioned earlier are actually six and this is the mystical dimension of the verse in the Book of Kings dealing with details of Solomon’s throne (Kings I, 10,19). We read שש מעלות לכסא, “six steps were leading up to the throne.” The reason for this was that Solomon in his wisdom wanted to include in the construction of his own throne the מעלות, “advantages or virtues” of both the thrones in the celestial regions concerning which it has been written in Psalms 122,5: “for there the throne of judgment stood, thrones of the house of David.” This is the meaning of Chronicles I 29,23: “Solomon sat on the ‘throne of the Lord.’” This description applies to times when Israel enjoyed G’d’s goodwill. On the other hand, in times of Divine anger at Israel, the applicable verse is Daniel 7,9: עד די כרסון רמיו, “I watched until thrones were set  in place and the Ancient of Days took His seat....His throne was tongues of flame, etc.”
    There are some other commentators who explain the words כמעשה לבנת הספיר as describing the achievement of the nobles who could view the interior of the white sapphire, i.e. behold what is hidden from normal eyes inside it. Normally, this gem reveals only what is on its outside, preserving the mystery of its essence.  All that becomes visible is a reflection of its inner essence. Its essence itself is not understood even by the beholder of its reflection. This would be similar to what G’d said to Moses in Exodus 6,3 וארא אל אברהם .....באל שדי, “I appeared to Avraham...as the G’d Shaddai.” He added: “but My name Hashem, i.e. My essence, I did not  acquaint them (the patriarchs) with.” This is why our verse actually describes the vision of the nobles in the form of a parable which is designed to make us understand the נמשל, the moral lesson of the fable. Proof that we are speaking about a parable, “fable,” is the letter כ before the word מעשה which describes an approximation of the insight these people achieved at that time. Whenever prophets achieve insights, when the Israelites achieved insights at Mount Sinai, something the Torah described as פנים בפנים, “face to face” in Deut. 5,4, the reference is to “a spiritual force within another spiritual force.” The recipient of that revelation was granted to enter an interior chamber of a hidden mystical domain without penetrating to its core. In order to illustrate this the Torah wrote the word כמעשה to describe a process similar to the viewing of the luster of the sapphire without seeing its true interior.
    
    24,11. ואל אצילי בני ישראל, “and against the ‘nobles’ of the Children of Israel, etc.” The reason they are referred to as אצילי is that the word is connected to אצילות, “emanation.” Some of the holy spirit had been emanated to them while they were standing at this holy site. The people so referred to were Nadav and Avihu as well as the seventy elders.
   לא שלח ידו, “He did not stretch out His hand.” This wording proves that they deserved to experience disciplining or worse by G’d.
   ויחזו את האלו-הים, “they gazed at G’d.” This is a repetition of what had been described earlier with the words ויראו את האלו-הים (24,10). The principal meaning of these verses is that the nobles were content to gaze at G’d from afar and not breach the security fence around the mountain.
   ויאכלו וישתו, “they ate and they drank, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text they considered the day a festival in view of their having been granted such insights and having survived the experience. This would be comparable to Yaakov who had said after his struggle with the protective guardian of Esau (Genesis 32,31) “for I have seen G’d face to face and my life has been spared.” This is also why the High Priest used to make a feast at the end of Yom Kippur every time after he had come out of the Holy of Holies without having been harmed in body or spirit by the experience (compare Yuma 70).
    Another way of looking at the meaning of these words is  that the Torah wanted to tell us that the spiritual level of these people did not match that of Moses who was able to go without food or drink for 40 days when he communed with G’d (34,28). As soon a these “nobles” had had their vision they returned to being ordinary mortals with the requirements of ordinary people. This is why they had to eat and drink.
    Rashi reads the words: “they gazed upon G’d and ate and drank” together, meaning that the two experiences occurred simultaneously, that they acted in a very gross fashion.
    A Midrashic approach to these words (Vayikra Rabbah 20,10): “Did they take cake, i.e. provisions along to Mount Sinai?” Rabbi Yochanan understands the words ויאכלו וישתו in a literal sense, i.e. they ate and drank real food (something superior to physical food). He compares the words to Proverbs 16,15: “in the light of the King’s face there is life.” The vision they had experienced sustained them as if they had been refreshed by physical food and drink. The meaning of Solomon’s words is that the true food which sustains life is “G’d’s favour,” which Solomon describes as “like the rain in the spring” in the latter half of the verse quoted. According to this view the entire vision may be compared to receiving food and drink of a superior category. This was the true nutriment. It may also be compared to what David had in mind in Psalms 63,6 when he said: “I am sated as with a rich feast.” We have to contrast physical food which though it sustains the body and therefore life, is something which reaches us at arm’s length, so to speak. G’d has to employ a number of “transformers” in order for physical food to reach us. Receiving Divine inspiration directly is a much more efficient process, skips the intermediaries, and therefore is likely to achieve more with less. This thought may be reflected in Psalms 36,9-10: “they feast on the rich fare of Your House; You let them drink at Your refreshing stream.”
    Still another way of explaining the words: “they ate and they drank” -that instead of reading וישתו we could understand this word as וישיתו, “they set.” We have found that after the sin of the golden calf and G’d’s decree not to travel with them but to delegate this task to an angel (33,4) the Jewish people no longer put on their “jewelry.” (compare what we wrote in connection with 24,8). Interestingly enough this remarkable שכר, reward, this jewelry was never mentioned explicitly as having been received by the Jewish people at Mount Sinai. The Torah became explicit about it only at the time when it was removed from them after the golden calf. Why were we never told specifically that this “jewelry” had been the reward for the נעשה ונשמע, the absolute devotion displayed by the people at the giving of the Torah?
    I believe that there was no real need to mention this “reward” specifically at all. The people who had come out of the camp and approached the mountain within the allowable parameters and who had heard the sounds of the Shofar and experienced all the mind-shaking phenomena reported in chapters 19-20 were obviously “clothed,” i.e. “bathed” in superior light, etc. When a person goes out in order to anoint himself with oil there is no need to report specifically that he did indeed smear the oil all over himself. Our sages (Shavuot 47) have paraphrased this thought when they said: “if you touch someone who has oil all over  him you will find that some sticks to you,” (Rashi on the proverb there).
    The whole matter may be compared to the Torah’s treatment of life in the hereafter, and indeed any specific promise that there is such a thing. Seeing the entire Torah legislation would not make any sense unless there was such afterlife, the Torah did not have to spell it out expressly. It suffices for the Torah to have written (19,17) “Moses took out the people towards G’d,” to teach us from this generality that the result of all this was that they received this “reward” which they are reported as being deprived of as a result of the sin of the golden calf. When that sin did occur, it became necessary to spell out that the people had lost this distinction (the stains of blood, or whatever other form the jewelry had taken).
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: “they gazed at G’d and ate and drank.” Why was this repeated seeing the Torah had already written in verse 10 that these people had “seen the G’d of Israel?” It is possible that these אצילים “saw” G’d  i.e. prophesied. In order that you should not think that what these people saw in verse 10  was “seeing” in the accepted sense of the word, the Torah had to use a different verb, i.e. ויחזו when describing the experience of these nobles and their reaction to it. The word ויחזו clearly reflects the word מחזה a mental image, such as Avraham experienced, not seeing something with one’s physical eye when awake. On the one hand, their prophetic achievement was greater than that of the rest of Israel, but at the same time it was inferior to Moses’ prophetic achievement. Moses could see with his physical eyes what these אצילים could see only with their mental eye. Expressed differently; the accomplishment of the people of Israel could be categorised as of the calibre ענן וערפל, “cloud and heavy cloud,” whereas that of the אצילים was in the nature of נבואה שלא במחיצה, a vision without deliberate obstructions; Moses on the other hand, saw the attribute כבוד with his physical eyes. This is what G’d meant when He told him in 33,23 וראית את אחורי, a reference to this attribute כבוד האחרון. As to the words ויאכלו וישתו following immediately afterwards, this teaches that the אצילים related to their exalted experience in a light-hearted, irresponsible manner. This is the reason that they should have been punished by G’d, i.e. שליחות יד by the attribute of Justice. However, G’d was content to wait so as not to disturb the festive atmosphere of the occasion.
    
    24,12. עלה אלי ההרה, “ascend to Me, to the mountain!” This paragraph also speaks of matters prior to the giving of the Torah. The wording proves it as otherwise it would not make sense for G’d to say: “I will give you there the Torah and the command-ments.”
	והיה שם, “and remain there.” Rashi  explains that G’d meant “for forty days.”
   אשר כתבתי, “which I have written, etc.” This means that G’d had written the Torah already prior to creating the universe with black fire on white fire. Alternatively, the words אשר כתבתי refer to the two Tablets which were reported as having been written by the finger of G’d“ in Exodus 31,18.
   להורותם, “to teach them.” According to the plain meaning of the text this teaches that the Torah and the commandments are the path to enable the soul to return to its roots. The true meaning of this then is: “to teach them the way to eternal life.” This is also what Solomon said in Proverbs 4,4; “He also taught me and said to me: ‘let your heart retain My words; keep My commandments and you will live.’”
    A Midrashic approach (Pessikta Zutrata): The word להורותם refers to the Talmud. This is also what the Talmud Berachot 5 says. The words את לוחות האבן, “the Tablets made of stone,” refer to the Tablets upon which were engraved the Ten Command- ments; the word התורה refers to the written Torah; the word והמצוה refers to the Mishnah (oral Torah); the words אשר כתבתי refer to the other Books of the Bible, the Books of the prophets and the Hagiographa; the wordלהורותם  refers to the Talmud. This teaches that all the laws contained in all these Books have been given to Moses at Mount Sinai. Furthermore, you will note that the first and last letter of the word להורותם between them have a numerical value of 70; this is one of the origins for the well known adage that there are 70 facets to the written Torah, i.e. 70 different ways of interpreting it.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word להורותם is spelled defec- tively here, the Torah merely writing להורתם. This spelling is support for the interpretation that when one observes Torah and the commandments this will result in man walking the correct path in life. The path leads to the realisation of the ideals represented by the concept of כנסת ישראל. Having reached that level, the soul is ready to ascend to the celestial regions, eternal life. This reflects the meaning of the words of Psalms 73,24  ואחר כבוד תקחני אתה, “and You guided me towards honour.” The word להורותם may be translated as “towards the bedroom of my parents.”
    
    24,13. ויקם משה ויהושע משרתו, “Moses and his servant Joshua stood up, etc.” Joshua was one of the seventy elders mentioned previously as having had a vision of G’d. In fact, Joshua was the most senior of these seventy elders. The question arises why he is mentioned specifically in this context. Nachmanides writes that possibly the reason is that the Torah wanted to tell us that during the entire 40 days that Moses spent on the mountain Joshua waited for him at the bottom of the mountain. This is why the Torah saw fit to describe him as Moses’ personal valet, משרתו, at this point. As such it was appropriate for him to accompany his master right up to the fence.
   ויעל משה אל הר האלו-הים, “Moses ascended to the Mountain of G’d.” This teaches that all the time Moses was on the mountain Joshua waited for him at the bottom of the mountain. Proof for this can be found in 32,17 where we read that as soon as Moses descended the Torah reports Joshua as “hearing the sound of the people in shouting.” Had he remained inside the camp, this verse would not make sense.
    
    24,16. וישכון כבוד ה' על הר סיני, “the attribute כבוד of Hashem rested on Mount Sinai.” This is in line with what had been mentioned in connection with 20,1: “G’d said all these words.” I have elaborated on this subject there. When the Torah writes here that the cloud covered the mountain this means that during the six days from the first of Sivan until the time of Matan Torah the cloud enveloped the mountain.
   ויקרא אל משה ביום השביעי, “He called Moses on the seventh day. This was the day after the Ten Commandments had been given at Mount Sinai. Moses then remained on the mountain for forty days and forty nights, as we know from verse 18: “Moses remained on the mountain for forty days and forty nights.” The six days during which the mountain was enveloped in cloud (during which Moses prepared himself mentally for meeting Hashem) were part of the forty days. You might ask that seeing that Moses remained there and did not descend until the seventeenth day of Tammuz, why did the Torah have to give us this statement about G’d calling Moses once more while he was already on the mountain? Our sages have different answers for this question. In the first chapter of Yuma (folio 4), Rabbi Akiva says that the whole verse was written only in order to honour Moses. Rabbi Natan says that  these six days were mentioned as during these days Moses’ entrails emptied themselves of any remnants of food consumed while he had been down below. This would make him more equal to the angels in that region who do not consume physical food. Rabbi Matya son of Charash says that the verse is meant to inspire fear. Torah can be given only to someone who relates to it from feelings of awe, sweat and fear. We know this from Psalms 2,11 “Serve Him out of feelings of trembling and fear.”
    A Midrashic approach (Pessikta Zutrata): consider the remarkable fact that whereas the entire universe was created in a mere six days, it took forty days to give the Torah to Moses. “Hail to the person who sells or gives something which is the product of only six (days labour) and who receives in return something that it took forty days to perfect.” (compare Vayikra Rabbah 30,1) This explains why Moses had to remain on the mountain for a whole forty days.
    I believe that the number 40 is an allusion to the maximum spiritual/intellectual accomplishments which it is given to the human species to achieve. Moses achieved that maximum and that is the reason it took him forty days to do so. This is presumably what the sages had in mind when they said (Pessachim 72) “A certain scholar studied a certain subject forty times until he felt he knew it as well as certain objects he had in his pocket.”  I believe furthermore that the merit of studying Torah incessantly for forty days resulted in Moses’ skin emitting the rays of light described by the Torah (Exodus 34,29) for the remainder of the forty years until he died. The great splendour his facial features acquired as a result of his stay on Mount Sinai did not  fade for the rest of his life. This is the meaning of Deut. 34,7: “his eye had not dimmed and his vigor had not diminished.” Moses spent a total of three times forty days on Mount Sinai, 120 days corresponding to the number of his years. The first forty days were spent acquiring the first set of Tablets and understanding the meaning of the Torah; the second forty days were spent imploring G’d to forgive the sin of the golden calf; the last forty days he prepared for receiving the second set of Tablets.
   מתוך הענן, “out of the cloud.” Seeing that during the preceding six days Moses had been covered by the cloud and had not proceeded further, the Torah now has to tell us that on the seventh day G’d called to him out of the cloud and instructed him to come inside it. This is why the Torah continues: “Moses entered the cloud.” Our sages in Yuma 4 said  that G’d made a path for Moses inside the cloud. They based this on the same expression בתוך being used when the Israelites entered the Sea of Reeds and G’d made separate paths for each tribe, as the expression בתוך  in our verse here.
    The words ומראה כבוד ה' in verse 17 is an expression for the Shechinah. Our sages refer to the phenomenon as שכינה, whereas the Torah calls it כבוד ה'. When we read in Psalms 85,10 לשכון כבוד בארצנו, “to make His glory dwell in our land,” the reference is to the Shechinah, which is also another name for the attribute of Justice known as יד, the attribute (tool) used by G’d to create the universe. This is what Isaiah 45,7 had in mind when he said ואת כל אלה ידי עשתה, “My hand has made all these (phenomena).” All the phenomena which between them make up the universe were described by the prophet simply as אלה, “these.” All of these are creations of the attribute of Justice. This is why Isaiah 66,2 refers to them as ויהיו כל אלה “all of these (phenomena) came into existence.” We find similar expressions in connection with the creation of the universe in Genesis. The word אלה appears in Genesis 2,4 אלה תולדות השמים והארץ, “these are the products of the heavens and the earth.” The word אלה in that verse includes all that had been created both in the celestial spheres as well as what had been created in the terrestrial spheres. Even when enumerating these phenomena in detail we find the expression אלה describing them. These are the phenomena in question in detail: “light, darkness, the Torah, Justice, the in-gathering of the exiles, Israel, the earth’s produce, rainfall. There is a verse describing each phenomenon as a product of G’d’s creative activity, Isaiah 45,7 writing: “I form light and create darkness, I make weal and create woe; I the Lord do all these things." The verse describing G’d as creating the Torah is found in Exodus 20,1 וידבר אלו-הים את כל הדברים האלה, “G’d said all these things.” Justice is referred to in 21,1 ואלה המשפטים אשר תשים לפניהם “and these  are the judgments you are to set before them.” The word אלה appears in conjunction with Israel in Genesis 49,28 כל אלה שבטי ישראל שנים עשר, “all these are the tribes of Israel, twelve in number.” The word אלה occurs in connection with the in-gathering of the exiles in Isaiah 49,12: הנה אלה מרחוק יבואו והנה אלה מצפון ומים ואלה מארץ סינים, “here: ‘Look these are coming from afar, these from the north and the west; all these from the land of Sinim.’” We have another verse on this subject in Zecharyah 8,12: ואמרת בלבבך מי ילד לי את אלה ואני שכולה וגלמודה גולה וסורה ואלה מי גדל הן אני נשארתי לבדי, אלה איפה הם? “And you will say to yourself, ‘who bore these for me when I was bereaved and barren, exiled and disdained; by whom then were these reared? I was left all alone- and where have these been?’” We have a verse in which the word אלה also appears in connection with the earth’s produce, i.e. Zecharyah 8,12: כי זרע השלום הגפן תתן פריה והארץ תתן את יבולה והשמים יתנו טלם והנחלתי את שארית העם הזה את כל אלה, “but what it sows shall prosper; the vine shall produce its fruit, the ground shall produce its yield, and the skies shall provide their dew. I will bestow all these things upon the remnant of this people.” The rain too is mentioned in a verse containing the word אלה in Jeremiah 14,22: היש  הבלי הגוים מגשימים ואם השמים יתנו רביבים הלא אתה ה' אלו-הינו ונקוה לך כי אה עשית את כל אלה, “Can any of the false gods of the nations give rain? Can the skies of themselves give showers? Only You can, O Lord our G’d! So we hope in You for only You made all these things.” 
    
    
    
   ויקחו לי תרומה
    
    
    
    
   קחו מוסרי ואל כסף ודעת מחרוץ נבחד, “accept my discipline instead of silver; accept knowledge instead of gold.” (Proverbs 8,10). In this verse Solomon warns man that he should harness his powers of alertness and energy for the pursuit of the ethical values of Torah rather than for the amassing of silver and gold. The reason is that the values Torah has to offer are useful both in this world and in the hereafter whereas silver and gold are useful only in this life. Not only that, a surfeit of silver and gold is potentially quite destructive and brings with it many causes for worry. This is what the sages said in Avot 2,7: “he who amasses silver (money) increases his worries.” The only thing which cannot be amassed to excess without negative results is Torah. The meaning of the words: “and knowledge is preferable to gold” is “accept the knowledge dispensed by Torah  for it is superior to gold.” The reason Solomon employed the word קחו for the acquisition of ethical imperatives is that just as material benefits are acquired by the owner “taking” them, i.e. they are not  usually the result of a windfall, so a similar effort is required to obtain proficiency in Torah knowledge and for the student to embrace its ethical message. Anyone displaying laziness in his attitude to the acquisition of Torah is liable to punishment even if he does observe the relevant commandment. If he were to pay lip-service to the importance of Torah-study and implementing its teachings but he relates to it with a lukewarm heart, he is guilty of a sin too great to carry. On the one hand, he does perform (go through the motions) the commandment, but on the other hand, he is subject to punishment for the disdain he displayed in the manner in which he fulfills the commandment.
    The same applies to people who say their prayers regularly, but as a form of routine, possibly even thinking of their business affairs while uttering the holy words of the prayers as composed by our sages. Anyone who acts in this manner is almost guilty of violating the commandment (20,23) “You shall not make (gods) of what is with Me, either out of silver or even out of gold.” We have already explained that the principal meaning of this line is that “while you are standing in My presence, addressing Me, you shall not think of either silver or gold, i.e. your private affairs.” Any petitioner, or even person who simply offers up praises to the Lord, estranges himself from G’d by doing so. It is something one would not dare do during an audience with a mortal king, a king of flesh and blood; how much more offensive is it when done vis-a-vis the King of Kings. When a person wears his phylacteries and is too lazy to take them off before going to sleep, he is guilty of a similar severe offense against G’d. Similarly, one must not pass gas while wearing the phylacteries. Anything the sages legislated with regard to proper respect for the phylacteries applies to the performance of the other commandments also.
    You have now learned that even while performing a commandment one may become guilty of a sin by the very manner in which one performs the commandment because of the lazy manner in which one performs it. The matter is comparable to vinegar drunk by people at the physicians’ urging. This drink may be beneficial to one’s health or it may even be detrimental. It all depends. While it may cure one’s stomach, it may harm one’s teeth. Similarly, the heat of a fire may be gut-warming and may dissipate the effects of winter. At the same time, the accompanying smoke and its inhalation may cause harm to one’s lungs. What follows from all this is how important it is to ensure that one’s mitzvah-performance does not result in unwelcome side-effects. This is the reason Solomon always condemns laziness, considering it a very negative character trait. (compare Proverbs 10,26: “as vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so is the lazy man to those who send him on a mission.”) Another verse in which Solomon expresses his disdain for the lazy is Proverbs 13,4: “the soul of the lazy man desires but has nothing;” What Solomon means is that if someone desires something and comes to the conclusion that he does not lack anything worth desiring, this is proof that he is lazy. Had he made a serious effort to find things which need improving he would have found such matters. [an example would be someone looking to do charity but not finding a person in need of charity. Ed.] Our sages (Megillah 6) phrase it thus: if a person says to you: ‘I have tried but could not find, do not believe him’; if he said: ‘I did not try but I did find, do not believe him either.’ If, however, he says: “I have tried to find and succeeded in finding, do believe him!” This is why Solomon was so insistent that laziness is a very bad character trait. Another occasion in the Book of Proverbs where Solomon makes the point of exhorting us in the name of the Torah to be diligent is in Proverbs 6,6: “go to the ant, you lazybones; study its ways and wise up!” The ant is to serve as an inspiration to man. Although it is one of the most inferior of all the crawling insects it uses the summer in order to stock up for a winter  without being forced to do so by a ruler. 
    When a person is diligent in perfecting his character traits he will experience that he enjoys constant personality growth. He will find that every day he is walking in a forward direction, never regressing (Jeremiah 7,24). Concerning the people mentioned by Jeremiah, Solomon said (Proverbs 15,19): “the way of the lazy man is like a hedge of thorns, but the way of the upright is paved.” A lazy man has prevented himself from making progress by his very laziness. Instead of progressing morally and ethically he regresses using his lethargic manner to prevent him from accomplishing anything. If we were to compare such a man to a wheat field with all its potential to produce a useful crop, he would instead produce only nettles. Solomon employs this parable when saying in Proverbs 24,30-31: “I have passed by the field of the lazy man, and passed the vineyard of the man devoid of under-
standing. Here it was, all overgrown with thorns; its surface was covered with nettles, its stone fence was broken down. Solomon compared a person who is too lazy to perfect his personality to a farmer who is too lazy to tend the various forms of labour required to produce a crop. Seeing that most people do have the energy to bestir themselves in the pursuit of silver or gold, Solomon demands that they apply themselves with equal vigour to the study of Torah and the ethical imperatives contained in the Torah. Torah is also called מוסר “ethical teaching,” as we know from Proverbs 6,23 ודרך חיים תוכחת מוסר, “instructive rebukes are a way of life.” By applying these teachings to  oneself man acquires eternal life in the hereafter where he will feast on the glory of the Shechinah. Our sages in Proverbs 2,21 interpreted the words: “for the upright dwell on earth, and the blameless will remain on it,” to mean that the word ישכנו in that verse is a reference to these people enjoying the glory of the Shechinah when their time comes to move to the celestial regions. The Shechinah is always close to the Torah. When G’d gave the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai the Torah wrote (Exodus 24,16) וישכון כבוד ה’ על הר סיני, “the Shechinah of G’d rested on Mount Sinai as the attribute of כבוד, ‘honour, glory.’” “It”, i.e. the Torah, is the cause that the Shechinah rested on Mount Sinai when G’d revealed Himself there, and the word וישכון refers to a hidden presence of the Shechinah, whereas the word כבוד refers to the revealed nature of that appearance of the Shechinah during the giving of the Torah. This was confirmed when the Torah described this manifestation in Exodus 24,17 as ומראה כבוד ה’ כאש אוכלת בראש ההר לעיני בני ישראל. “Now the Presence of the Lord appeared in the sight of the Israelites as a consuming fire on the top of the mountain.” Later on, when the Tabernacle was constructed, this Shechinah was hidden inside the Holy of Holies and in order to proceed with the construction of the Tabernacle housing the Shechinah the people were bidden to bring their respective contributions.
    25,2. ויקחו לי תרומה מאת כל איש אשר ידבנו לבו תקחו את תרומתי, “and from every person whose heart so moves him you shall accept the gifts for Me.” The plain meaning of the text is that these gifts were dedicated to G’d’s name. The word תרומה means something set aside. In other words, the Israelites were to set aside a voluntary contribution for the building of the Taber- nacle  each out of his or her own funds.
    The whole concept of the Tabernacle has to be understood as an internalised version of what transpired during the revelation at Mount Sinai (based on Nachmanides). The very attribute כבוד which rested on Mount Sinai for all to see afterwards was manifest inside the Holy of Holies on the ark between the cherubs on an ongoing basis. The principal difference was that it could no longer be seen. Moses had said in Deut. 5,21 “here the Lord has shown us His majestic Presence כבוד וגדלו,“ and this has been repeated in connection with the Tabernacle twice more. Once in Exodus 40,34: “and the Presence of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.” In the verse immediately following, the Torah also writes that Moses was unable to enter the Tabernacle as the cloud had settled over it and “the Presence of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.” Just as the Torah wrote in connection with the Mount Sinai experience (Deut.  4,36) “From the heavens He let you hear His voice to discipline you; on the earth He let you see His great fire; and from amidst the fire you heard His words,” so a parallel experience is described in connection with the Tabernacle in Numbers 7,89: “he (Moses) would hear the voice addressing him from above the cover that was on top of the Ark of the covenant between the two cherubs; thus He spoke to him.” If, at Mount Sinai, the “nobles” were described as: “they saw the G’d of Israel,” we find something similar in connection with the Tabernacle in that the G’d of Israel “sat” on the cherubs (Samuel II 6,20). This is also what the prophet Ezekiel reported as seeing in his vision (Ezekiel 10,19-20) וכבוד אלו-הי ישראל עליהם מלמעלה, היא החיה אשר ראיתי תחת אלו-הי ישראל בנהר כבר ואדע כי כרובים המה, “and the glory of the G’d of Israel was above them; this was the Chayah which I saw beneath the G’d of Israel at the river Kevar.”
   תקחו את תרומתי, “take (accept) the contribution for Me.”  After the Torah had first mentioned whose heart would be moved by generosity of spirit the Torah informs us that such a spirit results in the gift being described by G’d as “My gift,” as if it were G’d’s own contribution. G’d feels close to people who are of generous heart whereas He hates people who are stingy by nature.
    Furthermore, the word תרומתי, is meant to teach that once the donation has been made (promised), it belongs to G’d, and if the donor does not pay it he is liable to punishment as he has stolen from G’d. Once the gift has left the domain of the donor, he is no longer responsible for what happens to it.
    It is possible to explain the fact that the word תרומה occurs here three times in two verses as meaning that the Torah speaks of three different contributions by means of which the world is elevated. They are: חכמה, תבונה, ודעת, “wisdom-insight-know-ledge.” This is based on Proverbs 3,19-20: “G’d founded the earth with wisdom; He established the heavens with understanding. By His knowledge the depths were broken up.” The reason why these facts were alluded to here was that the construction of the Tabernacle was comparable to the construction of the universe (Bamidbar Rabbah 12,13). The first of these gifts was the one mentioned here which was used for the construction of the Tabernacle. The second תרומה consisted of the half-shekel which every male over the age of 20 had to contribute after the sin of the golden calf for the construction of the sockets of the beams making up the walls of the Tabernacle (Exodus 30,13). The third was the contribution known as תרומת המזבח, the half shekel contributed by all the males for financing the cost of the daily public offerings to be brought on behalf of the entire people. This is the תרומה mentioned in Numbers 1,2 where Moses was commanded to count the males above the age of twenty. The counting took place by means of each Israelite contributing a coin of a half-shekel. Of these three תרומות, contributions, two were considered sacred (the money), whereas the third, the one mentioned in 30,13 was not of sacred character as the occasion was the need to atone for the donor’s part in the sin of the golden calf. This is spelled out in detail by the words ונתנו איש כופר נפשו, “they shall each contribute (the half shekel) as an atonement for his soul” (30,12).
    When the Israelites entered the Holy Land they were once more commanded three times to contribute a תרומה. Two of these contributions were sacred in character, whereas the third was profane. The third, i.e. חלה, was profane seeing that it is applicable not only in the Holy Land but also in the Diaspora. The reason that the commandment of חלה, a תרומה for the priest, is the exception in that it also has to be set aside in the Diaspora is to ensure that the knowledge of this commandment will not be forgotten during the long years of exile the Jewish people experienced.
    In order to make it clear to us that the Tabernacle’s construction equaled that of the creation of the universe the Torah mentioned all the three תרומות which contributed to the founding of earth (as per the verse in Proverbs) at the beginning of the portion before we hear the details of the materials and quantities and measurements required. This is why the Torah writes about Betzalel the master-craftsman in charge of the construction of the Tabernacle: “I have filled him with a Godly spirit, with wisdom, insight, and knowledge, and with every craft” (Exodus 31,3). According to Berachot 55 Betzalel was able to combine the letters of the alphabet or of the Torah in the manner in which they had been used to create the universe. The wording of our verse is what I have just quoted, and the wording in Proverbs is: “G’d founded earth with wisdom, etc.” Our sages wanted to hint when writing all this that there was a parallelism of the wisdom required in creating the universe and in the wisdom required to carry out the instructions pertaining to constructing the Tabernacle and its contents.
    You will find in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 3 that Solomon employed all of these three elements (wisdom, insight, and knowledge) to build his Temple. You find in Mechilta 7,14 that Chirom (compare Kings I 4,13-14) “was the son of a widowed woman from the tribe of Naftali whose father had been a coppersmith in the city of Tyre. He was endowed with חכמה, תבונה, ודעת,” exactly the same talents as mentioned in connection with Betzalel and mentioned by Solomon in Proverbs. In the future, when the third Temple will be built, the same three attributes will also be employed in its construction. The precise wording is (Proverbs 24,3-4) ”a house is built by wisdom; it is established through understanding; its rooms are filled with knowledge.” G’d will endow the Israelites with all three as a gift as we know from Proverbs 2,6: ”for the Lord will grant wisdom, etc.” You will note that Solomon did not speak about wisdom having been granted but about wisdom which will be granted in the future. All of these three attributes will be granted to King Messiah as we know from Isaiah 11,2: ”a spirit of wisdom and insight, a spirit of counsel and valor; a spirit of knowledge and reverence for the Lord.”
    A Midrashic approach: “What do the words ויקחו לי תרומה, “and they will take a gift for Me mean?” After I, G’d, already have given them My gift, i.e. the Torah, in which is written כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם תורתי, “for I have given you good instructions, My Torah, etc., I ask you to bring Me a gift” (compare Proverbs 4,2). How are we to understand the words כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם? Tanchuma Terumah 2-3 describes the following parable. There were two merchants. One had pepper the other had silk. They exchanged their respective merchandise, the former one taking the silk, the latter took the pepper. As a result of these transactions, each of the merchants now lacked what he had previously possessed. Not so with Torah. If someone studies tractate Moed this will become his property. If another studies tractate Zeraim this will become his property. He who has mastered tractate Moed can now teach the one who had not learned it as yet without giving up what he already possesses. This is the meaning of “for I have given you good instruction.” You will retain it. It happened once that a certain person found himself on a boat together with many merchants each of whom carried his wares with him. Seeing that the scholar did not have a bundle they asked him: “where is your merchandise?” He answered them: “my merchandise is superior to yours.” The other merchants searched the whole boat without being able to locate that scholar’s merchandise. They began to ridicule this merchant (scholar) who did not have a bundle. In the meantime the boat was attacked by pirates who stole all the other merchants’ wares. When the boat docked and everyone went ashore, the other merchants found themselves in a strange country without money or food, etc. The scholar, however, went to the nearest Torah Academy where the local Jewish population received him with great honour. When the merchants became aware of this they went to the scholar asking his forgiveness for their rude behaviour towards him. They then asked him to do them a favour and to intercede on their behalf with the local population so that they would receive food and lodging. They appealed to him to tell the local people that they had been robbed and were not penniless beggars. Thereupon the scholar turned to them saying: “did I not tell you that my merchandise was superior to yours? Yours has ben lost whereas my merchandise endures. Not only this. Anyone who deals in tangible merchandise can do so only at certain hours on certain days. Customers do not always come to buy. My merchandise is available at any time and I can deliver it both by day and by night. Torah is a standby not only in this life but also in the hereafter.” All this is included in the verse כי לקח טוב נתתי לכם תורתי.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words ויקחו לי תרומה may be understood as an invitation for the כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept of the Jewish nation to gather around G’d. They are to be considered as a gift to G’d, collectively. It is the כנסת ישראל which is referred to by the word זאת in verse 3. This is why the Torah wrote here: וזאת התרומה אשר תקחו מאתם, “and this is the gift you are to take from them.” The word וזאת is also featured in Genesis 49,28 where I have explained this in detail [pages 726-7 in my translation. Ed.]. We have a verse in Psalms 118,23 מאת ה’ היתה זאת, “the זאת is from Hashem,” which makes a similar point.
    The reason for the wording ויקחו לי “let them take for Me,” is that it is an invitation to bring together the celestial forces with those on earth and vice-versa. Seeing that in all such matters the driving force is the heart and the mind, the Torah states that in order to attain such an objective it is necessary מאת כל איש אשר ידבנו לבו, “for every such person to be motivated by his heart.” This is all alluded to in the Tanchuma 24 on Emor  where the point is made that the Torah did not merely write ויקחו תרומה but ויקחו לי תרומה. According to that Midrash the word לי may be understood as אותי, as if the Torah meant: “you will take Me.” G’d meant, so to speak, “take Me to take up residence amongst you.” Another penetrating comment  found in Shemot Rabbah 49,2 is that the words mean that it is the כנסת ישראל which is the תרומה, the gift. The Midrash bases this on the verse קדש ישראל לה’ ראשית תבואתו, “Israel is holy to the Lord, the first of His harvest” (Jeremiah 2,3). In the Sefer Habahir item 103 you will find the following explanation of our verse: “they shall take for the Holy One a gift which is equivalent to י i.e. the tenth. How do I know that the tenth is holy? Because we read in Leviticus 27,32 “the tenth shall be holy for the Lord.” What precisely is the meaning of קדש,”holy?” Ezekiel 44,30 explains וראשית כל בכורי כל וכל תרומת כל, “All the choice first fruits of every kind and all terumah of any kind-of all your terumah gifts;” the word ראשית is equivalent to חכמה, compare Psalms 111,10 ראשית חכמה. Thus far the Sefer Habahir. [I believe the intention of the author as well as the author of Sefer Habahir is to read the word  לי as ל”י” “as a tenth.” Ed.]
    When the Torah writes a little while later on (verse 9) ככל אשר אני מראה אותך, the meaning is that G’d showed Moses all this already while he was on the mountain (27,8). The word אני refers to he attribute of Justice in this instance. This is not the only time the attribute of Justice appears in connection with the Tabernacle or Temple. We find the same, also in connection with construction of a Temple, in Chronicles I 28,19 where David says that הכל בכתב מיד ה’ עלי השכיל כל מלאכת התבנית. “All this the Lord made me understand by His hand on me, I give you in writing- the blueprint of all the works” (David speaking to his son Solomon). The words יד ה’ in that verse also refer to the attribute of Justice.
    You should realise that beginning with the words ויקחו לי up until the end of that verse the Torah speaks about a תרומה עליונה, a gift to heaven, whereas the words in the following verse dealing with gold, silver and copper, etc., refer to a תרומת המשכן the contributions to be made for constructing the Tabernacle. The meaning of all this is that when the Israelites would bring such contributions as gold, silver, copper etc., they would be considered as having made simultaneous contributions to the celestial regions. This concept enables us to understand the words ועשו לי מקדש. The contributions for the Tabernacle are considered as making a Temple for G’d, as a result of which ושכנתי בתוכם, “I will dwell within them,” i.e. this is the result of the תרומה עליונה, the spiritual aspect of the gift, the motivation of generosity. The mystical dimension of the words יביאה את תרומת ה’, “he will bring G’d’s gift,” is  that this  gift will come with the terrestrial gift. The Shechinah moving to earth and taking up residence inside the Tabernacle will be the result of the תרומה עליונה. The gift of gold, silver, etc., only provides the location for the Shechinah if we merit its presence amongst us. To sum up: donating materials without the gift representing the right spirit will result in an empty Tabernacle, one in which the presence of G’d is not manifest.
    25,3. זהב וכסף ונחשת, “gold, silver, and copper.” The Torah mentions three types of metal and three types of wool (different colours). We do not find that silk was used in the construction of the Tabernacle. The reason is that silk is the product of the body of a שרץ, a worm, and the only materials which were found suitable for forming part of the materials used in the construction of the Tabernacle are those that originate in ritually pure animals (compare Shabbat 28). In this connection it is well to remember that our sages explain in connection with Tachash (Shabbat 28) that the colour derived from such worms as the shamir is not derived from the actual body of the respective animal/worm but from a berry which was also inhabited by a worm which took its name from the berry. This applies also to the expression תולעת השני which does not mean that the red colour was taken from the worm but that that worm used to lodge in a berry from which the red colour for dying the wool was taken. Afterwards the Torah lists שש, another name for flax, i.e. linen. Immediately afterwards the Torah mentions contributions of עזים, i.e. goats’ wool, not the skins or the animals themselves. This is also the reason that Onkelos does not translate the words as עזיא, goat, but as מעזיא a product of the goat. The product in question is the hair, i.e. the wool. Even though the Torah has prohibited the combining of wool and linen, the priests when they entered the holy precincts had to wear garments in which wool and linen were interwoven. I shall explain the mystical dimension of this in Parshat Kedoshim where the prohibition is written.
    25,5. ועורות תחשים, “and the skins of the tachash.” The tachash was some kind of free-roaming beast. Our sages in Shabbat 28 are of the opinion that the tachash was an animal  which existed only during that generation and had a single horn on its forehead. Its whole function was to have its skin serve as one of the coverings of the Tabernacle. Apparently, the colour of their skin was so beautiful that it was not to be used again for secular purposes so that G’d allowed this animal to become extinct as soon as it had fulfilled its purpose. Our sages on that same folio  explain that the fact that it had a horn on its forehead was proof that it was a ritually pure animal. According to our tradition the ox offered by Adam as a sacrifice also had only a single horn on its forehead. This is based on Psalms 69,32: “ותיטיב לה’ משור פר מקרן מפריס, “that will please the Lord more than oxen, than a bull with a horn and hooves.” The singular of the word קרן means that a particular bull had only one horn. Although the vowel pattern under the word מקרן suggests more than one, the absence of the letter י suggests that David speaks about a single-horned bull. At any rate, unless the tachash had been ritually pure, none of its parts would have qualified for use in the Tabernacle. We have a strong allusion to this in the words of Exodus 13,9 למען תהיה תורת ה’ בפיך, “so that what goes into your mouth should conform to the Torah of the Lord.” Seeing that the tachash had so many colours Onkelos translates ססגונה, “proud of its being multi-coloured.”
   ועצי שטים, “and wood of the Shittim tree.” Where did the Israelites take these trees from? According to Tanchuma Terumah 9 Yaakov foresaw in his holy spirit that these trees would be required  when the Israelites would build a Tabernacle in the desert and having this in mind he brought acacia trees with him to Egypt which were planted there. He commanded his children that when they would leave Egypt they were to take these trees with them.
    
    25,6. שמן למאור, “Oil for illumination;” fine olive oil for lighting the eternal flame.”
   בשמים לשמן המשחה ולקטורת הסמים, “spices for the oil of anointment and the aromatic incense.” The meaning of the words is that in order for the incense to be offered up they were to bring gifts consisting of a variety of spices. There is a difference between spices, בשמים, and סמים, an inedible kind of fragrance. בשמים are a kind of food which are distinguished by their rich fragrance. סמים are medicinal herbs which are quite unsuitable as food or as additives to food. Frankincense is one of such ingredients known as סמים. 
    The reason that gold is mentioned as the very first material that was to be contributed was to indicate that at the time the materials for the Tabernacle were collected, the sin of the golden calf had already been forgiven. This is why it was appropriate that the very material which had served as the instrument to commit such a grievous sin should now be donated freely to demonstrate the about-face of the Jewish people who were now ready to donate their most precious material to serve the Lord (Tanchuma Terumah 8). This is also the reason that when the Torah legislates which animals make fit sacrifices, the calf heads the list. compare Leviticus 22,27. G’d wanted to emphasise that the sin of the golden calf had been forgiven.
    
    This entire commandment to contribute materials for the construction of the Tabernacle was commanded on the day following Yom Kippur, the day when the sin of the golden calf had been forgiven, finally (Compare Rashi). Even though that sin had been committed prior to the building of the Tabernacle, seeing it had been committed in the month of Tammuz and the building of the Tabernacle had been commanded only after the Day of Atonement, so that the Torah quite clearly does not report things in chronological sequence here, the Torah, whose paths are all designed to promote peace and harmony decided to write things in this order. G’d is normally at pains to provide (make available) the cure before the onset of the disease (Megillah 13). It was important to G’d to show that before we read about the sin of the golden calf that the means to make the people’s repentance effective had been outlined already. We have a verse in Hoseah 7,1 which spells out this concept that G’d prepares the cure before He inflicts the disease, i.e. “When I would heal Israel the guilt of Ephrayim reveals itself.” In order to show that the sin had been completely forgiven, the Torah commences the list of contributions to be donated for building the Tabernacle with gold. This means that the very means which had caused their disgrace would now become the means by which G’d would express His goodwill. A Biblical verse expressing the same sentiment is found in Hoseah 7,3, ברעתם ישמחו מלך, ”with their very malice they make a king merry.”
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Terumah 8). The words “gold, silver, copper,” refer to three different host-countries in which the Jews have been exiles. “Gold” refers to the kingdom of Babylon. We know that Nevuchadnezzar said (Daniel 2,38) “You O G’d are the head of gold.” The word “silver” is an allusion to the exile under the Medes, for it is written of Haman that he was offering ten thousand talents of silver in order to obtain permission to kill all the Jews (Megillat Esther 3,9). Copper is an allusion to the exile under the Greeks which was the most abominable of the three kingdoms mentioned. The words אלים מאדמים “red-dyed ram skins,” are an allusion to the Roman Empire. Esau, the progenitor of the Romans, was described as red-skinned already at his birth (compare Genesis 28,25) ויצא הראשון אדמוני.
    The allusion to the exile under the descendants of Esau is followed immediately by the words ושמן למאור, “and anointing oil,” i.e. a reference to the מלך המשיח King Messiah of whom it is written in Psalms 132,17 שם אצמיח קרן לדוד ערכתי נר למשיחי, “There I will make a horn sprout for David, I have prepared a lamp for My anointed one.”
    The words בשמים לשמן המשחה are an allusion to the fact that in the future the High Priest will once more be anointed with this oil; the words לקטורת הסמים are a promise that the Jewish people will once again enjoy being in G’d’s good graces. This has been promised by Ezekiel 20,41 בריח ניחוח ארצה אתכם, “by means of sweet smelling fragrances I will display My goodwill for you.” The words אבני שוהם refer to אבני כדכד of which Isaiah 54,12 said: ושמתי כדכד שמשותיך,”I will make your battlements of rubies.” The words ועשו לי מקדש refer to the Holy Temple which may soon be rebuilt in our days. The words ושכנתי בתוכם are an assurance that when that time comes G’d will dwell in our midst forever.
    
    25,7. אבני שהם ואבני מילואים, “shoham stones and (other) stones for the settings.” The sequence of the words in our verse is: “shoham stones for the Ephod, and the other gemstones for the breastplate to be set in it.” There were two shoham stones and twelve stones for the breastplate. Nachmanides explains that the reason the stones for the breastplate are called מלואים is that they were whole gemstones each, had not been polished or cut to size by craftsmen. This is also reflected in the translation by Onkelos who writes אבני אשלמותא, “whole stones.” According to Nachmanides the spiritual value of these various gemstones is dependent on their being whole as found in the ground. This is the reason the Torah instructs in 28,17 ומלאת בו מלואת אבן, “you shall fill it with stone;” we have a second verse concerning this procedure in  verse 20 of that chapter requiring that these stones be במלואתם, “in their wholeness.” Significantly, no such restrictions are mentioned in connection with the stones for the Ephod, i.e. the shoham stones. It is possible that the names of the tribes of the Children of Israel were engraved on the shoham stones similar to the way a signet ring is engraved, the seal sticking out when one presses it on to the sealing wax. At any rate, 28,11 makes it rather clear that a jeweler’s craft was required in connection with the two shoham stones and the names to be engraved in them. In connection with the twelve stones to be mounted on the breastplate such words as מעשה חרש אבן, “a jeweler’s handiwork,” are totally absent. However, the Torah did stipulate פתוחי חותם, (verse 21) “engraved like a signet ring.” This was the reason Moses had to use the shamir worm in order to achieve the engraving by chemical means, i.e. through secretions of that worm applied minutely. Had this not been the case, the requirement that they remain במלואותם, “in their wholeness,” could not have been met. This is the way our sages in Sotah 48 describe the procedure: “these stones were not inscribed with ink as the Torah stipulates פתוחי חותם; on the other hand, they were also not engraved with an engraving tool as the Torah stipulates that they were to remain whole, i.e. במלואותם.” What did Moses do? He first wrote the letters with ink and then exposed them to the shamir worm. When thus exposed (at some distance) the stones cracked in the required places, so that the names appeared as if they had been engraved on the respective stones. Nonetheless, not a single splinter of the original stone was missing as a result. Thus far Nachmanides.
    It is important to realise that there are a total of 15 items mentioned in this  paragraph which list the various donations  for the Tabernacle. בשמים וסמים are treated as a single item. (Normally, we think of these contributions in terms of 13 different items). The shoham stones and the stones for the settings in the breastplate are considered as items 14 and 15 respectively. When you examine the first verse in Genesis you will find that it has 15 syllables, (not counting the half-vowels called sheva) so that the items which formed the materials of the Tabernacle paralleled the beginning of the creation, i.e. the Tabernacle represented a re-enactment of מעשה בראשית. This was intended by Isaiah when he wrote (Isaiah 26,4) כי בי-ה ה’ צור עולמים, “for in Yah, the Lord you have an everlasting Rock.” [If I understand the allusion correctly it means that the presence of the Shechinah in the Tabernacle demonstrated that unlike human artists, G’d did not withdraw from His creation once He had completed it. Ed.] We also find that in the descriptions of the distances between the seven layers of heaven that the number 500 (years of walking) is mentioned 15 times. Each such רקיע is described as 500 such years distant from the next one (Chagigah 13). This gives us a total of 13 times 500, seeing the thickness of that heaven is also 500 years of walking distance. Beyond the seventh heaven are the chayot, presumably a region of similar distance. Above the chayot is another heavenly region. So this gives us a total of 15 times 500 years walking distance from earth to that highest region. G’d, of course, is above all that. The sages who composed the prayers in our liturgy included 15 different praises in the prayer called ישתבח which is the conclusion of the פסוקי דזמרה, the verses of songs recited daily prior to the קריאת שמע and its benedictions. After the קריאת שמע we recite a paragraph commencing with the words אמת ויציב which contains references to 15 attributes of G’d. Except for the word אמת itself, each one of these attributes is linked to the next one by the letter ו The first one, i.e. the attribute אמת, is not introduced by the letter ו as it is the name of G’d. This is why we find a verse in Jeremiah 10,10: וה’ אלו-הים אמת, showing that the word אמת is also a name of G’d. Furthermore, we find that David composed a list of 15 praises of the Lord when he wrote in Chronicles I 29, 10-11: לך ה’ הגדולה והגבורה והתפארת והנצח וההוד כי כל בשמים ובארץ לך ה’ הממלכה והמתנשא לכל לראש, והעושר והכבוד מלפניך ואתה מושל בכל ובידך כח וגבורה לגדל ולחזק לכל. He also composed 15 hymns commencing with the words שיר המעלות in Psalms 121-134 all in allusion to these 15 items mentioned in 15 syllables in the first verse in Genesis. We also find that the blessing pronounced by the Priests contains 15 words, corresponding to the same concept. In Deut. 26,17 we also find the programmatic verse commencing with the words את ה’ האמרת היום as containing 15 words. This too is an allusion to the relationship between Israel and its G’d being the purpose of creation of the universe.
    25,8. ועשו לי מקדש, “They shall make a Sanctuary for Me.” The reason the Torah refers to the Tabernacle as Temple, Sanctuary, from the word קדש holy, is that it was sanctified by the very Presence within it of the Shechinah. According to Shemot Rabbah 34,4 the words ועשו לי imply that Israel are G’d’s flock and He is their shepherd. This is the meaning of Ezekiel 34,17: “As for you, My flock, thus said the Lord G’d, etc.” The fact that G’d considers Himself our shepherd is based on Psalms 80,2: “Give ear, O shepherd of Israel! Appear, You who are enthroned on the cherubim.” There are numerous other verses quoted by the author, such as Isaiah 5,7, Psalms 121,4, Deut. 14,1 and Jeremiah 31,8 all making essentially he same point about the G’d-Israel relationship.
    This relationship bespeaks honour for the children when they are in the proximity of their father, and honour for the father when he is within the home of his children and feels welcome there. All of this is the meaning of the reciprocal relationship suggested by the words: “they shall make for Me a Sanctuary and I shall dwell amongst them. The words ושכנתי בתוכם may also be read as ושכינתי בתוכם, “so that My Presence will be amongst them.” The numerical value of the letters in the word ושכנתי alludes to the 410 years the first Temple stood, i.e. the word לשכני בתוכם in Exodus 29,46. When we break up the word ושכנתי into ושכן ת’י we get the same result, i.e. “He will reside for 410 (years).”  By re-arranging the letters to read ושני ת’כ “and the second (Temple) 420,” you get an allusion to the length of time the second Temple remained standing.
    
    25,9. את תבנית המשכן ואת תבנית כל כליו, “the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all its vessels.” It is an accepted concept that the various components of the Tabernacle on earth were replicas or symbols of concepts which exist in higher regions. One of the outstanding features of the Tabernacle was the fact that it was divided into three parts. 1) The area beyond the dividing curtain, the western part; 2) the area in front of the dividing curtain known as אהל מועד. 3) The courtyard in front of the Tabernacle which was enclosed by curtains. These three sections symbolised the three parts of the cosmos, 1) the world of the disembodied beings, the angels; 2) the world of the inert bodies, the stars and the planets; 3) our terrestrial universe, inhabited by living creatures with bodies (and souls, some of them). Upon examination we shall find that man, the most important creature in our lower world, is also composed of three parts representing the division of the whole cosmos into three parts. This is why man is called a microcosm, a world in miniature, by the sages (compare our author’s comment on Genesis 1,27). The three parts are: 1) the world of דבור, creatures capable of verbal communications. 2) the world of חיות, all kinds of living and moving creatures. 3) the world of vegetation, life and motion limited to the roots of these plants in the soil.
    The innermost part of the Tabernacle contained the Holy Ark, the Tablets, the cherubs, all of which were interior vessels that remained hidden from view as they housed the entourage of the Shechinah. This is what was meant in Ezekiel 10,19: וכבוד אלו-הי ישראל מלמעלה, “and the attribute כבוד of the G’d of Israel was above.” This attribute has also been described as dwelling with the cherubs in Psalms 80,2. This part of the Tabernacle was patterned after the celestial regions, the home of the angels. They are not visible, partly because they are disembodied spirits, forming the entourage and throne of G’d. Man’s equivalent to that part of the cosmos is his head, i.e. what is inside it, his brain; it is the Temple of his wisdom, and it is the region in which disembodied שכל, intelligence, makes its impact on man’s brain. A truly righteous man is himself an entourage for the Divine. Our patriarchs were such people. The Shechinah rests over such צדיקים by means of the phylacteries they wear on their heads and on their arms. These phylacteries inspire man’s head and heart respectively. They do for theצדיק  what the cherubs accomplished within the Holy of Holies in the macrocosm. Having had this explained to you, you can now understand the tremendous importance of the commandment to lay תפילין and the great potential contained  in that commandment.
    The second part of the Tabernacle, the one without the dividing curtain, was the part containing the table, the candelabra, and the altar for incense, all of which were very important interior vessels although they were not of the prime importance of the vessels inside the Holy of Holies. They corresponded to the world of the planets and stars which have all been infused with intelligence by their Creator and whose constant orbit is directly responsible for keeping this cosmos a going concern. In the microcosm called the world of man, they are represented by the heart which is an interior organ without which the body could not function. The constant pumping of blood to different parts of the human body does for our bodies what the motion of the stars and planet does for the cosmos.
    The third part of the Tabernacle, the courtyard around it, contained the copper altar, the one on which most animal sacrifices were offered up. This was where the animals used in that procedure lost their lives. The courtyard corresponded to our terrestrial universe which by definition is populated by creatures all of which die sooner or later, just like the animals on the altar. The corresponding part to the courtyard of the Tabernacle in man is the part from the navel downwards, the area where his life originated and which in turn is usually the beginning of the process of his life disintegrating. The very loss of life is simultaneously the cause of its coming into existence. If our world were not condemned to the death of its inhabitants there would be no need for new life to be generated.
    You have now learned that the Tabernacle in its three sections corresponded to the cosmos in its three parts concerning which David said (Psalms 103,20) “bless the Lord, O His angels, mighty creatures who do His bidding, bless the Lord, all His hosts.” David’s son Solomon followed in his father’s footsteps when he said in three consecutive verses in Song of Songs 5-13,14,15) “His cheeks are like beds of spices;” “His hands are rods of gold;” “His legs are like marble pillars;” I have already explained the meaning of these allusions in connection with Yaakov’s dream of the ladder in Genesis 28,12 [my translation page 435. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach: the words את תבנית המשכן ואת תבנית כל כליו teach that G’d had shown to Moses “green fire, black fire, white fire, and red fire.” He now told him: “in accordance with all that I have shown you” (verse 40). He instructed him: “construct it like this.” The matter can be illustrated by means of a parable. A King had a very costly pearl-studded garment. He instructed one of his servants to make him another one like it. The servant replied: ‘My lord king where am I going to get the raw materials to make another garment such as this?’ This is precisely what Moses asked G’d: “where am I going to take green fire, black fire, white fire and red fire from in order to construct a replica of the cosmos?” G’d said to him: “You do the best you can with the materials at your disposal.” Not only that. But, “if you will construct something comparable to what you have seen in My celestial spheres down on earth, I shall leave My celestial court and confine My Shechinah to the extent necessary in order to take up residence in the Tabernacle you will construct on earth.” Just as in the celestial regions there are upright standing Seraphim (angels) so on earth there will be upright standing columns of acacia wood (compare 26,15). Just as there are stars in the heavens there are stars down on earth.” Rabbi Chiyah added: “this teaches that the golden clasps appeared like stars on the carpets forming the ceiling of the Tabernacle.”
    
    25,10. ועשו ארון עצי שטים, “They shall construct an ark made of acacia wood.” When the Torah introduces the instructions to construct any of the other furnishings of the Tabernacle it always uses direct language, i.e. ועשית שלחן, “you shall construct a table, etc.” Why does the Torah switch to issuing the instruction to make the ark by using the third person, “they shall construct?” Shemot Rabbah 34,3 discusses this anomaly. Rabbi Yehudah son of Shalom said that G’d said: “let them all come and be occupied with the construction of the ark in order that all of them will acquire the merit of providing a housing for the Torah. They were all to contribute for the making of the ark.”
    According to the plain meaning of the text, the ark was a kind of box within which the Tablets of the covenant were to be stored and hidden. Seeing that Torah was called ראשית “a first,” it was appropriate that the ark should be the first of the furnishings to be constructed. The reason this box was called ארון is that the word is connected to the word אורה, “light.” Seeing that this box contained the Torah, the description of it by means of a word recalling “light” is most appropriate.
    The height of this ark which the Torah described as being “one and a half cubits,” takes into consideration the fact that cubits used in the Torah are six handbreadths long. The height of that ark therefore was 9 such handbreadths. When you add the fact that the lid  (kapporet) had a  thickness of one handbreadth you will find that the total height of the ark was ten handbreadths. The number 10 also resurfaces in connection with the table of which the Torah also writes that its height was to be one and a half cubits (verse 23). Seeing the Torah also designated what is termed a “crown”, i.e. sort of a frame around the top of the table, and this “crown” was one handbreadth high, the overall height of the table was also 10 handbreadths. The same height was designated for the candelabra (verse 31) where the word תיעשה is spelled with an unaccountable letter י. This motivated Solomon to construct 10 candelabras. The meaning of the letter י was not that Solomon was to make 10 candelabras out of the one in the Tabernacle. Similarly, we find that Solomon constructed 10 tables for his Temple as well as 10 basins for the priests to wash their hands (Chronicles II 4,7-8). He did not do so arbitrarily but there had been a long-standing tradition  that when the Temple would be built there should be this number of such furnishings.
    There is another allusion to the number 10 connected with the candelabra seeing the Torah speaks about 7 arms, 1 knob, 1 cup and 1 flower to be part of each of the seven arms (verses 31-35). The number 10 is again prominent in connection with the Tabernacle itself  whose beams were 10 cubits high (26,16). The “carpets” forming its inner ceiling were also ten in number, though they were joined to each other (26,1). The number 10 is featured again in connection with the copper altar which was five cubits long and five cubits wide (27,1) giving the altar a combined length and width of ten cubits. Furthermore, the height of the altar was also 10 cubits as I will explain at the end of this portion [seeing the Torah first describes it as 5 cubits high. Ed.] As a result of all this you find that the number 10 was of cardinal importance in all aspects of the Tabernacle.
    A Midrashic approach based on Bamidbar Rabbah 4,13: there are allusions in our paragraph to the kabbalistic statement that the composition of the Holy Ark was as dear to G’d as His throne in the celestial regions. They base this on Exodus 15,17 מכון לשבתך פעלת ה’, “You G’d have  made the foundation of Your dwelling place.” This teaches that the Temple corresponds to the throne in the celestial regions. The two cherubs are as dear to G’d as are heaven and earth, both of whom contain residences of the Lord. The entire Tabernacle was constructed only for the sake of the Holy Ark as the Shechinah resided within it. All the miracles performed for the Jewish people after the construction of the Tabernacle were performed by means of the Holy Ark which always traveled in front of the camp of the Israelites (Numbers 10,33). It would kill poisonous snakes on the way as well as any other antagonists lying in wait for the Jewish people .
    Rabbi Eleazar son of Pedot quotes in the name of Rabbi Yossi ben Zimta (Shir Hashirim Rabbah 3,5): “two sparks used to come forth from between the lid of the Ark killing snakes, hornets, etc., and burning the nettles and other harmful growths in the desert. The smoke rising from this fire would rise and sweep the whole earth with a pleasant fragrance. The nations of the world would react to this phenomenon  with the words of Song of Songs 3,6: ‘Who is she that comes up from the desert like columns of smoke in clouds of myrrh and frankincense of all the powders of the merchant?’” Thus far the words of the Midrash. We have to add to this  that the words: “they shall construct an Ark out of acacia wood” refer to the people who preoccupy themselves with the Torah (Yuma 72). 
    
    25,11. וצפית אותו זהב טהור, “you shall overlay it with pure gold.” This is an allusion to the tradition that in the future G’d would make a special “shade” for the people studying Torah and generally supporting Torah, concerning whom Solomon said in Kohelet 7,12: “for to be in the shade (shelter) of  wisdom is also to be in the shelter of silver.” Solomon also wrote in Proverbs 3,18: “she (the Torah) is a tree of life for all those who support it.” He did not write: “for those who study it,” but “for those who support it.” If merely supporting Torah and its institutions is considered holding on to ”a tree of life,” how much more must this be so for the people who actually study the Torah!והבאת את הבדים  בטבעות, “you are to insert the staves into rings, etc.” This is a reference to the multitude whose duty it is to maintain Torah scholars in a manner similar to the staves maintaining the Ark. This is the meaning of the words לשאת את הארון בהם, “by means of which they will be carried (sustained) by the Ark.” People who support Torah institutions will find themselves uplifted by what they do.” Our sages in Sifra Emor section 1,2 explain these words as meaning that such supporters of Torah (the Ark) will be raised to a higher level than their brethren. We find an explanation very similar to this in Chulin 92 where the Talmud states: “let the grapes pray for the leaves; for if it were not for the leaves there would not be any grapes either.” The meaning of this parable is: “when one plants a vine one should not have in mind the grapes exclusively, although, of course, they were the reason that one plants the vine; nonetheless the leaves fulfill a crucial function protecting the plant from excess heat and cold, etc.” There is a statement by our sages according to which “all the cubits inside the Ark were ‘broken.’” [I believe this means that after allowing for the insertion of the golden overlay on the inside of the Ark, the height, length, and breadth measurements left inside were fractions of cubits rather than whole cubits. Ed.] At any rate, the lesson to be derived from that fact is that a Torah scholar should always feel as well as deport himself in a somewhat broken manner, as opposed to appearing haughty and of an imposing appearance.
    A rational approach to these measurements: it is possible to explain the words: “they shall make an Ark for Me,” as an instruction that the Ark and its lid with the cherubs were to  symbolise the three parts the human being is made of, i.e. body-soul-intellect. The wooden part of the Ark represents the body of man; the four rings represent the four basic materials that the body consists of. These materials are what keep him alive and functioning. The two staves  correspond to the two “strings” which run through man’s body, i.e. the spine (vertebrae) and the spinal cord inside it. The two tablets which were to be deposited inside the Ark represented two special organs within man’s body which enable him to understand the wisdom of the Torah, i.e. the brain and the heart. The two cherubs represent the soul and the intelligence, the former being feminine the latter masculine. You are aware already that the masculine element is the predominating one. The male is the active element, the female element is responsive by nature. This is what Solomon referred to in Proverbs 19,2 when he wrote: גם בלא דעת נפש לא טוב, “it is also not good for a person (soul) to lack knowledge.” He meant that the soul cannot attain its objective, its fulfillment, unless it possesses intelligence. There is no need to add that if this is true of the creatures in our “lower” terrestrial world this is certainly true of the world of the planets and the stars. In that part of the cosmos we also have male and female forces such as the sun being a masculine, active force, whereas the moon is responsive, feminine. This is why both of these forces appeared in Joseph’s dream,  (Genesis 37,9) i.e. the masculine and the feminine force in the middle part of the cosmos, the world of the planets and stars. Even in the celestial regions this division between masculine and feminine forces exists as it is the function of the soul to eventually return to G’d as a soul which has absorbed divine intelligence [as if the feminine נפש after it had become impregnated with the masculine שכל, intelligence, had achieved its purpose, Ed]. Both of the cherubs, which represented the male and female elements in the celestial spheres were constructed out of the pure gold of the kapporet, the lid. of the Ark, in a single piece, מקשה. This kapporet  was an allusion to the throne of G’d the source of חכמה, wisdom.
    
    The word כפורת, of course, is derived from כפרה, atonement. A return of the soul to its origin is impossible unless atonement for sins committed while inside the body had first been obtained. Similarly, without knowledge of the Torah a return to its holy roots is also impossible as during its stay on earth the soul otherwise becomes contaminated by the body. We learn from this whole description of the construction of the Holy Ark that by means of knowledge of the Torah which is stored inside the Holy Ark the soul as well as the intelligence, both of which were “emanated” from celestial regions down to man on earth  from their origin near the throne of the attribute כבוד will be able to regain their roots if they make prudent use of their potential. This is hinted at when the Torah describes the cherubs as סוככים בכנפיהם על הכפורת, “they shall have their wings spread out shielding the cover with their wings.” 
    Another way of looking at the Ark is that it symbolised a garden (Gan Eden) and that the two Tablets inside it symbolise the two kinds of commandments respectively, i.e. commandments to be fulfilled by one’s body  and the ones to be fulfilled with one’s intellect. This corresponds to the tree of knowledge and the tree of life in the original Gan Eden. The kapporet represents the ערבות, the highest of the seven heavens, the one which covers all the other heavens. The cherubs on top of this kapporet  are an allusion to the angels above this highest of the seven heavens. The are the region from which prophecy emanates to all the other prophets. The cherubs extending their wings upwards symbolised their readiness and eagerness to receive spiritual input from G’d directly, a prophecy which was direct such as that of Moses which came directly from G’d without intermediaries. This is what the sages meant when they described the Shechinah as speaking to Moses from between these two cherubs. 
    
    A kabbalistic approach: the words: “they shall make an Ark” mean that this Ark was a symbol or replica of the throne of the attribute כבוד. This is the deeper meaning of the words ואת תבנית כל כליו, “and a pattern of all its furnishings.” It means that G’d showed Moses a “sample” of all the furnishings of the Tabernacle. The reason why the Ark had to be covered with a blue coloured garment was that the colour blue is reminiscent of the sky and the sky in turn reminds us of the throne of G’d (Sotah 17), and this is what is meant in Numbers 4,6 that when Aaron and his sons would approach the Ark prior to the Israelites breaking camp, “they are to cover the Ark completely with a blue-coloured woolen cloth and adjust its staves.” The word כליל תכלת used by the Torah in that connection  means that it was to resemble the colour of the sky in its entirety. The colour was to symbolise the colour of the celestial spheres which is also perceived as consisting of that shade of blue. Seeing that I have explained in connection with 24,10 that the throne of G’d consisted of three foundations of three colours [my translation pages 1207-8 Ed.], Betzalel made the Ark out of three separate “boxes” to reflect that concept. (Compare Tanchuma Vayakhel 7). He based himself on the instruction to overlay the Ark with gold both from the inside and from the outside (verse 11). Although there were in fact three separate boxes, they looked as if there were only a single box. This is also why you find in this paragraph all the letters of the alphabet except for the letter ג which the Torah wanted to conceal in order to conceal the fact that the throne of G’d consisted of three foundations. Betzalel, on the other hand, hinted at this missing letter ג by constructing three Arks which looked like one.
    
    This is also the reason that in Parshat Noach the Torah wrote the word קשת, “rainbow,” three times in the paragraph where G’d explains the rainbow as the symbol of His covenant with mankind not to bring on another deluge, ever. (compare Genesis 9, 13-14-16). One of the peculiarities of the Holy Ark which we must try and understand has been described in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer (chapter 4?) in connection with the Ark’s uncanny ability to carry its carriers as we know from Joshua 4,11. According to Rabbi Eliezer, just as the chayot appeared to be carrying (supporting) the throne of G’d whereas in fact the throne carried them (supported them), so something similar occurred with the people assigned to transport the Holy Ark. Our sages in Sotah 35 explained Joshua 4,11: “when all the people finished crossing, the Ark of the Lord carried its carriers and crossed with the priests ahead of the people.” There is another verse (Joshua 4,18) “the soles of the feet of the priests carrying the Ark of the covenant were torn away onto dry ground, and the waters of the Jordan resumed their flow.” According to this the feet of the priests were torn away backwards, raising the question how the Ark crossed the Jordan river afterwards. The only explanation is that the Ark carried its carriers across subsequent to what was reported in verse 18. The operative letter enabling us to understand all this is the letter כ which is read instead of the letter ב which is written in the verse, i.e. בעלות. This is what was meant by the words in verse 11 “the Ark of the Lord crossed and the priests were in front of the people.” Had the author of the Book of Joshua meant that the priests crossed the river on foot, he would have had to write ויעברו, “they crossed.”  Just as the throne of G’d carried the four chayot described in the vision of Ezekiel, so the Ark carried the four men who were assigned to carry it upon their shoulders. You find this spelled out in Menachot 98 .
    We find that the Holy Ark is also referred to as אדון כל הארץ, “master of the whole earth,” in Joshua 3,11. This is so because the Shechinah cleaves to the Torah. You also find a verse in Chronicles II 6,41 in which the Ark and G’d are almost equated when Solomon said אתה וארון עוזך, “You and the Ark representing Your power.” The word עזיך, “Your might, or Your power,” is spelled with the letter י as if the word were in the plural. When we find the Ark described as ארון העדות, as “the Ark of testimony” in verse 22 the meaning is that the presence of the Ark is proof that the Shechinah is present in Israel (compare Shabbat 22). The sages in Baba Batra 99 stated that the Ark did not take up measurable space in the Temple. What they meant by this was that one of the miracles in connection with the Ark was that its presence did not diminish the space in the Tabernacle or Temple. [In other words it did not occupy the three-dimensional space which forms the basis of our measuring things. Ed.] This was another aspect in which the Ark paralleled the throne of G’d whose location or measurements we also do not know. This is why the angels are reported as formulating their blessing by saying ברוך ה' ממקומו “blessed be the Lord wherever His location.” (compare Pessikta Zutrata )
    25,11. וצפית אותו זהב טהור מבית ומחוץ תצפנו, “you are to overlay it with pure gold, from the inside and the outside you are to overlay it.” This verse is used by our sages (Yuma 72) to demand that Torah scholars must be able to demonstrate that they practice what they preach. They base this on the Ark which was gold on the inside as well as on the outside. Although no one actually saw the inside, it had to correspond to its exterior. Another verse which alludes to this subject is Job 29,14: “I clothed myself in righteousness and it robed me; Justice was my cloak and turban.” The repetition in this verse means that one’s inside must match the image one creates for oneself on the outside. Our sages add further on this subject: “why were the words of Torah compared to glass?, i.e. (Job, 28,17) “gold or glass cannot match its value?” Answer: just as glass is transparent and allows you to see not only the outside but also the interior, so bearers of Torah must be able to be equally transparent, not hiding character weakness not visible to their students or to their peers.
   ועשית עליו זר זהב סביב, “you are to construct on it  a golden crown all around it.” When the Torah issues similar instructions concerning the table and the altar, the wording is not עליו, ”on it,” but לו “for it.” The reason is that the table itself was a symbol of the “crown” of Royalty, whereas the altar was a symbol of the “crown” of priesthood (compare Avot 4,13). The “crown” of priest-hood as well as the “crown” of Royalty is acquired by its wearer at birth, through inheritance. The “crown” of Torah is not acquired by birth. The word לו implies that this crown is an integral part of the table or altar respectively, i.e. “it belongs.” Seeing that the crown of Torah has first to be earned by the eventual wearer, the word עליו, “upon him” indicates that it will be placed on the Torah scholar at the appropriate time, at his ordination. Hereditary Royalty in Israel was the exclusive right of Kings descended from David, whereas hereditary priesthood was reserved for the descendants of Aaron. The word לו in a similar sense is used by the Torah in connection with the duty of the King to write two Torah scrolls for himself. We read in Deut. 17,18 וכתב לו את משנה התורה וגו', “he is to write for himself  two copies of the Torah, etc.” The Torah immediately (verse 20) continues to supply the reason for this by writing למען יאריך ימים על ממלכתו, “in order that the days of his dynasty be long ones, etc.” We find something similar in connection with the priesthood where the Torah writes in Numbers 25,13 after Pinchas had been elevated to the priesthood: והיתה לו ולזרעו אחריו, “and it shall be his and for his offspring after him a covenant of an eternal priesthood, etc.” Seeing that the crown on the Ark represents a different kind of concept, one based on יחוס עצמו, “personal achievement,” the preposition the Torah chose to use in connection with it is עליו instead of לו. 
    A Midrashic approach to this wording (Shemot Rabbah 34,2): the reason the Torah writes the word עליו in connection with the crown on top of the Ark as distinct from the way it describes the crowns of the table and the altar respectively, is that the crown of Torah is considered the most superior of the three (4) crowns mentioned in the Mishnah in Avot we quoted before. By writing the word עליו, “above,” the Torah indicates that he who has acquired the crown of Torah is as if he had also acquired the other crowns mentioned in that Mishnah. This thought is also expressed in the word סביב, “around it,” i.e. the crown of Torah is all-embracing. Note that the word זר for “crown” is spelled without the letter י. This is a hint that unless a person merits wearing this crown Torah is considered alien to him, i.e. זר, “strange, uninitiated.” [the assumption is that because of the vowel tzeyreh under the letter ז, the normal spelling of the word ought to have bee זיר. Ed.]  
    
    25,12. ונתתה על ארבע פעמותיו, “you shall place it (them) on its four corners.” Rashi writes that the word פעמותיו is to be understood in accordance with the rendering by Onkelos i.e. זויתה, “its corners.” The rings were attached at the corners close to the top of the Ark, immediately beneath the kapporet. I believe that the correct explanation of the verse is found in the commentary by Nachmanides who understands the word פעמותיו as derived from, or similar in meaning to, פסיעות, steps. The word פעמות occurs as meaning “steps” in Song of Songs 7,2 מה יפו פעמיך, “how lovely are your steps.” It is a fact that the rings were attached at the respective corners near the very bottom of the Ark as it would not have been seemly for the Ark to be sort of suspended below the shoulders of the priests who carried it. It was much more dignified and in keeping with the lofty ideals that the Ark represented that it be carried above the shoulders of those priests charged with transporting it.
    
    25, 15. לא יסורו ממנו, ‘they are not to be removed from it.” Our sages in Yuma 72 explain that the staves were never totally removed from the rings through which they had been placed. Anyone who did remove the staves from the Ark contravened this commandment. Another comment found on that folio on the words והבאת את הבדים בטבעות is that the staves moved to and fro within the rings. You might assume that this means that sometimes they would slip out of the rings altogether? The Torah reassures you by saying לא יסורו הבדים, the staves will not be totally removed, i.e. “fall out of the rings.” Had the Torah only written these last words I would have thought that the staves never moved at all. This is why the Torah added  והבאת את הבדים בטבעות, “place the staves through the rings.” How was this to be accomplished?” Answer: they were thicker at the extremities and thinner in the middle so that they could be introduced with ease but could be extracted only with great difficulty. [If you are interested in the tricky question of how both parts of the instructions in the Torah could be observed, read Or Hachayim on our verse, page 776 in my translation of it. Ed.] 
    25,18. ועשית שנים כרובים, “you are to construct two cherubs, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason that such figures of angels were placed both in the Tabernacle and in the permanent Temple is to keep alive the idea that there are such beings whom G’d designated from time to time to perform miracles on earth. Just as we have been commanded to have a firm belief in the existence of G’d Himself and the fact that He is the original Existence, and this is one of the fundamental concepts of the Torah as proven by the first words of the Decalogue: “I am the Lord your G’d, etc.,” so we are required to believe in the existence of angels as the second fundamental concept in the list of our religious beliefs. Had there not been such angels, i.e. instruments by means of whom G’d makes His will known from time to time to His prophets, there would be no prophecy, no Torah, in short no “hot line” to the Creator. This is why G’d commanded that these figures be made and installed inside the Tabernacle (where nobody could see them).
    The reason that two such angel-like figures had to be made  was to ensure that none of us would think that the solitary angel-like figure represented the Creator Himself, the One whom we worship and serve. If you were to reply that by making two such figures people might conclude that there are in fact two domains, i.e. that G’d shares power with another, this is not a valid objection seeing both of these cherubs’ wings were pointed upwards towards heaven indicating that they themselves were recipients of Divine input rather than original dispensers of Divine bounty. This is Maimonides’ view concerning the cherubs though I changed his wording a little (compare Moreh Nevuchim section 3 chapter 45). Seeing that I believe that the cherubs represented the existence of the angels and there are many angels, we can surely say that the word כרובים was chosen to convey the idea that there are many such beings. This is also why G’d Himself is described (Psalms 80,2) sometimes as יושב הכרובים, “enthroned above the Cherubs.” G’d is described there as taking care of flocks of such cherubs. According to Sukkah 5 the meaning of the word כרוב is the same as כרביא in Aramaic, i.e. “young child.” From the above it appears that the word כרובים has two meanings, “a multitude of something,“ and ”children.” In both of these meanings the first letter כ is not part of the actual noun but is additional. It symbolises the כסא, the throne of G’d. In fact we have a tradition that the name כסא is based on the letter כ. (compare what we wrote on Leviticus 27,2 under the heading “a kabbalistic approach.”) At the same time, the letter כ also alludes to the word or attribute כבוד, and we have already explained that it is this attribute of G’d which occupies the throne כסא. The function of some of the angels is to welcome this attribute of G’d as it is written וכבוד אלו-הי ישראל עליהם מלמעלה, “and the attribute כבוד of the Lord G’d of Israel was above them (the cherubs)” (Ezekiel 10,19). 
    We may say further that the cherubs were positioned at a height which corresponded to the high end of the lower third of the overall height of the Tabernacle. The same was true of the position of the cherubs in Solomon’s Temple as our sages pointed out in Sukkah 5. The reason for this is that the angel is considered as “one third of the world,” this is why the cherubs were positioned only in the lower third of the Tabernacle. This was to demonstrate that though the angel’s regular habitat is in the upper third of the three parts of the cosmos, nonetheless they represent the lower third of that domain in relation to the Lord Who “rides” above them. This is not so in connection with the mezzuzah which is affixed on the upper third of the frame of the door or entrance (compare our comments on Deut. 6,9).
    When the Torah writes here: “you shall construct 2 cherubs of gold,” using the word שנים instead of שני to describe the possessive clause, the word שני denotes the equality of the two cherubs such as in שני לוחות העדות, or in שני כשבים, “the two Tablets of testimony,” or “two sheep.” In order to teach that these two cherubs were not identical, could not be interchanged, the Torah had to write the word שנים instead of שני. One of the cherubs was male, the other female. This is confirmed by the fact that once we established that these cherubs were indeed different from one another, the Torah could write in verse 22 מבין שני הכרובים. Similarly, in 37,2 the Torah was able to write ויעש שני כרובים זהב, as in these verses the Torah emphasised what the two cherubs had in common, i.e. that both of them were constructed out of gold.
    An approach based on the plain meaning of the text. The words שנים כרובים are necessary to teach that the two cherubs were male and female. The Torah wanted to teach that the Children of Israel are as beloved of Him as the love that exists between man and woman. This corresponds to what the sages said in Yuma  54: “Rabbi Ketina said that at the time when the Israelites are in the habit of appearing at the Temple on the three festivals requiring them to do so, they used to roll back the dividing curtain so as to show the pilgrims the cherubs on top of the Ark  which were embracing one another and they would say to them: ‘see how beloved you are in the eyes of the Lord, just like the love that exists between man and wife.’” There is a verse in Kings I 7,36 which expresses the words of Rabbi Ketina where we read: כמער איש וליות סביב, “joined in an embrace (of their arms) like man and woman.” 
    It is necessary to understand these similes correctly. The Rabbis meant that the very shape and position of the cherubs was such that they suggested a readiness to embrace each other. They did not mean that these cherubs performed such activities, especially not when exposed to public view. The idea the Rabbis wanted to convey was that as opposed to the Gentiles who require an intermediary in their approach to the Lord, the Jewish people are so beloved of G’d that they do not require an intermediary just as man and wife do not require an intermediary if they want to express their love for one another. For He, the Exalted, leads Israel all by Himself without the help of any intermediary (compare Deut. 32,12). The Gentiles, on the other hand, are assigned to intermediaries as we know from Deut. 4,19).
    It would have been possible to construct the cherubs in a way that one was the figure of an adult and the other the figure of a child. Ezekiel saw it like this in his vision (Ezekiel 10,14) “the appearance of the face of one was that of a minor whereas the face of the other looked like that of אדם, “an adult person.” In his vision the message would have been that the love of G’d for Israel was like the love of a father for a son, a very formidable kind of love. However, in the Tabernacle the intention was to describe an ongoing close relationship. Seeing that it was impossible to inform us of the type of relationship which exists between G’d and the Jewish people, the Torah decided to describe this by means of the cherubs in the Tabernacle.
    Another reason for telling us all this by means of a visible symbol is to encourage us to pray for this relationship without intermediary to be maintained. This was the reason that the Ark was placed in the Holy of Holies, the site where the Shechinah resides, the ruin towards which all the eyes of Israel focus in prayer.
    If you will study the writings of Maimonides carefully (Moreh Nevuchim 3,3) you will find that he understood the cherubs in the Tabernacle as corresponding to the cherubs which Ezekiel saw in his vision, i.e. the chayot hakodesh. Even though Ezekiel reported seeing four chayot, in reality they were really only one. We can confirm this from the wording in Ezekiel 10,20 when he refers to them in the singular, i.e. היא החיה אשר ראיתי תחת אלו-הי ישראל בנהר כבר ואדע כי כרובים המה, “they are the chayah which I had seen under the Lord G’d of Israel at the river Kevar. So now I knew they were cherubs. After Ezekiel had earlier described 4 chayot, he had subsequently realised  that they were in reality a single chayah and the same as the cherubs.
    After Ezekiel had understood this he mentioned a second insight he had acquired that they are the Ophanim which he had previously observed next to the chayot though somewhat lower than the chayot. The wording in the text (Ezekiel 1,15) is as follows: וארא את החיות והנה אופן אחד בארץ אצל החיות, “When I saw the chayot, and here one Ophan was on the ground near the four-faced chayot.” Already during his first insight (Ezekiel 1,4) when he had the vision of the chayot he had said:  וארא והנה רוח סערה גדולה: “I saw that there was a stormy wind,” etc. Still later Ezekiel speaks of a third insight he had, an insight superior to the previous ones, the understanding of the phenomenon called Chashmal. Concerning these three separate insights granted to him he applied the word Chashmal. He used the wordוארא  three times to indicate that he had three separate visions. These visions are what is described in Chagigah 13 as מעשה מרכבה, the traditional name for Ezekiel’s vision. There is some disagreement  as to how far the מעשה מרכבה extends. Rabbi says that it concludes with the words וארא where this word appears for the last time (1,27), whereas Rabbi Yitzchak holds that it extends only until the word חשמל, (1,4) and that what follows are headings for different aspects of what is known as מעשה מרכבה, “a description of G’d’s entourage.” [The author goes to some length to compare the construction of the cherubs, their appearance, the gold they were made of, etc., to the vision of Ezekiel. I have decided to omit this. Ed.]
    Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 1,20 explain that the angels were created on the second day of creation and that the heaven described as רקיע was created on the same day. They understand the meaning of the directive יהי רקיע in Genesis 1,6 as a reference to the “heaven” inhabited by the angels known as chayot. It is important for us to appreciate that the habitat of these chayot is in the seventh רקיע, the one known as ערבות. Our sages in Chagigah 12 stated this specifically. Some Kabbalists believe that above that region is one called מעון, i.e. an eighth heaven. This heaven supposedly contains what are known in kabbalistic circles as נהרי שמחה, “rivers of joy.” This is why in the seven benedictions and the introduction to the grace after meals during wedding festivities we speak of the heavens as שהשמחה במעונו, “the heaven called Ma-on which contains joy.” Above that region is yet another heaven, the ninth, known as מכון. All the last three heavens together are part of what is known as ערבות. The holy chayot are within the general domain known as ערבות. The region known as מעון is inclined above their heads. The ninth heaven, the one called מכון, contains the throne of G’d’s attribute כבוד. We know that this is also part of the general region known as ערבות from David who speaks of סולו לרוכב בערבות בי-ה שמו, “extol Him who rides the regions of heaven known as ערבות, ‘the Lord” is His name” (Psalms 68,5). We have another verse referring to the region called מכון in Kings I 8,13 where Solomon describes that region as the one where G’d has His residence, eternally.
    A kabbalistic approach to the two cherubs.  Both the cherubs in the Tabernacle and the ones in the Temple were symbolic of the fire and the thunder the Israelites experienced during the revelation at Mount Sinai. Moses had reminded the people of their experience in Deut. 4,36 when he emphasised that the origin of these phenomena had been in heaven, i.e. מן השמים. They were both constructed of gold seeing that both were recipients of input from the attributes חסד and דין, Love, and Justice. They were constructed of a single chunk of gold, מקשה, to symbolise the underlying unity of these attributes. They were male and female respectively in order to teach that these two genders represent the משפיע and the מושפע, the initiating force and the responsive force respectively. The reason they were placed at opposite ends of the kapporet (verse 19) was that one represented the “head” i.e. the beginning of the בנין in the lower, terrestrial world, whereas the other represented the סוף, the conclusion of that  בנין “construction.” This is what is implied in the wording מן הכפורת תעשו את הכרובים על שני קצותיו, “from the kapporet shall you make the two cherubs at its two ends.”
   והיו הכרובים פורשי כנפים למעלה, the meaning  of these words is that the cherubs are to receive spiritual input from the celestial  regions. ופניהם איש אל אחיו, “with their faces opposite each other.” Our sages (Baba Batra 89) explain that as long as the Jewish people carry out the will of their Lord the faces of the cherubs will be turned towards the kapporet like the student who lowers his eyes before the teacher out of deference and fear. We need to understand that the kapporet together with its cherubs is an allusion to the five “lower” regions who raise their wings in an upward direction, i.e. facing the five “upper regions.” This concept helps you to understand how appropriate it was that the Tablets were underneath the cherubs inside the Ark. By facing the Ark with their faces (as opposed to their wings), the cherubs indicated that they looked for inspiration from the Torah (Tablets) below them inside the Ark. Just as we heard the Torah i.e. what is inscribed on the Tablets, through fire and thunder at Mount Sinai, the cherubs’ facial direction symbolised this. The reason that the Torah repeats once moreואל הארון תתן את העדות אשר אתן אליך,  “and into the Ark you shall place the Testimony which I will give you,” is a warning that the Ark is not to remain empty, without the Tablets. This is similar to the instructions (Menachot 99) that the table is not to be empty overnight of the show-breads. The Tablets inside the Ark were a symbol of G’d’s Presence as described in Isaiah 26,4 and in Exodus 23,21, where the Presence of G’d in the Tabernacle is referred to.
    The cherubs which Ezekiel saw, i.e. the chayot hakodesh, corresponded to the cherubs in the Temple on the lid of the Ark. This is the meaning of what he said (Ezekiel 10,20): ואדע כי כרובים המה, “I realised that they were the cherubs.” Seeing that he had already seen cherubs which were chayot hakodesh, he realised that in a still higher region there were other cherubs, angels which he had not seen although he had seen a “sample, a pattern,” of them.
    The cherubs which Ezekiel did see as well as the cherubs in the Tabernacle and the Temple all were a pattern of the cherubs in the higher celestial regions which he knew of but had not seen. The term “cherubs” includes such phenomena as the throne of G’d’s attribute כבוד; they are the ones to which Isaiah 64,10 referred when he said בית קדשנו ותפארתנו אשר הללוך אבותינו, “our holy Temple, our pride, where our fathers praised You.” You are aware that the sound of G’d’s voice was heard by Moses as emanating from between the two cherubs on the kapporet, from the single handbreadth of open space between their outstretched wings. This is where G’d had “compressed” His Shechinah. He did so although we have been told elsewhere (Jeremiah 23,24) “for I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord.” You also find in Tanchuma Vayakhel 7 that Rabbi Joshua from Sakinin said: “the way to understand all this is by means of a parable: there was a cave at the beach of the sea. Whenever the sea was rough the cave was filled with water; nonetheless the sea did not appear to have lost any of its volume.” In a similar manner G’d compressed His Shechinah into a small space without impairing the truth of the statement in Psalms 148,13 הודו על ארץ ושמים, “that His splendour covers heaven and earth.”
    When we consider the framework of man you will find that  man possesses three special organs, each one of which is about the size of the space between the wings of the cherubs in the Tabernacle. These three organs contain the letters of the tetragram, each organ, one of them. (the organs are מילה, פה,לשון, the male organ, the mouth and the tongue). The word הלב has the fourth letter of the tetragram i.e. the second letter ה of the name “Hashem.” Our sages in Bamidbar Rabbah 12,10 say that the kapporet on the Ark corresponds to the Seraphim in the celestial regions which are above the throne as we know from Isaiah 6,2 שרפים עומדים ממעל לו “Seraphim were standing ‘above’ him.” These Seraphim are “advisors” of the Shechinah. There are two of them. They too are part of the beings called cherubs.
    
    25,20,סוככים בכנפיהם על הכפורת , “spreading their wings over the kapporet.” This verse refers to these cherubs which were 10 handbreadths in height; this is the source of the sages proving that the interior height of the Sukkah, exclusive of its covering must not be less than ten handbreadths (Sukkah 5). The cherubs occupied the lower third of the Tabernacle seeing that the interior of the Tabernacle was 10 cubits high and the cubit comprised 6 handbreadths. We have already shown that the height of the Ark including the kapporet but excluding the cherubs was also ten handbreadths, so that the cherubs occupied the upper ten of the lower 20 handbreadths. This is what was meant by the statement that they were standing in the “third” of the Tabernacle, i.e. the lower third. The words סוככים על הכפורת mean that there was enough space beneath their wings to form the minimum height for a Sukkah.
    25,23. ועשית שלחן, “you are to construct a table.” It has already been demonstrated that there was a real need for the Ark seeing that it served to house the Tablets. The kapporet was also essential as it served as the lid for the Ark. The word כפורת is also derived from וכפרת אותה “you shall cover it,” used in connection with waterproofing the boards of the Ark of Noach (Genesis 6,14). The cherubs on top of the kapporet were needed to demonstrate that there are such beings as angels. This leaves the question of what need did the presence of the table actually fill? The question is equally relevant to the presence of the table in the Tabernacle as to its presence in the Temple.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the table was needed in order that the show-breads which the Torah commanded to be ever-present in the Tabernacle (Temple) could be placed upon it. These show-breads were necessary as the basic minimum to which G’d’s bounty could attach itself. The weekly offerings of these show-breads were consumed by the priests who performed the service in the Tabernacle or Temple during the week in question. A small part of this bread was sufficient for many priests. Our sages in Yuma 39 illustrated this point when they said that if a priest received as little as the size of a bean of that bread this would suffice to still his hunger. This then is the reason that this structure was called “table,” seeing G’d provided His blessing for the bread which was placed upon it. From this table G’d’s blessing for the food of the Jewish people would proliferate to all parts of the country, indeed to all parts of the earth. This blessing was in the nature of a יש מיש , “something based on something else.” It was of the same category as that demonstrated by such prophets as Elijah and Elisha who were able to make a minute amount of flour or oil grow into huge amounts. It was a precondition for these prophets to have something, i.e. a “יש” to work with (compare Kings II 4,2 and Kings I 17,16). Creating something out of nothing is something reserved for G’d Himself and such power has not been given to any prophet. In fact we do not know that a type of יש מאין creative activity ever occurred again after G’d commenced creating His universe in such a fashion.
    A Midrashic approach: the word שטים in the phrase ועשית שלחן עצי שטים, “you are to construct a table out of shittim wood,” may be understood as an acrostic of the first letters of the words שלום, טובה, ישועה, מחילה; we also find similar acrostics in connection with the Ark and the Altar, i.e. that these furnishings of the Tabernacle contained within them the essence of all the principal blessings man is in need of. In fact, the table (in each man’s house) symbolises the altar, the instrument through which man is able to achieve atonement for his errors. The bread on the table is considered as a surrogate for animal sacrifice on the altar provided man is generous and shares his blessings (food, etc.) with the poor. This is the deeper meaning of what the sages said (Berachot 55)  when they commented on Ezekiel 41,22 והמזבח עץ שלוש אמות......וידבר אלי זה השלחן אשר לפני ה', “and the altar, a wooden block, three cubits high,.....and He said to me: ‘this is the table before Hashem.” The remarkable thing in that vision is that it commenced with the altar and concluded with the table. The message to Ezekiel was that as long as the Temple was standing and the altar was functioning, man’s atonement was achieved through the sacrifices offered on the altar. When there is no altar upon which to offer sacrifices, man must achieve his atonement by means of his table. It became an accepted practice amongst the pious Jews of France to construct their caskets out of the wood of their tables in order to demonstrate the idea that their table become the means of their atonement just as death is the means to achieve our ultimate atonement. It also was to signify that man does not take with him any of the material things he enjoyed on earth. The only thing he can take with him is the evidence of the charitable deeds he performed while alive. The table was a prime symbol of such charitable deeds. This is also why the sages (Berachot 54) said  that he who spends a long time over his meal will have his life extended.” [the idea is that the poor may come to his door while he is still eating and they will be invited to share. Ed.]
    
    25,24. וציפית אותו זהב טהור, “you shall overlay it with pure gold.” We find here an allusion to the three basic benedictions which comprise our grace after meals which are considered as Biblical in nature. They are the acrostic formed by the respective first letters in the words זן, הארץ, בונה . forming the word זהב.
   ועשית לו זר זהב, “you are to make for it a golden crown.” In the words זר זהב you can detect an allusion to the dynasty of the Kingdom of David.
    A kabbalistic approach: the table with its golden crown is an allusion to the attribute of Justice in the higher emanations. This is why it was positioned in the northern part of the Sanctuary which is also the “left side,” traditionally the side representing negative influences. We have a verse supporting this view in Job 37,22: “by the north wind the golden rays emerge.” The meaning of the statement that he who wishes to amass material gains should turn his attention to the north (Baba Batra 25), is that that is where the attribute גבורה is found. This is the reason that the table had two different colours in the two coverings used to transport it, i.e. red and blue (Numbers 4,7-8), The red corresponded to the attribute of Justice in the higher emanations, whereas the blue was symbolic of the attribute Justice in the lower terrestrial regions (the emanation מלכות) The procedure followed on the table was as follows: first they placed the show-breads on the table directly without anything intervening between the bread and the surface of the table. This is the meaning of the words; ולחם התמיד עליו יהיה, “and the constant bread shall remain on it.” (Numbers 4,7) They would spread a blue-coloured woollen cloth over the breads and all the various appurtenances of the table were placed on top of the blue-coloured woollen cloth and subsequently they would place the re-coloured woollen cloth on top of all this so that a symbol of the attribute of Justice in the higher emanations would be above the symbol of the attribute of Justice in the lowest emanation. The ‘Higher” attribute of Justice makes its impact on the lower attribute of Justice known as the emanation מלכות, the one alluded to by the word זהב formed by the acrostic we mentioned earlier, which hinted at the dynasty of David. [this was the procedure when the Israelites were moving. Ed.] The table thereby established a link between the concepts of מלכות in the celestial and the terrestrial regions respectively. This forms the background to he statement דוד מלך ישראל חי וקיים that “David King of Israel is alive and well.” [renewal of the moon is reassurance concerning renewal of the active dynasty of David. Ed.] It is common knowledge that the blessing connected with the supply of material welfare is dependent on the goodwill and generosity of the king (govt.) and an example of this is found in the wording of the banquet given by King Ahasverus to his people where the Book of Esther 1,7 speaks of the lavishness being כיד המלך, “in accordance with the king’s generosity.” Our sages (Bamidbar Rabbah 4,14) also say that the table is a symbol of the כתר מלכות in the celestial regions. To sum up: the livelihood for mankind and the world has its origin in those regions. Both the celestial regions and the terrestrial regions receive their requirements from that source as this is the emanation from which טרף לביתה וחוק לנערותיה (Proverbs 31,15) “provisions for her household” are provided. This makes it easier to understand the height of the table, i.e. 10 handbreadths plus what is on top of it  [a total of 20 handbreadths when the superstructure of twice six layers of these breads housing the show breads one above the other is included, symbolising both celestial and terrestrial regions. Ed.]
    
    25,29. ועשית קערותיו, “you shall construct its dishes, etc.” The forms in which the show breads were baked and displayed  are called by the Torah קערה. Rashi explains the word to mean “its forms.” The form was made like the forms in which bread is baked, sort of a box broken in half from both directions. It had upright elevated sides. The surface of the bread was visible from three sides; this is why these loaves were called “show-breads,” as each loaf actually had three surfaces, “u” shaped.” There were two forms, one of iron and one of gold. The breads were baked in the iron form. When they came out of the oven they were placed in the golden forms and placed on the table where they remained until the following Sabbath.
   וכפותיו, “and its spoons.” the frankincense was placed inside these “spoons.” There were two of them each holding a kometz, fistful, of frankincense. One spoon of it was placed on each of the shelf-like arrangement holding the show-breads.
   וקשותיו, “and its shelving tubes.” These were hollow tubes cut in half to allow for air to circulate between the forms with the breads. 
   ומנקיותיו, “and its pillars;” these were upright standing golden posts extending well above the height of the actual table and forming the anchors for the hollowed shelving tubes supporting the forms on which the show-breads were positioned. There are different opinions between the commentators as to the most appropriate translation of the word, especially in view of the apparent meaning of the word having to do with “cleanliness.” Probably, and in accordance with Onkelos, the meaning is “pillars of support.”
    
    25,30. לחם פנים לפני תמיד, “show-breads before Me, always.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word פנים, literally, “face,” is used as three sides of these breads faced the onlooker. They were positioned in such a way that they “faced” three different directions inside the Tabernacle.
    According to the Midrash (Sukkah 5) the reason for the word פנים is that they were one handbreadth thick, and our sages said that the word פנים is not used for something thinner than one handbreadth. We refer to Leviticus 16,2 אל פני הכפורת, “facing the kapporet,” and we had explained in connection with the Ark that the thickness of the kapporet was 1 handbreadth. We have another verse in Genesis 27,30 מאת פני יצחק אביו, “from the face of his father Yitzchak.” The face of a human being is never thinner than a handbreadth. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the reason these breads were given the adjective פנים was because the Torah added לפני תמיד, “before Me, always, i.e. “facing Me always.” We have already explained the mystical dimension of the meaning of the word פנים  in connection with Exodus 20,3 on the words לא יהיה לך......על פני.
    
    25,31. ועשית מנורת זהב טהור, “you are to construct a golden lampstand.” According to the plain meaning of the text the purpose of the Menorah in both the Tabernacle and the Temple was to establish the lofty meaning of the Temple in the minds of people and their souls. They should forever display reverence for what the Temple stood for, just as the Torah wrote (Leviticus 19,30) ומקדשי תיראו, “and you shall be in awe of My Sanctuaries.” This is why the lampstand had to be positioned outside the dividing curtain and not beyond it like the Ark. This is why the Torah emphasises this with the words מחוץ לפרוכת העדות באהל מועד יערוך אותו, “outside the dividing curtain within the Tent of Testimony he shall position it, etc.” It should be possible to be viewed by everyone who entered the Tabernacle and who left it.
    Furthermore, it should also teach that the Shechinah which was beyond the dividing curtain did not need to be supplied with light from us (humans). This is also why (refers to the need to make us awe-struck) it was constructed out of gold, the most precious of all the metals. The number of lamps on it were seven in order to correspond to the middle ground between a daily and a monthly cycle. It is known that the soul itself benefits when lights are lit and it derives pleasure and joy from its light. Once the soul is in a joyous state its joy spreads seeing the soul itself is perceived as if it were hewn out of the light of man’s intelligence. This relationship between light and intelligence is the reason why the soul is drawn after light which is of its own kind although basically the “light” of our intelligence is essentially physical in nature, whereas the light represented by the soul is of a spiritual nature. This is why Solomon was able to compare a lamp (physical light) to the soul (spiritual light) when he said (Proverbs 20,27) “the soul is the light of the Lord.”
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Beha-alotcha 5): The Menorah with its seven lamps corresponded to the seven fixed stars which orbit the whole globe; the meaning of these words is that these seven fixed stars are perceived as separate light bodies in the skies exerting their respective influences on the creatures in the terrestrial world and providing guidance for our world both by day and by night. The seven lamps on the Menorah were burning around the clock by day and by night just as the seven fixed stars supply their light by day and by night without interruption. The middle lamp represented the sun which is constant in its light and the centre of the seven fixed stars.
    A rational approach: The Menorah with its seven lamps is an allusion to the Torah which is generally known as אור, light. This is confirmed by the verse in Proverbs 20,27 we quoted earlier. 
    Torah comprises seven different kinds (disciplines) of wisdoms (compare an analysis by Ibn Ezra). This is why the Menorah had seven lamps. The six arms which extended from the centre shaft represented the six different directions in our three-dimensional terrestrial globe. They were to be a reminder that all parts and all extremities of this globe are dependent on the Torah which was given to the Jewish people on the sixth of Sivan and for the sake of which the earth continues to exist. This is what Jeremiah had in mind when he said (Jeremiah 33,25) “if it were not for My covenant (with the Jewish people through the Torah)  which is the basis of day and night, etc.” 
   שלשה גביעים משוקדים בקנה האחד, “three “cups” engraved like almonds on the one arm.” On each arm there were 3 such “cups.” This gives us a total of 18 “cups” for the six arms. The centre shaft of the Menorah had 4 “cups.” This means there were a total of 22 “cups.” This number corresponds to the letters in the Hebrew alphabet. These 22 letters are symbolic of 22 parts of the universe: wind, water, fire, the seven fixed stars, and the 12 signs of the zodiac. These letters in the Hebrew alphabet also are symbolised by the 22 parts of the human body: head, heart, kidneys, seven orifices of the body; 12 organs (compare Sefer Yetzirah).
    We note that the Menorah and its arms had 3 different “decorations;” there were “knobs,” “cups” and “flowers.” The “knob” was like a round apple which protruded from the centre shaft in every direction. The “knob” symbolised the world of the angels who are basking in the radiation of the Shechinah’s brilliance in uninterrupted delight. The roundness of the “apple” symbolised the idea that something was never ending, everlasting. Our sages in Taanit 31 alluded to this delight when they said: “in the future G’d is going to make a ‘circle’ for the righteous and His glory will be amongst them.” The word used by the sages is  מחול, something round which has no beginning and no end. This is the reason spiritual delights are always described in such terms to remind us that they are something enduring, something permanent. The “cup” is a vessel which is a receptacle, it irrigates and provides water. This corresponds to the world of the planets  and the atmosphere which at one and the same time receive beneficial input from the world of the angels and in turn distribute it beneficially to the inhabitants of the lower, terrestrial part of the universe. The “flower”  symbolises our terrestrial part of the universe on which all the outstanding people of earth spend their lives. They are characterised as flowers, plants, etc. The overall idea gained from  the appearance of the Menorah is that the 22 letters of the Torah (alphabet) enable man to achieve this greatness in all three parts of the universe.
    
    25,38. .ומלקחיה ומחתותיה, “Its tongs and its fire pans,” it is well known that עצה ומחשבה, deliberation (counsel) and thought, are “tongs” with which to extract Torah-knowledge. This is what is meant by Proverbs 1,5: ונבון תחבולות יקנה, “and a man of understanding will attain wise counsel.” מחשבה, “thought,” originates in the heart. The Torah here compares the heart to a fire pan as just as the fire pan is a vessel from which one takes the fire to light the lamps so the heart is the instrument of the intelligence which a person employs in studying Torah. Its (the lampstand) weight was a talent of gold (verse 39) neither less nor more. The reason the weight had to be precise was to remind us that one is not free to add or to detract from Torah in any manner. This is the meaning of Psalms 19,8 that תורת ה' תמימה, that “G’d’s Torah is perfect.” It was constructed out of a single chunk of gold to teach the unity of the Torah as is written (Exodus 12,49) תורה אחת, “a single Torah.” It was placed in the southern half of the Tabernacle as most wisdom is found in the south (Baba Batra 25). The land of Israel is known as ארץ הדרום, “the land of the south,” as it is situated climate-wise in the choicest locations of the earth’s seven climatic belts. (compare author’s comment Exodus 1,2-3) It is protected from extremes of heat and cold thus enabling people in it to think more clearly. This is the meaning of Bereshit Rabbah 16,3 that “the gold of that place is good” (Genesis 2,12). The Rabbis there comment that there is no ethical moral teaching (Torah) comparable to that of our Torah just as there is no wisdom comparable to the wisdom found in the land of Israel. Furthermore, the sages in Baba Batra 155 also taught that  the very air one breathes in the land of Israel is causing one to become wiser.
    It is worth reflecting on the fact that the table and the Menorah respectively were placed opposite each other (south and north) as the two spiritual “winds” represented by these two directions complement each other. This is why the Torah wrote (26,35) “you are to place the table outside the dividing curtain and the lampstand opposite it.” The reason for this is that in order for wisdom to endure its owner has to have the physical wherewithal, i.e. food and drink, etc. The table in the north is a symbol of material wealth as we have pointed out previously.
    A kabbalistic approach: The Menorah alludes to all levels of emanations, excellence, superiority. The fact that it was made of a single chunk of gold symbolises the concept of perfect unity. The six “arms” protruding from the centre shaft in both directions symbolise the six proliferations from the centre line of the diagram of the emanations, ספירות. The lamp which burned on top of these arms symbolised בינה, insight, an emanation above the lower six and supplied with direct input from the essence of G’d. It is the lamp (light) which is described by Solomon as (the origin of) man’s soul (Proverbs 20,27). It was placed in the south opposite the emanation wisdom. This is the mystical dimension of the statement in Baba Batra 25 that “he who wishes to become rich should turn south.” The oil is also known as יצהר, corresponding to the crown, which is another word for the מאור הגדול, “the great luminary.” This is the mystical dimension of the significance of the oil used for anointing the High Priests and the kings (of the Davidic dynasty). When doing the anointing the figure of the letter כ was painted on the heads of the recipients (in oil), to symbolise the shape of the letter כ for כתר in that ceremony. Some hold that the pattern described during this anointing was the letters כ'י which would symbolise that the recipient was endowed with the emanations from “head to toe.” [According to Horiot 12 there were different patterns of oil traced on the heads of the priests and the Kings respectively. Ed.]
    The word מנורת (in the possessive clause in verse 31) with the tone-sign tipcha underneath, an unusual use of the possessive clause at the beginning of the whole subject, may be understood to mean here that the whole concept of the Menorah is secondary (possessive clause)  to our light. The possessive clause makes no sense unless there is at least another Menorah (or independent source of light) to which it can be compared. The “other” Menorah is the light provided by us humans studying the Torah. The possessive clause inherent in the word מנורת instead of מנורה does not only apply to the word זהב טהור, “pure gold,” of which the Menorah is to be constructed, Had this been the Torah’s intention there should be a connecting makkaf between the words מנורה and זהב. We find, for instance, that also the prophet Zecharyah mentions the Menorah in the possessive clause at the very first occasion when it is mentioned (compare Zecharyah 4,2 ראיתי והנה מנורת זהב כלה), and even though it is mentioned in the possessive clause the tone-signs there clearly indicate that the words מנורת זהב do not belong together but that the word מנורת is to be read as belonging to what was written before, i.e. ראיתי, and not to the words זהב כלה “all made of gold.” The reason for this is that the author wanted to emphasise that the material aspect of the fact that the Menorah in the vision was made of gold was of very subordinate significance. The possessive clause was used only to draw attention to the fact that there was another luminary which served as the inspiration for this physical luminary, the golden Menorah. The possessive clause was to alert the reader to some hidden Menorah which is in some relationship to the one mentioned in this verse. The deliberate separation of the word “gold” and “Menorat” is designed to show how different the “other,” unmentioned Menorah is from the one mentioned in the verse.
    
    25,39. ככר זהב יעשה אותה את כל הכלים האלה, “he is to make it out of a talent of gold with all these vessels.” The Menorah with its lamps comprised a total of one talent (weight). The other subsidiary vessels such as the tongs, etc., were not included in the weight given here by the Torah (Menachot 88). The verse is to be read as follows: “he shall make it out of one talent of gold together with its integral parts, i.e. the arms protruding from its centre shaft; all of these vessels are to be made of pure gold.” This is also the way the Torah reports the execution of these instructions in 37,24: “of a talent of pure gold he made it and all its utensils.” The words: “and all its utensils” refer to the fact that they were of pure gold, not to the fact that they were part of the talent of gold mentioned. The weight measurement “one talent” refers only to the lampstand and the lamps. This is what the Talmud taught in Menachot 88. The Talmud there says expressly that the words must be read in such a way that the extra words את כל כליה, mean that all its utensils were to be made of gold, whereas only the Menorah itself and its lamps were to be part of the talent of pure gold mentioned.
    Rabbeinu Chananel, in connection with the symbolic/moral meaning of these various furnishings of the Tabernacle writes that the Ark was an allusion to the truly righteous and learned individual whose interior matches his exterior and vice versa. This 
is the meaning of the Ark being covered with gold both on the inside and on the outside. Just as the bottom of the Ark had an area of two and one half cubits by one and a half cubits giving us a total of 4 square cubits minus one quarter cubit square, so the righteous person should remain constantly aware that the four elements which make up his physicality should not become the sum total of his existence but should be augmented liberally with physical matters such as the performance of good deeds for others, etc. Just as the walls of the Ark when combined were twelve cubits (when measuring the combined total of the outside dimensions 1.5x2.5 1,5+2.5 +1,5+2.5) seeing the long walls measured a total of 7.5 cubits and the shorter walls forming the sides measured 4,5 cubits, so the righteous person is expected to fulfill all the 12 conditions mentioned in Psalm 15,1 as the qualifications for dwelling in G’d’s holy precincts (the entire Psalm is devoted to listing these 12 requirements). If one wishes to attain a loftier level of relative perfection than that of a “mere” righteous individual, the next step up is becoming a נביא a prophet, or at least acquiring the spiritual level expected of a prophet. This is symbolised by the kapporet above the Ark. The fact that the entire kapporet was made of pure gold, that it was not only overlaid with gold, indicates that it symbolises something even purer than the Ark itself. We know that a prophet is considered as כלו צדק, “totally righteous” from Proverbs 8,8 “all the words of my mouth are with righteousness.” The cherubs above the kapporet are an allusion to the angels, beings on an even higher spiritual level than the prophets. They were spreading their wings heavenward in an allusion to their striving to be near the Shechinah which is higher than the angels seeing the angels are the throne, ever ready to welcome the attribute of כבוד, occupant of that throne. This is the meaning of the words in verse 20 אל הכפורת יהיו פני הכרובים, “the faces of the cherubs will be turned toward the kapporet.” They had to look downwards towards the lid and were forbidden to gaze at the Shechinah. Above everything is G’d Himself as is written in Samuel II 6,2: אשר נקרא שם שם ה' צבאות יושב הכרובים עליו, ”to which the Name was attached, the name of the Lord of Hosts Enthroned on the cherubs.” Solomon also constructed the cherubs in the Temple out of wood as is written (Kings I 6,23) “he made in the sanctuary two cherubs out of olive wood.”
    The table represented the kings of Israel who entertain the scholars of Israel at their table. This is what David told his son Solomon on his death-bed: “Barzilai‘s sons shall be amongst the people who are regular guests at your table” (Kings I 2,7). We also have a verse in Kings I 5,2 describing the lavishness of King Solomon’s table and the quantities of food consumed on a daily basis.
    The Torah, in describing the table in the Tabernacle as overlaid with gold, illustrates that the function of Royalty was primarily to make a great impression on the outside world. After Samuel had told Saul that he would be replaced as king by someone more worthy, Saul still begged the prophet to honour him at least in public as he wanted to maintain the appearance of power although he knew this was no longer his position (compare Samuel I 15,30).
    The reason that the length of the table was two cubits was in order to symbolise two requirements of every king. 1) He must be competent in meting out justice; 2) he must be competent in waging war. This is what the people had told the prophet Samuel when they asked him to appoint a king for them (Samuel I 8,20). They said: “that we may be like all the other nations; let our king rule over us and go out at our head and fight our battles.”
    The size and height of the walls which amount to nine cubits symbolise the nine commandments specifically addressed to a Jewish King. They are: 1) “he shall not keep many horses,” or 2) “send people back to Egypt to add to his horses;” 3) “he shall not have too many wives.”  4) “He shall not become haughty,” and 5) “he must not turn away from G’d’s commandments to right or to the left.” 6) “he shall write for himself 2 copies of the Torah.” 7) “He shall  read in the Torah every day of his life.” 8) “He shall not amass too much silver and gold.”  9) “He shall not turn away from the commandments.” (Deut. 17,8-20.)
    The purpose of the border around the table was to prevent the show-breads sliding off it for whatever reason. It was intended to protect the show-breads just as the priests and the Levites are supposed to be on guard against the kings deviating from the path of the Torah. We have an example of this in Chronicles II 24,2: “Yoash (the King) did what was right in the eyes of the Lord as long as Yehoyadah the High Priest was alive.” In connection with King Uzziah we read in Chronicles II 26,5: “he applied himself to the worship of G’d during the time of Zechariah, instructor of the visions of G’d.”
    All the details that the Torah writes about in connection with all the vessels of the Tabernacle have similar moral allusions. The Ark represents the righteous people. The table corresponds to the kings of Israel. The Menorah corresponds to the scholars of Israel. The golden altar corresponds to the priests, whereas the copper altar corresponds to the people of Israel at large. Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel.
    
    25,40. וראה ועשה בתבניתם , “See and construct according to their pattern, etc.” It would seem that the preposition כ would have been more appropriate here than the preposition ב seeing that this is the preposition always used when two matters are being compared as being similar in some respects though not in all respects. Seeing that what Moses had been shown was only a mental image and he had not seen a physical pattern or miniature, it would therefore appear to have been appropriate for the Torah to write כתבניתם. Why then did the Torah write בתבניתם as if the construction of the Tabernacle and everything connected with it corresponded in detail to all he had been shown on the Mountain? This argument is also reflected in our sages quoting Moses as saying to G’d: “from where am I going to take all the red fire, white fire, green fire, and black fire which You have shown me as the pattern?” (Bamidbar Rabbah 12,10)
    It is important to understand the difference between the preposition ב and the preposition כ in Hebrew. The best way to illustrate this is to look at the words בצלמנו כדמותנו, “in our image and in our likeness.” Why do we have two different prepositions in that verse in Genesis 1,26? The answer is that the word צלם refers to a “form” which is a strictly abstract term, describing something in the mind, something spiritual in nature. The word applies to disembodied creatures, creatures whose essence is spiritual. The word דמות on the other hand, refers to the corresponding idea in the physical world, describing creatures with bodies. When G’d created man He said that in some essential respects man would be like the disembodied beings in the heavens, like the angels. In other, less essential respects he would be different seeing that he would have a body. This difference is indicated by the use of two different prepositions when referring to צלם and דמות respectively. Seeing that man’s likeness to the angels was primary, the “face,” the preposition ב reflected this when the Torah writes בצלמנו. Seeing that what Moses saw and what was constructed corresponded in essence to what he had been shown, the Torah was correct in writing בתבניתם. 
    
    26,1. ואת המשכן תעשה עשר יריעות, “you shall construct the Tabernacle out of ten curtains, etc.” The word משכן is spelled with the letter ה in front, indicating that it was a building we had heard about previously. This shows that the מקדש mentioned in 25,8 and the משכן mentioned here are one and the same thing. By rights the details of the construction of the Tabernacle should have preceded that of its furnishings; however, due to the lofty nature of the Ark the Torah decided to first mention its construction, and, having commenced with one of the interior furnishings it also listed details of the table and the Menorah. When you will examine the report of the actual construction (36,8) you will notice that Betzalel constructed the Tabernacle before he constructed the furnishings it was to house. 
    
    26,2. אורך היריעה האחת שמונה ועשרים באמה, “the length of a single curtain was approximately 28 cubits.” It is common knowledge that the entire Tabernacle and its components were meant to be sort of a replica of what exists in the heavens (primarily the parts we can see). Seeing that the luminaries are fixed in the sky, and all their activities inasmuch as they have impact on our terrestrial world are decreed to occur at predetermined times, the Torah called the Tabernacle, i.e. the covering, the ceiling of the structure, by the name יריעה, “curtain.” David uses the same expression to describe the heaven in psalm 104,2 where he speaks about G’d as נוטה שמים כיריעה, “spreading the heaven like a tent (curtain).”
    There were a total of ten such curtains corresponding to ten different גלגלים, i.e. the seven fixed stars, plus what is known as the גלגל השכל, גלגל המקיף, and the גלגל המזלות, the domain (orbit) of ‘intelligence,’ a domain which surrounds all the planetary systems, near the domain of the sign of the zodiac. The reason that the length of each curtain was to be 28 cubits was that it was  to correspond to the 28 times Solomon mentions the word עת in Kohelet chapter three. With regard to the significance of that word עת, we read in Chronicles I 12,32 that the men whom the tribe of Issachar dispatched to participate in the crowning of King David were all יודעי בינה לעתים, “conversant with the meaning of these different periods described as עת.” David himself said concerning the significance of each different time period: אברכה את ה' בכל עת, “let me bless the Lord in each one of these time periods” (Psalms 34,2). Another occasion when David mentions the word עת specifically is in Psalm 31,16 בידך עתתי, “my times are in Your hands.”
    Another reason for the number 28 may be connected to the lunar cycle, i.e. the number of days the moon either gains or loses size (according to our observation). Midrash Tanchuma Terumah 9 in referring to the length of 28 cubits of each of these curtains claims that there was a basic miracle involved here as we never find curtains of this length (about 56 feet). According to Rabbi Nechemyah this was a miracle that occurred only in connection with the weaving of these special יריעות. Actually, miraculous occurrences took place not only in connection with these curtains but also in connection with the קרשים, the upright beams forming the walls of the Tabernacle.
    
    26,7. ועשית יריעות עזים לאהל על המשכן, “and you are to construct curtains of goats’ hair above the Mishcan.” The Torah had first commanded: “construct the Tabernacle out of ten curtains of twisted linen and blue and red-coloured wool.” Concerning these curtains the Torah instructed that they were to be approximately 28 cubits long each. Now with the curtains made of goats’ hair, the instructions were that they were to be approximately 30 cubits long each. There were to be 10 curtains called משכן, whereas this second layer of curtains consisted of a total of 11. I will now give you an explanation of a general nature.
    Remember that the Tabernacle was 30 cubits long and 10  cubits wide. Its height was also 10 cubits. We know that it was 30 cubits long as in connection with the upright beams, קרשים, which formed the walls, the Torah wrote that 20 such beams be constructed for the wall for the south side (verse 18). Each beam was 11/2 cubits wide (verse 16) and its height was 10 cubits (verse 16). There were 20 such beams for the north wall and 20 for the south wall. The combined width of these 20 beams was 30 cubits, giving the Tabernacle an overall length of 30 cubits. We know that the Tabernacle’s width was 10 cubits as the Torah writes (verse 22) that for the back of the Tabernacle 6 beams were to be constructed. Add to this the fact that the Torah describes the western wall as comprising 8 beams (verse 25),  plus the fact that two beams had been constructed to form the corners (verse 23) and you know that the two corner beams were positioned so that their width was facing west whereas their thickness was facing north and south respectively making the outside width of the Tabernacle 12 cubits. In other words, the inside measurement of the Tabernacle was 30 by 10, whereas the outside measurement was 31 by 12 cubits.
    Onkelos translates the word ולירכתי, in verse 22 as ולסיפי, “and for the end of.” The reason he does so is that the western wall is the “end” of a process which began in the east, with the pillars and the curtain at the entrance to the Tabernacle. There were no beams at the eastern end of the Tabernacle. The five pillars which supported the מסך, “screening curtain,” formed the entrance to the Tabernacle on the eastern side (compare verse 36).
    It is well to remember that the length of the various curtains mentioned by the Torah was placed across the top of the Tabernacle. This meant that if the beams were ten cubits high and the width of the Tabernacle from the outside was 12 cubits (the inside being ten cubits), the 28 cubits of the inner curtains most certainly did not extend all the way down the beams, not even to the level of the silver sockets the beams were encased in. Approximately 2 cubits of the lower ends of the beams including the sockets remained exposed after the inner curtains which had been joined together were placed across the top of these beams. This explains why a second set of curtains made from goats’ hair was necessary in order to cover the one cubit left exposed on each side above the silver sockets of the beams.
    Our sages (quoted by Rashi) used the fact that the lower cubit of the beams remained exposed as a lesson in good manners. The costly curtains were not to touch the earth and become soiled. The elevation would protect them also against being splashed by raindrops, etc. Seeing that the materials used for the second layer of curtains was less expensive, it did not matter that these would be more exposed to dirt and splashing by rain drops. There were a total of eleven curtains of those made of goats’ hair. When the Torah comments that there was an ”overhang” (verse 23) on either side of the curtains of one cubit on either side after they had been stretched out, this means in the direction of north and south. The “overhang” was relative, i.e. it covered areas previously left exposed by the curtains made of blue and red wool and twisted linen. The curtains did not drag on the ground, as did the ones trailing down on the western side of the Tabernacle. When verse 9 speaks of “the sixth” curtain being “folded over,” the reference is to the sixth out of the eleven goats’ hair curtains which had been joined together in two lots, one of five and one of six curtains joined lengthwise side by side to cover a total area of 30 by 44 cubits. The so-called sixth, is really the “eleventh.” It was called “sixth” as it is the last of the second carpet formed by five and six curtains respectively. Half of that curtain was folded over at the entrance of the Tabernacle covering the upper cubit of the מסך, “screening curtain,” there. Our sages described this as a sign of chastity comparable to the bride who veils her face under the wedding canopy. The other half of that curtain which was also excess was at the western end extending 2 cubits on the ground like the train of a bridal gown. 
    
    26,15. ועשית את הקרשים, “you are to construct the beams, etc.” The Torah really should have written ועשית קרשים, “you are to construct beams,” just as the Torah had written ועשית יריעות, not היריעות. The letter ה in front of the word קרשים, suggesting that we had heard about these beams previously seems quite unjustified. Our sages therefore found support in the letter ה for the tradition that Yaakov had already brought acacia trees to Egypt with him and had told his sons to take the trunks with them out of Egypt when the time would come as they would be needed by the Israelites in the desert.
   עצי שטים עומדים, “of acacia wood standing upright.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word עומדים, “upright,” indicates that contrary to common practice these beams were to be used in the same way they had grown, facing upwards, not like boards which are usually used horizontally.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Terumah 9): the word עומדים, describes a particular kind of acacia tree. There are many varieties of trees called “acacia,” so that the adjective עומדים helps in defining which sub-species of acacia wood was meant. The reason the Torah specified precisely what kind of wood to take may be connected with the sin the Israelites committed during the last year of their wanderings in a place by the same name, Shittim (Numbers 25,1). Seeing their sin was bound up with Shittim, G’d wanted that a different kind of shittim should become instrumental in their atoning for their sin. In Numbers 25,9 we have been told that no fewer than 24.000 Israelites died in a pestilence G’d sent against the people who had sinned on that occasion. The whole idea of Yaakov bringing the shittim trees to Egypt already foreshadowed the time-honoured principle that G’d arranges for the cure before the onset of the disease as we know from Jeremiah 30,17: “but I will bring healing to you and cure you of your wounds.” The prophet speaks about the cure before he even spoke about any wounds which need healing.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words עצי שטים עומדים parallel the words שרפים עומדים ממעל לו “Seraphim stood in attendance on Him” (Isaiah 6,2). The word עומדים was mentioned as an allusion to the celestial forces. There is nothing in the Tabernacle which does not somehow reflect concepts and beings of the celestial realms. To quote just a few verses from the Bible in which this thought has been expressed, even though obliquely at times. 1) (Exodus 25,9) את תבנית המשכן ואת תבנית כל כליו, “the pattern of the Tabernacle and the pattern of all its vessels.” The matching verse is found in Chronicles I 28,19 הכל בכתב מיד ה' עלי השכיל כל מלאכות התבנית, “All this the Lord has made me understand by His hand on me, the works according to all its pattern.” 2) (Chronicles I 28,12) ותבנית כל אשר היה ברוח, “and the pattern of all that he had by the spirit.” The point of all this is that although the Tabernacle, the Temple, and all the holy vessels would be destroyed or lost, we must never believe that the destruction of physical symbols meant that their counterpart in the celestial regions also ceased to exist. Rather, they remain in an upright standing position. This is the thrust of what we have been taught in Sukkah 45 and Yuma 72 that the mystical dimension of the words עצי שטים עומדים is מעמידין את צפוין, שמא תאמר אבד סברן, בטול סכוין, תלמוד לומר עצי שטים עומדים, שעומדים לעולם ולעלמי עולמים’ The meaning of the words: “upright standing acacia wood,” is that these woods lend hope and spiritual fortitude to those who look upon them. If you perchance would think that after all they have now been lost to us and just as they have been lost so has our hope faded, the Torah described them as “standing,” i.e. in the present tense, to reassure you that the concept they represent will endure forever and ever.” The word צפוין in the Talmud there means “the power which is expected of them by those looking at them with hope.” The meaning of the words מעמידין אותו הכוח is תלה גדול בקטן, “that the great was made dependent on the small,” The wood of the shittim trees held the gold overlay in place instead of vice versa.
    
    26,25. והיו שמונה קרשים, “there shall be eight beams, etc.” Two of the eight beams overlapped with the beams forming the long sides of the Tabernacle, one at the southern end and one at the northern end. There were therefore six beams left which formed the western wall without any part of them serving as extensions of the long walls. This is what was meant by verse 22 ולירכתי המשכן תעשה ששה קרשים, “and for the end of the Tabernacle you are to construct 6 beams. This verse reveals a mystical dimension. Seeing that the Shechinah which is situated in the west is composed of 6 extremities, the west is referred to as ים in order to allude to this fact. The west is known as ים, “ocean” because the ocean is a collection point for all the waters just as the Shechinah is a collection point for all the directions of the globe from the farthest extremities.
    The order of the four geographical directions of the world in the celestial entourage, מרכבה, are: the three patriarchs of the world (Avraham Yitzchak and Yaakov), and David. South ranks first as Avraham was the first of the patriarchs, and it is written of him that Avraham journeyed southwards to the land of the south (Genesis 20,1). This is followed by north, as Yitzchak made a supreme effort at the time he was bound on the altar. This is followed by east seeing it is written of Yaakov that the sun shone for him (Genesis 32,32), and his son Joseph has also been compared to the sun (Genesis 37,9). Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 84,11) have said quoting Yaakov: “who told this one (Joseph) that my name is “sun?” West is the סוף, the end; it is the harp on which David played which used to play all by itself on occasion (Berachot 3) This direction was called ים, i.e. the sea known as ים האחרון, the westernmost sea. In order to allude to these four great men the directions of the earth have been identified with these people through their names.
    
    26,28. והבריח התיכון בתוך הקרשים מן הקצה אל הקצה, “and the middle bar inside the beams shall extend from end to end.” Rashi explains on this verse that five of the bars were on the northern wall, five on the southern wall, and five on the western wall. These “five” were in reality only three, as the upper and lower bars respectively consisted of two bars each (on the same level), whereas the middle one was a single bar joining all the beams  on its respective side. It was thirty cubits long. This is the meaning of the words: “from one end to the other end.” The western wall’s middle bar then was 12 cubits long, from east to west. [The words underlined do not make sense and are not found in Rashi’s editions nowadays. Ed.]
    According to Shabbat 98 the middle bar stood miraculously. Tossaphot on that folio say that the middle bar extended through all three directions, i.e. one bar which made two 90 degree turns and must have been 70 cubits long. The two corner beams which overlapped detracted from what otherwise would have been 72 cubits. It is well to remember that this middle bar which joined every one of the beams to one another in the manner of a belt symbolised the קו האמצעי, the “centre line” we have often mentioned as part of the diagram of the ten emanations. In this instance it stabilised and supported all the extremities of the Tabernacle providing input from earth into the celestial Sanctuary by symbolising the spiritual force generated on earth by Yaakov and his 70 family members (descendants) who emigrated to Egypt. This is why it was Yaakov who was chosen (by history under G’d’s guidance) to be the one to bring all these people down to Egypt. In fact we have a Midrash Tanchuma Terumah 9 according to which the בריח התיכון this “middle bar” descended to Egypt with Yaakov at the time. He told his sons that when the time would come to leave Egypt they should make sure to take it with them.
    
    26,33.והבדילה הפרוכת לכם בין הקדש ובין קדש הקדשים , “and the dividing curtain shall separate for you between the Holy and between the Holy of Holies.” The Ark and the kapporet were beyond the dividing curtain in the Holy of Holies. During the period of the second Temple, the אבן השתיה, the stone covering the “navel of the earth” (Yuma 45) stood there in its place in the westernmost part of the Sanctuary. Beyond the dividing curtain but in front of the Ark (during most of the years of the first Temple) was kept the bottle of manna which had been filled by Aaron in the desert. They also kept a bottle of the anointing oil there as well as the staff of Aaron which had sprouted almonds after the suppression of the revolt of Korach (compare Yuma 37). The author claims that the garments of the High Priest were also stored there. The other furnishings of the tabernacle/Temple such as the table, the lampstand, and the golden altar, were kept in front of the dividing curtain in the part known as היכל. The table stood in the north, the lampstand in the south, and the golden altar of incense was between the two, slightly closer to the entrance of the Tabernacle (Yuma 33).
    
    27,1. ועשית את המזבח עצי שטים, “You are to construct the altar of acacia wood.” This was the altar for the regular offerings, better known as מזבח העולה. It was positioned in the courtyard of the Tabernacle and most of the sacrifices were offered up on it. It was overlaid with copper and was square, symbolising the fourth leg of the מרכבה, the Divine entourage. It represented the fourth letter in the Holy name of the Lord, the tetragram. This is the reason the Torah wrote the words רבוע יהיה, as the fact that it was square was already evident from the measurements given as five cubits by five cubits. You should know that the overall height of this altar was ten cubits (not three as written in our verse, compare Zevachim 59). If the Torah wrote that its height was three cubits, this is a reference to the area on which the actual offerings were presented (from the סובב, “ledge” upwards to the corners).
    Proof that the overall height from its foundations was ten cubits is offered in Bamidbar Rabbah 6,3 where the Midrash examines the words רבוע יהיה, “it shall be square.” The words are considered superfluous. Therefore the Midrash considers them as providing a lesson comparable to another similar expression  used in connection with the altar of the incense (30,2). There the Torah writes that its width and length was to be 1 cubit each and its height was to be 2 cubits. There too the Torah adds the words רבוע יהיה, “it shall be square.”  We are entitled to conclude (thanks to the two expressions “it shall be square,”) that just as the altar for incense was twice as high as it was wide and long, so the copper altar should be proportioned similarly. Seeing it was five cubits wide and long, it would have an overall height of ten cubits. In view of this we remain with the problem that in our chapter the Torah described the height of the copper altar as being three cubits. Is this not a contradiction? Answer: the three cubits measured by the Torah in connection with the copper altar begin from the ledge which ran around it on which the priest would stand.
    Furthermore, it is worth studying what the Talmud (Sukkah 45) tells us about the willow branches which would be placed around this altar on the festival of Tabernacles. According to the description in the Talmud the tops of these willow branches would be right next to the top of the altar, bending down a little towards its top. These willow branches are described as having a length of eleven cubits. They were of that length in order to be able to exceed the height of the altar by a little, i.e. by one cubit.
    In Zevachim 59 our sages explained that the altar which Moses erected was 10 cubits high as it has been compared to the altar in the Tabernacle according to what is written (Numbers 4,26) “and the lace-hangings of the Courtyard and the Screen of the entrance of the gate of the Courtyard which were around the Tabernacle and the Altar, etc.” Just as the Tabernacle itself was ten cubits high so the altar was ten cubits high also. There is also a clear verse in connection with the altar erected by Solomon for his Temple which describes its height as being ten cubits (Chronicles II 4,1) [in that instance the height of the altar was half that of its width and length rather than double. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Terumah 11): when the Torah wrote: “you shall make an altar of shittim wood and overlay it with copper,” what was this altar to atone for? For the effrontery characterised by a “copper-hard forehead.” We have a verse in Isaiah 48,4 where this simile is used for stiff-necked behaviour. The prophet writes: ”because I know how stubborn you are; your neck is like an iron sinew, and your forehead bronze.” It is also worth noting that the letters in the word מזבח, “altar,” may be understood as an acrostic of the first letters in the words מחילה, זכות, ברכה, חיים respectively. The word שטים may also be understood as an acrostic of the first letters of the words שלום, טובה, ישועה, מחילה respectively. The measure-ments of five by five cubits for the length and width of the altar corresponded to the two Tablets of the covenant on each of which five of G’d’s directives had been engraved. The height described by the Torah, i.e. three cubits, is an allusion to the three redeemers of the Jewish people, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Thus far the Midrash.
    
    27,6.ועשית בדים למזבח, בדי עצי שטים , “you are to construct staves for the altar, staves made of shittim wood.” It would have seemed more appropriate for the Torah to write: ועשית בדים למזבח עצי שטים, without repeating the word בדים once more. Alternately, the Torah could have written: ועשית למזבח בדי עצי שטים, which would have been the shortest way to express the same instruction, just as the Torah did in connection with the ark where the Torah wrote: ועשית בדי עצי שטים. Why this peculiar wording then? It was to allude to the fact that these staves were to be extremely long-lasting (compare Kings I 8,8). There was a miracle involved in all this as our sages (Tanchuma Terumah 17) have mentioned that G’d said that “in the future these staves would be 487 years ‘long’”. The idea was that from the time of the original construction of the Tabernacle until the dedication of Solomon’s Temple 487 years later no other staves would be used to transport the altar.
    
    27,8. נבוב לוחות תעשה אותו, “you shall construct it  hollow, of boards.” It was square. as the Torah had written: “it shall be square” (verse 1). The wooden boards surrounded its four sides, the inside being hollow. This is in accordance with the translation by Onkelos, חליל לוחין. The expression נבוב is found in Job 11,12 ואיש נבוב ילבב, where it means “a hollow man will get under-standing.” [the author meant that as opposed to G’d man is hollow, lacks understanding at birth and has to acquire it as he grows older. Ed.] The hollow part inside the altar would be filled with earth every time the Israelites made camp in order to enable them to offer sacrifices upon it. In this way the instruction of Exodus 20,21: “you shall construct an earthen altar for Me” was fulfilled.
    A great miracle occurred on a regular basis on this altar. Although the fire on the altar burned around the clock, neither the wooden boards nor the copper overlay burned or melted. This was also one of the miracles mentioned in Avot 5,5 that even when it used to rain the fire on the altar where the wood was stacked would not be extinguished by the rain. It (the altar during the period when the Temples were standing) was standing in the area called עזרה, an enclosure without a roof, corresponding to the courtyard mentioned in connection with the Tabernacle.
    In Tanchuma Terumah 11 we find the following comment:. Moses was afraid that the fire might burn the wood of the altar. G’d reassured him, saying: “why are you afraid Moses? Who ordered fire to burn? You should learn from your own experience. When you came up to the mountain and you entered the ערפל, and you walked between rows of fire you did not get burned. Moreover, you entered My domain, and I Myself Am consuming fire (Deut. 4,24) and you remained unscathed. Similarly, the altar’s boards and covering will not be burned either.” If someone were to say that the copper overlay over the boards of the altar was so thick that no miracle was required to protect it form melting, Rabbi Nechemyah said that it was no thicker than the coin called a דינר. Rabbi Pinchas, son of Bar Chama, said that the altar constructed by Moses (Betzalel) was more beloved by G’d than that constructed for Solomon’s Temple even though Solomon’s altar was much larger, seeing that we read in Kings I 3,4 that Solomon’s altar could accommodate 1.000 burnt offerings (presumably at one time).
    
    27,9. ועשית את חצר המשכן לפאת נגב תימנה, “You are to construct the courtyard of the Tabernacle on the southern side, etc.” When explaining the length of the courtyard it was necessary for the Torah to mention the south side first to inform us that the hangings were 100 cubits long. The hangings opposite it to the north were of the same length. Later on, when the Torah describes the erection of the Tabernacle it also mentions the south side first  followed by the north side opposite it (compare 26,18 and 26,20 respectively). Here the Torah explains that the dimensions of the courtyard were 100 by 50 cubits. The outer fifty cubits of these 100 cubits length formed  the courtyard in front of the Tabernacle, whereas the inner (western) 50 cubits of that enclosure commenced at the level of the entrance of the Tabernacle so that it extended 20 cubits behind it. The width of the Tabernacle, i.e. the ten cubits were in the centre of the 50 cubits of the width of the courtyard so that there were 20 cubits of courtyard (width) on either side of the Tabernacle. (actually only 19 after allowing for the thickness of the beams forming the walls of the Tabernacle). At any rate, from the description provided in the text it is clear that it was the second half of the courtyard which “surrounded” the Tabernacle. In view of all this, it is easy to understand why the Torah first mentioned the south and the north to give us a clearer view of the length of the courtyard. When the Torah wanted to tell us the width of the courtyard it had to mention the fact that it extended in a western-easterly direction seeing that the entrance of the Tabernacle was in the middle of it. The unusual fact that the westerly direction is mentioned first is accounted for by the fact that three sides including the western side of the Tabernacle were surrounded by the hangings of the courtyard whereas the eastern end which was at least partially open was of a different character. Only the first 15 cubits on either side were an extension of the hangings of the long sides. The entrance gate to the courtyard was 20 cubits wide. When the Torah mentions all four sides of the courtyard and their hangings, it makes sense that seeing the eastern side was incomplete it should have been mentioned last, although generally speaking the Torah mentions east before west. The sequence followed by the Torah here is that first the two longest sides are mentioned followed by the western side which was still made up of an uninterrupted length of 50 cubits of these hangings, whereas the eastern side which had much shorter hangings on either the northern or the southern side was mentioned last. 
    Whenever the Torah lists the directions, the sequence is: east, west, north, south. One of the reasons why south is sometimes mentioned last is the fact that the south is relatively uninhabited due to its being very hot. The principle of listing the four major directions in a certain order is taken from Job 23, 8-9. We read there: “But if I go East- He is not there; West- I still do not perceive Him; North- since He is concealed I do not see Him; South-He is hidden and I cannot see Him.” Job mentioned south last for the aforementioned reason. In our verses here the fact that it was less likely to find whoever one is looking for in the sparsely inhabited south is irrelevant. We are assumed to be facing east unless the Torah mentions otherwise. [the encampments of the Israelites around the Tabernacle in Numbers on the other hand follows a circular pattern beginning with east, followed by south, followed by west ending with north. Ed.].Someone facing east has the south on his right. Seeing that in our instance it did not make sense to begin with the east seeing that the east was a broken sequence of hangings, the Torah mentioned south first. Once it had mentioned south, the opposite, i.e. north, follows next. This was logically followed by west as east had to be last.
    The true sequence of the directions in our terrestrial world differs from the sequence in the celestial regions. In the celestial regions the sequence is: south-north-west-east, whereas in our terrestrial world the customary sequence is east-west-north-south. I have already mentioned the subject of the sequence of this matter in connection with 26,28. The hangings discussed in our verses were sort of netting providing a kind of wall around the courtyard.
    
    
   ואתה תצוה
    
   שמן וקטרת ישמח לב ומתק רעהו מעצת נפש, “Oil and incense gladden the heart; the sweetness of a friend is better than one’s own counsel” (Proverbs 27,9). In this verse Solomon warns man to have pity on the stranger who has been exiled from his birthplace and from his homeland. Seeing that the Torah has already warned us on numerous occasions not to take unfair advantage of aliens neither with words nor with money, as is written in (Exodus 22,20 as well as 23,9), Solomon adds some additional dimension to this legislation. 
    When meeting people who have been uprooted from their homeland and families we owe such people that we 1) provide them with the physical requirements such as food, clothing and lodging, as well as 2) to help their mental state by treating them in a friendly manner. Solomon uses the verse preceding the one we have quoted to compare wandering birds to wandering, homeless strangers. A person who had to leave his home environment is compared to a bird which had to leave its nest. The simile of “oil and incense” used by Solomon in Proverbs refers to the physical sustenance we have to give to strangers, while the simile of “sweetness of a friend” represents the friendly attitude we are to display towards the stranger. This is to be augmented by friendly encouraging words on our part. One should not merely flatter the stranger by paying lip-service to these warnings but to be genuinely concerned about the stranger integrating in his new home. The words “better than one’s own counsel,” reflect Solomon’s comparison between physical sustenance and words of encouragement. He considers the latter as even more important than the former.
    Our sages in Ketuvot 111 state that he who “shows the white of his teeth” i.e. smiles at him, has done a better service (to the stranger) than the one who fed him milk to drink. The statement is based on Genesis 49,12: “his teeth are whiter than milk.” The sages play on these words, saying: “do not merely read them as ולבן שנים but as ולבון שנים, ‘and the white colour of teeth.’” This sentiment has been echoed by Isaiah 58,7 who compares fasting with performing loving deeds and says that sharing one’s bread with the hungry impresses the Lord more than the kind of piety such as fasting which is not accompanied by good deeds. In Isaiah’s opinion that verse reflects what Solomon meant by שמן וקטרת, supplying the needy with physical needs and comforts. Isaiah continues in the same chapter verse 10, saying: “and to offer your compassion to the hungry.” He meant that merely offering to alleviate his physical hunger is not enough. This is what Solomon meant when he spoke about מתק רעהו.
    A Midrashic approach to the words: “oil and incense gladden the heart.” The oil of the Menorah  was kindled, i.e. “offered” close to the time of the incense being offered as we know from 30,8: “and Aaron shall burn it at twilight when he lights the lamps- a regular incense offering before the Lord throughout the ages.” This is something which gladdens the heart of G’d. Our sages in Tanchuma Nasso 11 elaborate that just as the Torah mentioned G’d‘s joy (satisfaction) after He reviewed His handiwork as described in Psalms 104,31 “may the glory of the Lord endure forever; may He continue to rejoice in His works,” so He would rejoice when the Israelites perform the incense offering and the burning of the oil in the Menorah. Solomon described this joy of G’d in the words: “oil and incense gladden (His) heart.” We have learned repeatedly that the whole construction of the Tabernacle and all that belongs to it was considered by G’d as equivalent to a re-enactment of the work of creation on a minuscule scale. If G’d rejoiced on the occasion of the completion of His universe, He surely also rejoiced when the Tabernacle reflected all His instructions. Just as at the end of creation G’d created man in order to administer the earth on His behalf, so, at the end of the building of the Tabernacle, G’d appointed Aaron as High Priest, to perform all the tasks which were part of the service in the Tabernacle ensuring the uninterrupted functioning of this Sanctuary. 
    Seeing that the Shechinah was constantly residing over the Tabernacle as a result of the incense offering, Solomon referred to oil and incense in the verse we quoted at the opening of our commentary. You are also aware that the reason the incense offering is known as קטרת is that its fragrance attaches itself to the various attributes (character traits) and when these attributes rejoice this elevates the person offering the incense to an even higher spiritual level. Also, this joy increases further through the bounty of G’d which man (the inhabitants of earth) receives. The oil which was being offered at about the same time as the incense was made from olives seeing that the olive is the symbol of what provides light in our world. This is a mystical dimension of Genesis 8,11 that “when the dove returned to the ark it had a leaf of an olive tree in its beak.” This is the reason that only olive oil had to be used to burn in the lamps of the Menorah.
    
    27,20. ואתה תצוה את בני ישראל ויקחו אליך שמן זית זך כתית למאור להעלות נר תמיד, “As for you, you are to command the Children of Israel that they take for you pure, pressed olive oil for illumination, to kindle the lamp to burn constantly.” The words “they shall take for you,” mean that this instruction even applied immediately. It was necessary to write these words as we might have misunderstood, seeing that at the end of verse 21 this commandment is described as חקת עולם, “an ongoing statute,” not subject to change or relaxation. The Torah mentioned the words “olive oil” to exclude any other kind of oil. The reason the Torah specifies the grade of olive oil, i.e. זית זך, was to let us know it was to be from the first part of the oil extracted from the olives. The word כתית, pressed, was to tell us that the olives were to be squeezed, i.e. crushed, to extract the oil. Any oil which simply oozed out of the olives without their having been crushed first was not acceptable. The word למאור, “for illumination,” indicates that only for illumination did all the aforementioned restrictions apply. The olive oil used in the preparation of certain Minchah-offerings did not have to conform to similarly stringent conditions. The second category of oil, the one which is one grade below that of oil fit for the Tabernacle/Temple was good enough for the offerings. Normally, people who possess two different qualities of oil, use the inferior type for burning in lamps and the superior kind for their food. (Tanchuma Tetzaveh 6). In this instance, the Torah legislates exactly the reverse.
    A Midrash points out that the numerical value of the word כתית is 830, suggesting the combined number of years that the first and second Temples were standing, i.e. 410 and 420 years respectively, in that order. Strangely, that Midrash alludes only to the existence of two Temples. Why is there no reference to a third Temple? Perhaps the Midrash was concerned only with the Temples whose function was limited in time, whereas the third Temple which will endure indefinitely did not concern the author as the word כתית, another word for “destroyed,” most certainly would not apply to the third Temple. Perhaps the third Temple is alluded to in the word למאור, “as illumination,” seeing that the redemption and what follows have been characterised by the prophet Isaiah 60,1 as אור, light, when he wrote: “Arise, shine, for your light has dawned, etc.” There are more such verses such as Psalms 27,1: “G’d is my light and my salvation,” or Psalms 118,27: “the Lord is G’d and He lights up for me.” These verses are implied assurances that there will be a third Temple and that it will endure.
    The words להעלות נר, are sort of a headline. The word נר means “lamps” (pl.) just as when Yaakov told Esau that he had acquired שור וחמור  (Genesis 32,6) he did not mean that he had acquired only one of each, but that he had made acquisitions of these respective species of domestic animals. We find a similar use of the “singular” אשה, in Judges 21,16, where the words כי נשמדה מבנימין אשה do not mean that “a woman of the tribe of Benjamin had been killed,” but that ”all the women of Benjamin had been destroyed.” Similarly here; the Torah means that  there must never be a time when not at least a single light burns in the Tabernacle. Anyone who thinks in terms of the “eternal flame,” errs. An alternative meaning of the word נר תמיד could be that it is indeed a reference to what is known in Talmudic parlance as the נר מערבי,  the “western light,” the one lamp out of the seven on the Menorah which was kept burning around the clock and was never allowed to be out except when its wick or its oil were being replaced. It was the light in the centre of the Menorah, hence its name as the “western” light. All the other lamps faced either north or south, only this light pointed straight up.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Tetzaveh 2): the words להעלות נר תמיד are reminiscent of Job 14,15: “You would call and I would answer You; You would yearn for (the deeds of) Your handiwork;” for it is written (Isaiah 46,4) “I was the Maker, and I will be the Bearer; and I will carry and rescue you.” The meaning of our verse is that Moses is to command the sons of Kehat to carry the furnishings of the Tabernacle on their shoulders as we have read in Numbers 7,9. The service of these Levites reflects a response to what G’d had done for the Jewish people. Similarly, seeing that G’d provides man with food and all his needs, the priests by offering the sacrifices described by G’d as קרבני לחמי, “My offering, My bread,” reflect the appropriate response by man in recognition of what G’d had done for him. Seeing that G’d provides light for the entire universe, it is no more than fair that man, i.e. the High Priest, light the Menorah as an appropriate response. This is what Job meant when he described G’d as: “yearning for your deeds (the deeds of His creatures).” 
    G’d responded: “Do not think that My ‘yearning’ reflects My need for your deeds,” I certainly do not need light supplied by mortal human beings seeing it is I Who supplies light for the entire cosmos. My purpose in commanding these laws is to enable you to elevate yourselves and to acquire merits.” Furthermore, Rabbi Meir is quoted as saying that G’d says: “the lights which Aaron is kindling are very beloved of Me, more so even than the ones which I have set up in heaven.” The reason for this is that at the time when the princes offered their respective offerings at the inauguration of the Tabernacle the tribe of Levi had not been assigned participation in that procedure and Aaron felt quite saddened at this. G’d told him that he would be given the task of doing much more in the Tabernacle than the princes had done. They had offered an offering once, entering the holy precincts; Aaron, on the other hand, would be allowed to perform service in the Tabernacle every single day. This is the meaning of the verse in Psalms 10,17: “You have responded to the yearnings of the humble,” as well as the meaning of the words: “outside the dividing curtain in front of the Testimony he and his sons shall arrange them (the lights).” Thus  far the Midrash. This was also an allusion to the lights rekindled by the Hasmoneans in the Temple. If so, this accounts for the words “from evening to morning a permanent statute” in our paragraph applying both in the immediate present and in the distant future.
    
    28,2. לכבוד ולתפארת, “for glory and splendour.” According to the plain meaning of these words the meaning is that the wearers of these garments will be honoured and glorified by them. Seeing that in the eyes of even the distinguished individuals among the people the High Priest is considered like an angel of the Lord as far as his performing the sacrificial service is concerned, the Torah now commanded that his external appearance be comparable to that image which these people have of him by dressing him in garments reflecting his lofty assignment. The garments he was to wear were typical of Royal garments as we know from a number of verses in which these garments are associated with Royalty. Compare Samuel II 13,18: “she (David’s daughter the princess Tamar) was wearing an ornamented tunic מעיל, for maiden princesses were customarily dressed  in such garments.” The word כתונת תשבץ is reminiscent of the garment Yaakov had made for his favourite son Joseph which the Torah described as a כתונת פסים, The מצנפת is also known to us as a headgear worn by rulers such as in the Arab countries even in our own days.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words לכבוד ולתפארת describe the task Aaron and his sons are to perform when performing their duties in the Tabernacle. It is their task to reflect credit on the Jewish people in the eyes of the Lord when they perform their duties dressed in these garments. You are aware already that the Tabernacle on earth was a model of the Sanctuary of the future. Isaiah 64,10 referred to the Temple as בית קדשנו ותפארתנו, “the House of our sanctity and glory.” What he meant when referring to “our sanctity” was the honour, and by the word “our glory” he referred to the glory that is Israel. The same idea is expressed by King Amatziah in Amos 7,13: “for it is a king’s sanctuary and a royal palace.” [he forbade the prophet to prophesy in the temple at Bethel. Ed.] The reason that the word לכהנו in לכהנו לי is spelled with the letter ו at the end is to allude to the sixth emanation which is called תפארת. The word לי is equivalent to לה’, i.e. G’d’s attribute כבוד.
    
    28,3. ואתה תדבר אל כל חכמי לב, “and you shall speak to the wise-hearted people, etc.” The  word ועשו which appears close to the word חכמה hints that the making of these garments required an exceptional degree of wisdom meaning that they had to be made לשמם, i.e. the people making them had to remain constantly aware of the purpose of these garments and the function of the people who were to wear them. The Torah wrote the word ועשית, in addition to the word ועשו to underline how important the כוונה was which had to be present in the weavers, embroiderers, etc. You will note that this short paragraph contains the words לכהנו לי three times. Each time it would have sufficed for the Torah to write לכהן לי, “to be a priest for Me.” The three extra letters ו whose numerical value totals 18 is a veiled reminder of the 18 High Priests which served during the 410 years which the first Temple remained standing.
    
    28,4. ואלה הבגדים אשר יעשו, “These are the garments they are to make, etc.” Our sages in Erchin 16 say that just as the sacrifices themselves were instruments of atonement for the Jewish people, so the priestly garments (when worn at the right time in the right place by the right people)  were also instruments helping the Jewish people to achieve atonement. This is the reason that the section dealing with the priestly garments was written right next to the section dealing with the sacrifices themselves (the consecration offerings 29,18). The breastplate would atone for sins committed erroneously by judges, as is written: ועשית חושן משפט, “you are to make the breastplate of judgment” (verse 15). The ephod would secure atonement for the sin of idolatry committed inadvertently as we are reminded by Hoseah 3,4: “and there will be no ephod and no teraphim.” It is also written in Judges 8,27 that Gideon converted gifts of gold given to him into a garment called ephod, something that was accounted a sin for him [seeing he did not treat it as a garment but as a sort of monument. Ed.]. The robe called מעיל secured atonement for loose use of one’s tongue, לשון הרע; this is symbolised by the bells at the lower hem of that tunic, מעיל. This robe had a number of bells at the lower edge of which could be heard when the High Priest wearing it was approaching. Just as the evil tongue is something that was spread in public, so the atonement procedure was by means of a garment heard in public. When evil was spoken in private by someone, (who was unaware that he was guilty of unfair comments) the means of atonement for this was the incense. The checkered tunic, כתונת תשבץ, would secure atonement for blood spilled inadvertently. This has been alluded to in Genesis 36,31: “they dipped the tunic in blood.” This tunic resembled a type of shirt and was worn next to the skin (like a T-shirt with sleeves). It was embroidered with gold threads designed in a checkered manner so that it appeared to have “stripes” through it. This is what is meant by (28,39) “you shall make the tunic of a box-like knit of fine linen.” The word תשבץ is the same as משבצות זהב (compare Maimonides Hilchot Kley Hamikdash 9,19). The headgear worn by the High Priest, i.e. the מצנפת, would obtain forgiveness for haughty bearing and deportment. It was appropriate that something worn high on top of one’s head should be the symbol by means of which haughtiness could be atoned for. The אבנט, belt, would secure atonement for lewd fantasies and other sinful thoughts. Our sages in Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 7,3 claim that the length of this belt was 32 cubits (about 20 meters) The golden head band, ציץ, worn by the High Priest on his forehead would atone for effrontery. We have a verse in Jeremiah 3,3 describing effrontery as associated with the forehead. The prophet speaks of the “brazenness of a harlot,” using the word מצח to define brazenness. Aaron had a total of eight garments of which the Torah lists only six. The Torah did not mention his linen trousers as only the garments Moses was to dress him in qualified for this paragraph. The headband, being made of pure gold, is also not enumerated as one of the garments, as, strictly speaking, it was an ornament rather than a garment. The instruction for Aaron to wear linen pants was given only in verse 42 after Moses had already been instructed to dress him in his garments. Had Moses been meant to dress Aaron in his pants the instructions to dress Aaron would not have been written only at  the end of verse 42 The function of the pants as a means of securing atonement extended to sins of a sexual or incestuous nature as man is perceived as using his legs to run after chances to obtain sexual gratification.
    
    28,6. ועשו את האפוד, “they are to make the ephod.” In view of the fact that the Torah had already referred to this garment in verse 4, and again in verse 15, it is clear that the reason this garment is mentioned repeatedly (verses 4, 6 and 15) is that it was the most important of all the special garments of the High Priest. The breastplate was worn immediately beneath the ephod as an appendix to it, the ephod being the principal part of that combined garment. Seeing this was so, the Torah wrote about the making of the ephod before it wrote about the construction of the breastplate. At the time of the actual construction, the ephod is mentioned in verse 6, whereas the actual making of the breastplate is mentioned only in verse 15. If, nonetheless, in verse 4 the breastplate was mentioned first this was because the urim vetumim  were to be housed in part of that breastplate, and it was these which represented the “hot line” to G’d of the High Priest who could receive answers from the celestial regions to his inquiries by means of that device.
    It is well to remember that the three garments (breastplate, ephod and belt) were made of a mixture of linen and wool even though the Torah had specifically issued a prohibition to the Israelites to wear any garment which combined these two materials (Deut. 22,11). Priests (only during the time they performed service in the Temple) were exempt from this prohibition. This is why the Torah wrote specifically in connection with the ephod: “they shall make the ephod of gold, blue wool, purple and scarlet wool and twisted linen.” In connection with the breastplate in verse 15 the Torah describes the very same materials again and in the same sequence. In Exodus 39,29 the Torah describes the belt as being made of “twisted linen, blue wool, purple wool and scarlet wool” (no golden thread).
    The word תכלת describes wool dyed the colour of the sky; the word ארגמן describes wool dyed a purple colour, whereas the word תולעת שני describes wool dyed a scarlet colour. The expression שש  describes a kind of fabric made of linen. You should know that the ephod and breastplate contained five different kinds of materials whereas the פרוכת, the dividing curtain, contained four different kinds of materials. The pomegranate-like apples at the bottom of the robe contained three different kinds of materials. The breastplate of the ephod is described as containing: gold, blue wool, purple wool, scarlet coloured wool, and twisted linen (verse 15). Of the dividing curtain the Torah writes that it contained blue wool, purple wool, and scarlet coloured wool plus twisted linen (36,35). Of the pomegranates the Torah writes (39,24) that it contained blue wool, purple wool, and twisted scarlet coloured wool. No mention of linen is made in connection with the robe.
    Our sages in Yuma 71 say that wherever the Torah mentions the word שש in connection with garments the meaning is that the strand consisted of six threads of that material. If the word שש is followed by the word משזר, however, the Torah refers to strands of eight threads. If the word משזר occurs without the word שש in front such as in connection with the רמונים, the pomegranates of the robe, then the meaning is 12-threaded strands. These descriptions refer to the various threads of each material, so that you find that the dividing curtain was made of a total of 24-threaded of material, the breastplate and ephod of 28, seeing that the dividing curtain had four different kinds of materials each of which was described as שש and four times 6 equals 24. The robe, on the other hand, was constructed of a total of only 12-thread thick strands seeing it was comparable to the פרוכת (verse 31). On the one hand, it was made of only a single material, i.e. blue wool, seeing the Torah writes כליל; on the other hand, seeing the word כליל is understood to mean גדיל, a certain type of strand woven or spun out of a double thread, the robe would have 12 threads of blue wool per strand instead of the 6-threaded strands used with the dividing curtain. This is why the מעיל, the robe, had thicker strands consisting of 12 threads each. The breastplate and ephod which had yet another variety of material in addition to  any other garment had a total of 28-threaded strands. It is impossible to say that  the golden strand also consisted of six threads (so that it would have 30-threaded strands) as the expression וקצץ פתילים is mentioned in connection with it (39,3) and we know that the word פתיל refers to something only twofold, so that if it was folded over it would be four-fold. This gives us 4 varieties of six-threaded strands and one variety of a four-threaded strand for the materials used on the חשן האפוד.
    
    28,10. ששה משמותם, “six of their names, etc.,” according to how their father had named them, in the chronological order of the births. The verses teaches that the names of the tribes were to be inscribed in order of their births, i.e. Reuven, Shimon, Levi, Yehudah, Dan, Naftali. These six were to be inscribed on one of the two gemstones on the shoulder epaulette of the ephod; on the second gemstone the order was: Issachar, Zevulun, Gad, Asher, Joseph, Binyamin. These twelve names were engraved on the two shoham-stones seeing the Torah describes the work as that of a lapidary (engraver of gemstones) (Verse 11). When describing the names on these 2 stones the word במלואתם which we find in connection with the 12 gemstones on the breastplate is missing. On the other hand, the words מעשה חרש אבן do not appear in connection with the 12 stones of the breastplate. This was clear as it is a physical impossibility to describe stones which have been engraved by a lapidary as still being במלואתם, “in their original completeness,” i.e. no chips having been removed. The only way those stones could have been “engraved,” or rather “inscribed,” while retaining all their original mass was by means of the chemical secretion from the shamir worm which was skillfully applied to write the names in question. This is the reason our sages in Sotah 48 said that Moses needed the shamir worm at that time whereas he did not require it in connection with the stones on the shoulder-pads of the ephod.
    The workmanship of the ephod could be described as follows: its overall width was about the size of a grown man’s back extending from shoulder to shoulder. Its length extended from under the armpits to the legs; the two shoulder-pads were sewn onto it above. This is the meaning of the words שתי כתפות חוברות. The reason was so that it could be worn as suspended from the High Priest’s shoulder. On each shoulder-pad (strap) one of the two  square shoham-stones were recessed into a golden setting and each contained 6 of the 12 names of the tribes of Israel (compare Maimonides Kley Hamikdash 9,9). 
    
    28,15. ועשית חשן משפט מעשה חושב, “you shall make a breastplate of judgment of a woven design.” He would weave a cloth made of blue wool, purple wool, scarlet wool and linen. He would take one thread of gold and make a strand of the other six-threaded strands of materials so that each would have a seventh golden thread. This is the meaning of the words: תכלת וארגמן ותולעת שני ושש, (compare Maimonides Kley Hamikdash 9, 5-6). This is based on the words וירקעו את פחי הזהב וקצץ פתילים לעשות בתוך התכלת ובתוך הארגמן וגו', “they hammered out sheets of gold and cut threads to be worked into designs among the blue, the purple,” etc. (39,3). This teaches that the golden thread was folded over amongst the other materials, like a double thread.
    The length of the breastplate was 2 zeratot, (22 cm approx), its width 1 eret. It was folded over so that it would look square from the front. There were four rows of three gemstones on it, each gemstone being square. The names of the tribes were “inscribed chemically” each tribe’s name in accordance with the colour gemstone reflecting its individuality. Reuven’s name was inscribed on the stone called אודם, Shimon’s on a stone called פטדה, etc., etc. In addition to the names of the twelve tribes the names of the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov were also inscribed plus the words שבטי ישורון. These additional words were distributed between the various stones so that, for instance, the stone אודם with the name Reuven had an additional letter א as part of the name אברהם, whereas the stone פטדה which had the name שמעון inscribed on it also had a letter ב added as the second letter in the name אברהם, and so on. A stone with a short name such as גד, for instance, had the word שבטי of שבטי ישורון added seeing that there was enough space for this. The stone with the name אשר had in addition the letters ישר of the word ישורון inscribed on it, whereas the stone with the name יוסף had the last three letters of the word ישורון inscribed on it also, so that each stone had a total of six letters making an overall total of 72 letters. These 72 letters corresponded to the great name of the tetragram when it is spelled in all its 24 permutations. The six days of creation comprised a total of 72 hours of daylight, the number of hours during which the universe and all that is in was created (no creation took place at night.). We know this as the Torah speaks of ביום עשות ה' אלו-הים ארץ ושמים (Genesis 2,4), “on the ‘day’ Lord G’d made earth and heaven.” This number 72 has also been alluded to in Psalms 89,3 where David speaks about the world having been built on the attribute חסד, loving kindness. The numerical value of the word חסד is also 72. We infer from these verses that the world which has been created in 72 hours of creative activity by G’d is maintained due to the merit of the twelve tribes of Israel, i.e. the 72 letters inscribed in the breastplate of the high Priest.
    It is remarkable that the stone with the name בנימין which was spelled plene, i.e. with two letters י (as opposed  to Exodus 1,3 or Genesis 42,38 et al) where there is no letter י before the final letter ן filled out its stone seeing his name had six letters. It was therefore impossible to add a letter from the patriarchs’ names on his stone. The reason that this was so may be connected to a historical occurrence in the time of the Judges when the tribe came close to extinction, only 600 young men surviving after the civil war described in Judges 20-21. Had his name not been spelled with six letters on the breastplate, even the six hundred young men who survived might not have done so.
    Scientific books claim that the basic number of gemstones, (not allowing for variants, mutations) are only 12 in number, so that they were all represented on the breastplate of the High Priest. They may be considered as the “patriarchs” of all other precious stones. The reason that the gemstone assigned to the tribe of Reuven was the אודם was the fact that it symbolised the blush on his face when he owned up to being guilty of his misdemeanour in Bilhah’s tent. The fact that he was not ashamed to admit his guilt is a credit to him reflected by this red-coloured stone known as “rubin.” It is supposedly found in certain areas at the bottom of the sea. It is chipped of a great rock beneath the sea, and is mined similar to silver and gold. The rock is known as Balax. Rubin and Balax are supposedly two names for the same kind of stone. The difference between them is only that the variety known as rubin is reddish looking. Onkelos also translates the word אודם as סמקן, a red stone. It is the choicest of a number of sub-categories of the same basic kind of precious stone. Seeing it is red, an essential colour reminding us of blood, it is reputed to have the power to protect a woman who wears this jewel against ever aborting any fetus she carries. Women who wear jewelry made from this stone will give birth to babies that have been growing in their wombs for the full nine months. The stone is even supposed to have positive effects upon women who are having a difficult delivery. If this stone will be crushed into powder and consumed with food and drink it displays properties similar to those of the דודאים (mandrakes?), the plant which Leah “sold” Rachel in order to help her achieve pregnancy (compare author’s comment on Genesis 30,14). The shape of those dudaim which Reuven had found at the time was the outline of a human being. This is the reason that the word אודם, normally spelled with the letter ו was spelled without that letter in order to draw our attention to the spelling which could be read “Adam,”אדם . The reading of the word teaches the nature of the stone, whereas the spelling teaches the effect of that stone, its function.
    Shimon’s stone פטדה, is a greenish-looking gemstone, similar to the turquoise colour of the sea in certain coastal cities. Onkelos also translates it as ירקן (emerald?). It is of the same group as the gemstone נפך, the stone with the name of Yehudah inscribed on it. Both are of similar colour, except that the stone described as נפך is the more precious of its group. It sparkles very much. The פטדה is inferior to the נפך both in colour and in sparkle. The greenish colour symbolises the terrible sexual licentiousness  committed by that tribe who had caused the face of their leader Zimri to turn green in shame. (Numbers 28,14). The same happened to all the other members of the tribe of Shimon who took part in that sin at that time. Darkon, dropsy, was the illness from which these people died. The positive feature of that gemstone is that it cools the body. This may be the reason it is found in hot countries such as Nubia (the Sudan). The people in that country are especially steeped in sexual licentiousness. They need to “cool off” in order to counteract their tendencies. This is why we read in Job 28,19 “topaz from Nubia cannot match its value (that of rubies).” The reason Job made this comparison was because these stones were found in Nubia.
    The stone which bore the name of Levi was the ברקת, known popularly as carbuncle (a rounded gemstone without facets). It is  so called as it flashes just like a bolt of lightning, ברק. It illuminates like a lamp. Onkelos also translates it as ברקן, a flashing stone. This was the gemstone Noach hung in the ark to provide him with light. The Torah referred to this light in Genesis 6,15 צהר תעשה לתבה. Isaiah refers to it as אקדח, in Isaiah 54,12 where, speaking of the future of Israel he writes: ”I will make your battlements rubies and your gates of precious stones, i.e. לאבני אקדח.” The name is justified as it appears glowing like red-hot coals. A similar expression occurs also in Isaiah 50,11: “kindlers of fire.” The reason this stone was chosen to symbolise Levi was that the Levites illuminate the people by teaching them spiritual illumination, i.e. Torah, as we know from Deut. 33,10 יורו משפטיך ליעקב ותורתך לישראל, “they teach Your judgments to Yaakov and Your Torah to Israel.” We also know of Moses, who was of the tribe of Levi, that the whole house was filled with light when he was born as the Midrash (Shemot Rabbah 1,24) interpreted the words in Exodus there (Exodus 2,2) that “she (his mother) saw that he was good.” Furthermore, when Moses returned from Mount Sinai with the second sets of Tablets the Torah testified that the skin of his face emitted rays of light (Exodus 34,29). We have another verse (Kohelet 8,1) “a man’s wisdom lights up his face.” The positive value of this gemstone is that it is apt to enlighten the foolish, providing him with insights he never had. This is in addition to the general usefulness of that jewel in providing light just as does a lamp. People say that if one pounds this carbuncle into fine dust and mixes it with food or drink as one mixes certain medicinal herbs into the food it proves very capable of providing wisdom and opening up previously “closed” hearts.
    Yehudah’s name was inscribed on the gemstone called נפך as we mentioned already. This jewel is known either as merkedy or zemurah in Arabic. Onkelos’ translation azmoragdin, (emerald) can support either one of these names. He chose a combination of these two words. As already mentioned, it is a greenish stone of high lustre and represented his shame-facedness in accusing his daughter-in-law Tamar’s pregnancy as being the result of harlotry when he himself had fathered the child she was carrying (Genesis 38,26). Seeing that he overcame his embarrassment and made a public confession of his own involvement, this stone, i.e. its colour, was chosen as appropriate for him. In addition he also had had to bear the shame, i.e. his face turning green, in the matter of having sold Joseph and his father suspecting him of this though the matter had never been spoken of. When Yaakov blessed Yehudah on his deathbed saying: “from the prey, my son, you elevated yourself,” he wanted him to know that he suspected him of having been involved in the deception which had made Yaakov call out in anguish: “a wild beast has torn Joseph to shreds (Genesis 37,33).” When hearing his father say that he considered Yehudah as having elevated himself, i.e. having exonerated himself from that guilt, his face was restored to its original colour after all these years. It then resembled the appearance of the emerald giving off a sparkle. It is also written of Yehudah (Genesis 49,8) “your hand is at the neck of your enemy,” and the outstanding feature of the gemstone emerald is that people wearing it experience that their enemies turn their neck towards them, i.e. that they attempt to flee. This is the reason this jewel is known as נפך. The Bible comments on Yehudah’s bravery in battle more than once, and it is written of David (Samuel I 18,7) that he defeated his enemies in their tens of thousands, Of the messiah it is written: (Isaiah 11,4) “with the spirit (breath) of his mouth  he will kill the wicked.” 
    Issachar’s name was inscribed on a jewel called ספיר, sapphire, a jewel known as sephily of a blue colour. It had been assigned to Issachar because he was extremely wise and his tribe excelled in Torah knowledge. This has been attested to in Chronicles I 12,32. We have a tradition that the Tablets with the Ten Commandments were made of sapphire (Tanchuma  Ki Tissa 26). We also find another reference to this jewel in Exodus 24,10 where the vision of G’d seen by the elders and the nobles is described as their observing with their mental eyes the appearance of bricks made of sapphire. It is a well known fact that the souls of Torah scholars are part of a whole bundle of souls beneath the throne of G’d’s attribute כבוד. This is derived from Ezekiel 1,26: “as the semblance of a throne, in appearance like sapphire.” The blue colour of this jewel is not like the blue which denotes haughtiness similar to certain shades of red or green; on the contrary, it is a colour symbolising humility, modesty, a character trait equally becoming to both young and old. This is what Isaiah 57,15 meant when he wrote: “I dwell on high, in holiness; yet with the contrite and lowly in spirit.” The outstanding feature of this jewel is that it is good for one’s eyesight; this is the reason people have a habit of passing this jewel back and forth in front of their eyes. It was appropriate for Issachar as Torah also provides enlightenment. There is a popular saying that this jewel is useful in getting rid of all manner of pains and any swelling one experiences in any part of one’s body. The Torah too is a powerful remedy for all parts of the body. We have been told in Eyruvin 54 that if someone suffers from headaches the best remedy is to immerse oneself in the study of Torah.
    The name of Zevulun was inscribed on the gemstone known as יהלום, diamond. This gemstone is known as pirle, same as bedolach. It is clear, transparent. It is to remind us of “white” silver, an allusion to the material wealth of the tribe of Zevulun. We know from Yaakov’s blessing of Zevulun in Genesis 49,13 that he was a great trader sending his ships far afield in order to bring home wealth from foreign lands. It was appropriate therefore that the stone bearing his name was the diamond. The special property of the diamond for man is that it helps one to go to sleep, something Leah referred to when she (the mother of Zevulun) said after he was born: “this time my husband will make his permanent home with me” (Genesis 30,20). [I believe what the author meant was  that possession of diamonds allows people to sleep easy as they feel emotionally and economically secure. Ed.]
    The name of the tribe of Dan was inscribed on a gemstone called לשם, known as opal, or ashtefassis. It shows a human face turned upside down, reminiscent of the time when the tribe of Dan attempted to reverse the norms of Judaism by appointing for themselves a non-Levite as religious leader (compare Judges 18,31). We find in Joshua 19,47 that a certain town previously called Leshem was renamed Dan in commemoration of the founding father of that tribe. This city became an integral part of the land of Israel.
    The name of the tribe of Naftali was inscribed on a jewel known as שבו, agate. It is commonly known as turquoise. [the various names which I have spelled in italics appear to be the equivalents of these gems’ names in Spanish or old French during the time of the author. Ed.] Onkelos also translates it as טרקיא. The special property ascribed to that gemstone was that it “pulls” man while  riding in carriages or riding horses and enables him to become successful as a driver or rider. This occurs through man and beast developing mutual affinity for each other while man sits in the saddle. It was appropriate for Naftali to be associated with this gemstone as at the time he was born his step-mother Rachel had said that she had prevailed in a struggle with the attribute of Justice and her sister and as a result her handmaid had born this son for her. Rachel also had to use all her abilities (she thought) in order to have a son at least through her handmaid (compare Genesis 30,8).
    The gemstone bearing the name of Gad was the אחלמה, popularly known as crystal. This is why Onkelos translates the word as עין עגלא. A better known gemstone called lemon is similar to it but reddish in appearance. The reason this gemstone was used to symbolise Gad was that seeing the gemstone crystal is very common and everyone is familiar with it, the members of the tribe of Gad were also widely known as were the people who had been slain by this tribe in the wars of Israel against the Canaanites. This is the meaning of Deut. 33,20 וטרף זרעו קדקד , “tearing off arm, and even head.” The special property of this gemstone is that it reinforces the resolve of one’s heart when going to war and prevents one from becoming faint-hearted. The gemstone gives man strength. It is called אחלמה, as that word is connected to מלחמה, attributes needed to be successful in battle. The expression occurs in that sense in Isaiah 38,16: ותחלימני ותחיני, “You have restored me to health and have revived me.” The idea is that G’d made King Chiskiyah strong again. Another verse with a similar message is Job 39,4 where G’d speaks to Job about the health of the hinds, etc., saying יחלמו בניהם ירבו בבר, “their young are healthy (strong) able to grow up in the open fields.”
    The gemstone on which the name of the tribe of Asher was inscribed is called תרשיש, better known as cariolica, topaz, chrysolite. Its colour is close to that of oil (olive oil). Others say that its colour is azure-blue (compare Kimchi). Onkelos translates it as כרום ימא, aquamarine. The reason is that the colour of the sea resembles that of azure-blue. The name Tarshish appears also as a destination in the ship hired by the prophet Jonah, presumably because these gems could be found in that country. The special property of this topaz is to facilitate in the digestion of foods. It is even more important if one first pulverises it and mixes the powder into one’s food. It will then make a mass similar to a mixture of flour and oil. The Torah extols Asher’s land portion within the land of Israel as being particularly full of oil, i.e. rich soil as we know from Yaakov’s blessing in Genesis 49,20.
    The gemstone bearing the name of the tribe of Joseph was called שהם, better known as onyx. The special property of this jewel is that its owners enjoy favour in the eyes of people. The letters in that stone also spell השם when read in a different order. This is an allusion to the verse in Genesis 39,2: “G’d was with Joseph and he became a successful man;” or, Genesis 39,24 “G’d made the warden of the prison like Joseph, etc.” Anyone who wears the jewel in the king’s palace will find that he becomes very successful and that his suggestions will be well received.
    The name of the gemstone on which Binyamin’s name was inscribed was ישפה, better known as jasper. It is a multi-coloured gem consisting of red, black, green. Binyamin had many contradictory thoughts about the sale of Joseph by his brothers, all of which are reflected in the different colours of the jasper. The special property of that stone is that it stops the flow of blood. The reason this gemstone was assigned to the tribe of Binyamin had to do with the founder of that tribe not being able to decide if to tell his father that Joseph was most likely alive, or to keep silent as he could not foresee how Yaakov would react to such information. In the end he controlled himself, stopped himself, and did not reveal what he knew. The word ישפה may be understood as two words, i.e. יש פה, “he has a mouth,” or words to that effect. The name of that stone alludes to the fact hat Binyamin deserved credit for keeping silent about what he knew his brothers had done to his older brother Joseph.
    This completes the discussion about the twelve gemstones on the breastplate of the High Priest. All the details connected with the stones, the breastplate, the inscriptions, etc., are part and parcel of the detailed supervision G’d exercises over the fate of the Jewish people in all its aspects.
    I have seen in a book by Aristotle devoted to stones that the stones require the wearer of them to be pure in order for each of them to effectively carry out its special function, the properties we have listed above. If the wearer is ritually impure, they either lose their power altogether as far as he is concerned, or their power is greatly reduced. As soon as the wearer undergoes purification rites, the gemstone around his neck will recover its power. It is perfectly in order to accept what Aristotle says as there is no gemstone which does not contain some power given to it by celestial sources. Just as we have been taught in Bereshit Rabbah 10,7 that there is no herb on earth which does not have its counterpart in the celestial regions providing it with its individual mazzal, so the same is true of the precious stones. Having carefully absorbed what we have written about the gemstones in the garments of the High Priest you will note that he was surrounded by the names of the tribes of Israel both in front and behind, seeing these names were inscribed both on the breastplate and on the shoulder pieces of the ephod. [I suppose the fact that the ephod was closed from behind makes the whole garment appear as if it were worn on the back. Ed.]  Whenever the High Priest put on his special vestments, he would put on the ephod and the breastplate at the same time, seeing that they were joined together and the Torah had instructed (verse 28) that the breastplate not be detached from the ephod. The band (belt) was tied together under the High Priest’s heart. The two shoulder-straps were inserted in the two rings at the upper end of the breastplate and two threads of blue wool cord were fed to beneath his armpits from the rings at the lower ends of the shoulder straps of the ephod.
    
    28,20. משובצים זהב יהיו במלואותם, “set in gold they shall be in their mountings.” The meaning of the words is that the stones should remain whole, in their golden settings. The principal instruction of this verse is that the stones should be on top of the gold and the inscriptions on top of the stones. There were a total of 72 letters corresponding to the 72 (lettered) name of Hashem (as pointed out at the beginning of verse 15). This reflects a great spiritual awakening reminding people of the great value of Torah which supersedes even all the accumulated gemstones found on the breastplate of the High Priest. By placing the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, i.e. the letters of the Torah, above the gemstones, and the gemstones above the golden mountings, the point that Torah values are supreme was made for all to see. The gold was the basis of the gemstones and the gemstones in turn were the basis of the letters of the Torah. Without the letters inscribed on top of the gemstones the gemstones and the gold would not have been of much significance. The significance of the letters lay in the fact that it was these which  G’d employed in order to create this universe.
    28,30. ונתת אל חושן המשפט את האורים ואת התומים , “you are to place within the breastplate the Urim and the Tumim, etc.” The Torah introduces both the Urim and the Tumim with the letter ה in front as if we were dealing with known phenomena whereas in fact they have never been mentioned before. They had never been mentioned as being either part of the furnishings of the Tabernacle or as being part of the priestly vestments. Seeing that later on when the various furnishings and vestments are being described as having been made, we never read of ויעש את האורים ואת התומים, “he made the Urim and the Tumim,” it is clear that they were not something fashioned by craftsmen. They were something fashioned directly by celestial input. This is the reason they were introduced as a known quantity, something which had been in existence already. We observe something parallel in Genesis 3,24 when the Torah reports וישכן מקדם לגן עדן את הכרובים, “He positioned east of Gan Eden the cherubs, etc.” We had never been told of the existence of cherubs. There too the letter ה in front of the word כרובים taught us that such cherubs had already existed though we did not know of them seeing they had come from an extra-terrestrial domain.
    The fact is that the words Urim ve-Tumim are the description of the names of holy beings by means of whom the High Priest was able to divine certain events in the future and to announce them to the people who had inquired about them. The two names Urim, Tumim, represent two different parts of such divine messages. The first refers to the lighting up of letters on the breastplate which were visible to the High Priest and enabled him to place the respective letters into sequences which formed an intelligible message. The flashing of the respective letters on the breastplate was called Urim, whereas the combining of these letters into an intelligent message by properly arranging the letters in question was called Tumim. [from the words אור, light, and תמים, perfect, whole. Ed.] The holy name of the Lord was written on a parchment the High Priest folded underneath the breastplate so that the parchment was covered by the stones above and the fabric underneath. Moses placed the parchment inside the breastplate only after he had dressed Aaron in his vestments. This is the meaning of  the verse in Leviticus 8,8: “He placed upon him the breastplate and he put inside the breastplate “the Urim and the Tumim.”
    It was one of a number of levels of divine revelations such as  Ruach hakodesh, Holy Spirit, which is considered a higher level than the revelation called Bat kol, “heavenly echo.” The communications received by the High Priest by means of the Urim ve-Tumim ranked below that called Nevuah, prophecy. We have been told in Berachot 4, that the reason the Urim and Tumim were called by these names is that the first word, i.e. Urim refers to their ability to convey what they had to say by means of light, i.e. the flashing of the letters we mentioned. The word Tumim, on the other hand, means that they would bring their message to an intelligible conclusion, i.e. their predictions would come true. These two phenomena were also known as כרתי ופלתי as we know from Samuel II 20,23, the names suggesting that the answers given to questions directed to these High Priests equipped with the breastplate were clear and unmistakable. When someone asked the High Priest concerning a future event and he received an answer based on the pronouncement of the Urim and Tumim as interpreted by the High Priest he would find that the event forecast would indeed occur. The High Priest would stand with his face towards the Holy Ark when referring the petitioner’s question to G’d for an answer. The person making the inquiry would stand behind the High Priest. He would not phrase his question or inquiry in a loud voice but would speak like people who engage in prayer not expecting anyone near them to hear the details of their prayer. Immediately after the petitioner had uttered his request the High Priest would be granted a measure of Holy Spirit and he would look at the breastplate and he would see the prophetic message flash on the breastplate’s letters, (such as עלה or לא תעלה in the event that the king had inquired if to engage in a certain war and if he would be successful.) The only people entitled to use this facility were the King or the community as a whole as has been pointed out in Yuma 71.
    
    28,31. ועשית את מעיל האפוד, You are to make the robe for the ephod.” The wording of the text teaches that the robe was attached to the ephod. Rashi also wrote that the ephod was placed over the robe much like a belt.
   כליל תכלת, “entirely of blue wool.” This teaches that the robe was made completely of blue without any other colour being mixed into its fabric. Its shape was similar to a garment known as גלימה, i.e. mantle, or cloak. Its top had a circular opening so that it was not buttoned along its front in order to close and open it. (it was slipped overhead when putting it on or taking it off). It had two wing-like flaps which the High Priest could open or close as he liked. At his hem, all around the hem there were 72 pomegranate shaped woolen balls made of blue purple and scarlet red wool, 36 on either side of the wings we mentioned. These pomegranates were hollow containing 72 bells with tongs and clappers. This is what our sages explained in Zevachim 88. According to this interpretation [which differs radically from Rashi, who holds that the pomegranates and the bells alternated. Ed.]  the wordsפעמון ורמון, פעמון ורמון  have to be understood as meaning “each bell was concealed within the pomegranate.”
    
    28,32. והיה פי ראשו בתוכו,“and its head-opening shall be folded over within;” it appears to me that when the sages explained in Zevachim 88 that “let something involving sound be the instrument of atoning for a sin committed involving sound,” they had in mind such sins as evil gossip, lies, refusal to honour verbal undertakings, etc. This is why the wording of the Torah in describing the “collar” of the robe as והיה פי ראשו בתוכו sounds so stilted. The wording contains a hint that what a person says should reflect what is in his heart. His pronouncements should not be at variance with his true feelings and intent. The lips which form the frame of his mouth should have prevented him from abusing the power of speech; whereas instead of doing so the sinner made his mouth a מעשה אורג, “weaver’s work,” i.e. he fabricated all kinds of embellishments to the truth. The words כפי תחרא, “like the opening of a coat of mail,” also hint at the manner in which the sinner used the mouth to reinforce his lies, just as the armor of the knights of old consisted of overlapping pieces of metal to allow both for protection and flexibility. The robe was designed to atone for the kinds of sin which estrange the sinner to his G’d. Concerning such people David said in Psalm 101,7: ”he who speaks untruths shall not stand before My eyes.”
    
    28,35. ונשמע קולו בבואו אל הקדש, “and its sound will be heard when he enters the holy precincts.” When Aaron enters the Sanctuary dressed in his eight special vestments his voice in prayer will be heard by G’d and his prayers will be accepted. In addition to the sound of his voice in prayer there will also be heard the sound of the bells at the hem of his robe. This little verse is a lesson in manners. When a person wishes to receive an audience he first knocks on the door of the king or prefect from whom he requests the audience. Aaron (the High Priest) would announce his intention to pray by means of the chiming of the bells at the hem of his robe. What is customary as a sign of deference to a mortal king must also be observed when one petitions the King of Kings. When one arrives unannounced in a mortal king’s palace, enters without preamble, one incurs the death penalty. Similarly, when the High Priest enters G’d’s Sanctuary it behooves him to give notice of his intention to enter. The matter is best illustrated in Esther 4,11 from where we know that King Ahasversus looked with great suspicion on anyone who came unannounced, and, generally speaking, he had such persons executed as he thought they were bent on harming him. Even though G’d, of course, is fully aware of the intentions of the “intruder,” the same rules of etiquette apply in the Sanctuary.
    Another reason why the High Priest “gave notice” in this manner of his intention to enter the Sanctuary was to ensure that none of the angels would at that time interfere with his prayer, i.e. interpose themselves between him and G’d. Had he entered unannounced this could have happened. He himself might even have been harmed by the angels who were unaware of his intentions. 
    Actually, the sound of the bells was not meant to give warning either to the Shechinah or to the angels that the High Priest was approaching. it was intended to warn the angels that the approaching High Priest desired to have privacy during his audience with the Shechinah. Additionally, it was meant to head off any chance that some angel would harm him as an unwanted intruder (as happened to Nadav and Avihu). The same sound of these bells chiming when the High Priest had completed his audience in the Sanctuary served the angels notice that they could again resume their customary positions inside the Sanctuary. When the Torah writes the words ולא ימות, “so that he will not die,” at the end of our verse, this was a warning that if the High Priest were to enter the Sanctuary without the bells on his robe being audible, the attendants around the Shechinah would kill him as an intruder. This matter is elaborated on in Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 1,5 and quoted by Nachmanides in connection with Leviticus 16,17: “that no person (אדם) should be in the Tent of Testimony,” that this wording includes even the angels which were described in Ezekiel’s vision as having a ”human face” (Ezekiel 1,10). This is why the High Priest was instructed to make certain that his approach would be heard by means of the bells in the hem of his robe chiming. The idea is reflected in Psalms 55,15 “sweet was our fellowship; together we walked in G’d’s house when there is turmoil.” What we have described applied during all the days of the year when the High Priest entered the Sanctuary; it did not apply on the Day of Atonement when he entered the Holy of Holies, as on that day he was not allowed to wear the “golden garments” when inside the Sanctuary. 
    We are told in Shemot Rabbah 38,8 in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi that the reason the names of the twelve tribes were inscribed on the breastplate can be understood by means of  a parable. A king’s son had a tutor, a pedagogue. He went to the king to intercede on behalf of his pupil the prince. He was concerned lest the various officials attending the king might utter some negative comment concerning the prince while he was engaged in defending him. What did the tutor do? He dressed himself in his most impressive uniform, an attire designed to cause respect and awe in those who would see him wearing it. In a similar manner, Aaron would enter the Sanctuary to intercede with G’d on behalf of the Jewish people dressed in the kind of garments which would be sure to keep unwelcome listeners away. If he had not had many merits he could not have survived such an encounter. By wearing the breastplate with the names of the twelve tribes (and the names of the patriarchs) inscribed on them he felt sure that whatever personal merit he might lack would be made up for by a reminder of the accumulated merits of the patriarchs and Yaakov’s sons. G’d enabled him to neutralise any attacks by the angels upon him through providing him with these priestly vestments and giving him a holy appearance. This is alluded to in Isaiah 59,17: He ”wrapped Himself in zeal as in a robe.” Thus far Midrash Rabbah. [this parable raises more questions than it solves. 1) the High Priest was not allowed to enter the Holy of Holies at will (Leviticus 16,2). He could only enter on the Day of Atonement during certain times of the day. 2) on that day he wore only white linen garments when inside the Sanctuary (Leviticus 16,4). Ed.]
    
    28,36. ועשית ציץ זהב טהור, “you are to make a head-plate of pure gold.” The head-plate was made as follows: Betzalel took a flat strip of gold two fingers wide which would be worn around Aaron’s forehead from ear to ear and on which were inscribed the words קדש לה', “holy unto the Lord.” The word קדש was written on the lower line, the word לי-ה-ו-ה on the upper line. The letters in these words were protruding. (Maimonides Kley Hamikdash 9,1-2 explains the technique used). The two ends of the ציץ were pierced so that below the holes a strand of blue wool would be fastened which in turn would be tied behind the High Priest’s neck.
    According to the view of Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet (Raa’vad ) the inscription on the lower line was קדש ל so that only the name of the Lord i.e. י-ה-ו-ה was inscribed on the upper line. That letter ל was at the end of the upper line whereas the name of the Lord appeared at the beginning of the lower line near the end at the right. The reason Maimonides calls the upper line “lower” and the lower line “upper,” is because he considered what is at the end of the line as “lower,” and what is at the beginning of the line as “upper.” (At any rate, according to Rabbi Shlomoh Aderet’s interpretation the words קדש לה' could be read sequentially in the normal order, and not as the impression first created by the words of Maimonides.
    The ציץ, head-plate, was also considered as one of the eight vestments of the High Priest. However, strictly speaking, it was not a garment but a decoration, a kind of jewelry. If our sages always speak about eight vestments which the High Priest would adorn himself in, they simply included this adornment with the other seven which are garments in the true sense of the words. The other seven garments symbolised the seven heavens; I will explain this in greater detail at the end of Parshat Tzav (Leviticus 8,7). The golden head-plate represented the highest of all the heavens. The very words inscribed on the head-plate are an allusion to the principle that the glory of the princess is best seen by the fact that she stays out of the limelight, as Psalms 45,14 phrased it כל כבודה בת מלך פנימה ממשבצות זהב לבושה, “the royal princess, her dress embroidered with golden mountings, (is led inside to the king.”) The chamber (heaven) referred to is the tenth, innermost. This is why the ציץ was made of pure gold and why it was appropriately inscribed with the words קדש לה'. This is also the meaning of the words פתוחי חותם קדש לה', “engraved like a signet ring ‘holy unto the Lord.’” The Torah writes in verse 38 that the ציץ is to be worn on Aaron’s forehead, and that it is to be on his forehead תמיד “always.” How are we to understand the latter word “always?” The word refers to the periods during which the High Priests fulfills his specific functions in the Temple or within the holy precincts. As you are already aware the High Priest served as a symbol and so did his vestments while he wore them during the performance of his duties. This is the reason why the Torah wrote the word לזכרון, “as a remembrance,” i.e. as a symbol, in connection with the gemstones on the ephod and with the gemstones on the breastplate (compare verse 12 and verse  29). The word לזכרון is very close in meaning to the word לדוגמה, “as an example, a model, a symbol.” The word ציץ itself is reminiscent of Song of Songs 2,9 מציץ מן החרכים, “He was peering through the lattices.” Aaron’s inspiration came from the Shechinah which peered through the lattices (shuttered windows of the highest heaven) observing him performing his functions. The word is related to ויצץ ציץ, “it sprouted a bud,” i.e. the topmost part of the fruit. Wherever the word occurs it alludes to the highest of something. Just as this particular ornament symbolised the highest emanation, the highest attribute of G’d, so all the vestments  symbolised something of that nature. 
    28,43. והיו על אהרן ועל בניו, “and they shall be (worn) by Aaron and his sons, etc.” The meaning of the verse is that Aaron should wear the eight priestly garments mentioned since the beginning of our portion. They are: the breastplate and ephod, the robe, the chequered tunic, the turban, and the belt, the head-plate and the linen trousers. His sons are to wear four priestly garments when performing their part of the service. This is the meaning of the words: “so that they shall not bear guilt and die.” A High Priest performing the service with fewer than eight priestly garments, or an ordinary priest performing the service with fewer than four priestly garments commits a capital sin. He is called in Talmudic parlance מחוסר בגדים, “devoid of clothing,” his service is null and void, and he is guilty of death at the hands of heaven just as a non-priest who undertook to perform service in the Temple/Tabernacle (compare Sanhedrin 83). This is based on 29,9: “You shall girdle them with a sash,- Aaron and his sons- and you shall wrap the headdresses on them. The priesthood shall be an eternal duty for them.” At the time when they wear the garments the priesthood is part of them. At times when they do not wear these garments their priesthood is not part of them, and they are no better than non-priests. Of non-priests performing service in the Temple the Torah has written והזר הקרב יומת, “and the non-priest who approaches (to do service) shall be killed” (Numbers 18,7).
   חקת עולם לו ולזרעו עד עולם, “an eternal statute for him and his descendants forever.” The statute that the High Priest wear the eight priestly garments at the time he performs the service is an eternally valid statute; similarly, an ordinary priest must wear four priestly garments whenever he performs the priestly duties assigned to him. They are: linen trousers, a tunic, a cap-like headgear, and a belt. The ordinary priests who performed service on a daily basis experienced a great miracle. Although the only garment covering their bodies was the tunic, i.e. a shirt, and they were exposed to rain and cold, they did not die from exposure. This is why our sages (Shekalim 5,1) said that they used to appoint one of the priests whose duty it was to visit sick priests and to heal them from intestinal disorders seeing that this was an occupational disease suffered by many of the priests. Moreover, the fact that they had to perform their service barefoot standing and walking on cold stone floors contributed to their suffering these diseases. (According to Jerusalem Talmud Shekalim 5,1 a contributing factor was the consumption of much meat and the drinking of water (instead of wine? Ed.)
    
    29,1. וזה הדבר אשר תעשה להם, “This is the matter that you shall do for them:” Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write: זה אשר תעשה להם, just as the Torah wrote in verse 38: וזה אשר תעשה על המזבח, where the word הדבר does not appear. The reason the word הדבר has been added in our verse is that seeing this paragraph introduces the whole subject of sacrificial offerings and there will be times when such offerings cannot be brought due to the absence of the Temple, the substitute of prayer, i.e. “words” or דבר, is a hint of such future developments. This is what Hoseah 14,3 is all about when he said קחו עמכם דברים ועבדו את ה', “take with you words and serve the Lord.” Another verse conveying a similar message is ונשלמה פרים שפתינו, “and let us substitute with our lips for bulls. “
   לקח פר אחד בן-בקר ואילים שנים, “take one young bull and two rams, etc.” these three animals are symbolic of the three patriarchs of the world; Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov.
    A Midrashic approach: The word פר refers to Aaron whereas the words “two rams” refer to his surviving sons Eleazar and Ittamar. The Torah here forecast in an oblique way that Nadav and Avihu would not perform priestly functions.
    
    29,14. ואת בשר הפר, ”and the flesh of the bull, etc.” The sin-offering of a bull was meant to atone for the sin of the golden calf. When the Torah writes: “you shall burn its flesh by fire,” this expression is very similar to the one used for the red heifer’s flesh (Numbers 18,7). The mystical dimension of these procedures is known already from the scape-goat in Leviticus 16. The reason for assuming that this bull was to atone for the sin of the golden calf is that the High Priest when guilty of a sin involving idolatry has to offer a bull as sin-offering as described in Leviticus 4,3. The reason Aaron’s sons also had to place their hands on that bull prior to it being slaughtered (verse 10) was that seeing that G’d had been angry at Aaron for his part in the sin of the golden calf (Deut. 9,20), and He meant to kill him and his sons, it was critical that they become part of the atonement process. The word להשמידו which Moses used in that verse in Deut. 9,20 meant that Aaron’s  sons would be killed also.
    29,37. כל הנוגע במזבח יקדש, whatever touches the altar becomes sanctified.” The wording of this statement suggests that regardless of whether something is suitable for the altar or not, mere contact with it makes it holy. In order to prevent us from arriving at such a conclusion, the Torah wrote in the next verse: וזה אשר תעשה על המזבח כבשים בני שנה, “and this is what you shall prepare on the altar: sheep within their first year, etc.” Just as year-old sheep are suitable as sacrifices on the altar, so everything else which is suitable as a sacrifice on the altar will become sanctified by contact with it. Another law to be derived from the wording of our verse is that  any priest who arrives first in order to offer the sacrifice will have some priority, i.e. he has been sanctified in respect of priests arriving later. Seeing he has been on the altar in order to perform sacrificial service he is not to be replaced in favour of someone else without having had a chance to perform his task.
    
    29,38. וזה אשר תעשה על המזבח, “and this is what you are to do on the altar, etc.” the word עשייה here refers to the arranging of the various parts of the animal on the altar and the pile of wood which occurred at sunrise. The actual slaughtering of the daily burnt-offering had taken place earlier as soon as the eastern sky had begun to become light. Six priests participated in that sacrifice (Yuma 24). One would carry the legs and the head, the other the two forelegs; the third the rear end and hind leg, the fourth the chest and the stomach; the fifth would carry the rib-cage, and the sixth would carry the entrails.
    
    29,40. ונסך רביעית ההין יין לכבש האחד, “and a drink-offering of one quarter hin wine for the one sheep.” Rabbeinu Chananel  writes that as soon as the priest had bowed down in order to offer the libation the deputy High Priest  would wave the flag-like cloth to signal to the Levites to begin to chant their hymns. A the time of the Mishnah, a certain ben Arza would then strike the cymbal as a further signal and the Levites would commence reciting their hymns. All the assembled people would bow down and after every section the tekiah blast of the shofar would be blown and the trumpets would be blown until the end of the offering of the burnt-offering. At the end of that procedure the King and all those present with him would prostrate themselves (Chronicles II 29,28-40; compare also Tamid 7,3). The Levites would follow this procedure every day, varying the hymn they would sing. 
    On Sundays they would recite Psalm 24,1 as that psalm dealt with aspects of the creation of the universe, recalling that everything had been void and empty before. The psalm concludes with the words ויבא מלך הכבוד to commemorate the directive “let there be light.” The attribute כבוד also known as Shechinah is a great light. On Mondays the Levites chanted psalm 48. In verse 4 of that psalm the separation between different levels of holiness is alluded to. In the Holy Temple there were different levels of sanctity such as the Azarah, the Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies. On the second day of creation the Torah speaks of separation between upper and lower waters (Genesis 1,6). These various levels of sanctity are referred to in verse 4 of our psalm by the word ארמנותיה, “its various citadels, palaces.” On Tuesdays the Levites would chant psalm 82 which features a verse (3) speaking about judging the poor etc. This corresponds to the directive that all the waters in the terrestrial world were to concentrate in one area so that the dry land could become visible (Genesis 1,9). This was an allusion for the judges to congregate when they sat in judgment and to pronounce judgment for each individual supplicant. On that day the Torah (G’d) also directed that the earth should produce trees, etc., each according to its own kind (Genesis 1,12), an allusion to the individuality which is to be preserved on earth. When we read in that psalm that alas, man had to die, unlike the angels, the reference is to the sin committed in that garden in which all these beautiful trees had grown. This is why the psalm recited by the Levites on the fourth day i.e. psalm 94, which commences with the reminder that G’d does take revenge on those who hate Him, is appropriate for Wednesday, the day the sun and moon were placed in orbit. The psalmist refers to the people worshipping sun and moon. On Thursdays the Levites used to chant psalm 81 which amongst other matters deals with the Exodus from Egypt. Pharaoh was compared to a sea-monster, תנין, and on that day the great sea-monsters had been created (Genesis 1,21). On Fridays the Levites chanted psalm 93 describing how even G’d robed Himself in splendour. It was the day that man, the most perfect of the creatures was created, a creature combining within himself some divine attributes (created in the image of G’d). He had been assigned dominion over the animals and even nature, i.e. was liable to similarly regard himself as sovereign in his domain on earth. Chanting that psalm then was in keeping with the significance of the day. On the Sabbath the Levites chanted psalm 92, a hymn in which the righteous are described as firmly planted in the House of the Lord, a reference to the Holy Temple. It is entirely possible that there are still more allusions in these various psalms chanted by the Levites on the different days of the week. Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel.
    
    29,41. כמנחת הבוקר וכנסכה תעשה לה, “like the meal-offering of the morning and its libation shall you prepare it.” In Numbers 28,8 where the Torah speaks about the same offering the wording is כמנחת הבוקר וכנסכו תעשה אשה ריח ניחוח לה'. Why is the masculine pronoun used there in connection with this offering? Answer: in Numbers the reference is to the word בוקר, morning, whereas in our verse here the reference is to the word מנחה, i.e. the nature of the sacrifice mentioned here being a מנחה, gift-offering though it was totally consumed on the altar. The word לה in this connection is quite unique; we do not find this formulation elsewhere. It is possible that it refers to the tenth emanation which this offering was aimed at. [the word would not then be understood as the ordinary “for it,” but as directed at what the last letter ה in the tetragram represents. (based on Torat Chayim).]
    
    29,43. ונועדתי שמה, “I shall make My meeting there.” The word שמה, “there,” refers to the altar mentioned earlier. This is what prompted our sages, quoted by Rashi, to say that as soon as the Tabernacle had been erected G’d would communicate with Moses from the copper altar. Other sages claim that G’d spoke to Moses from between the wings of the cherubs on the kapporet as mentioned specifically in 25,22. According to that view the word שמה in our verse does not refer to the altar but to the Tabernacle as mentioned in verse 42 פתח אהל מועד, “at the entrance to the tent of Meeting.”
   ונקדש בכבודי, “it will be sanctified by means of My attribute כבוד.” The fact that My Shechinah will rest on it will make it holy (compare Rashi). A Midrashic approach based on Zevachim 115 reads the word as במכובדים שלי rather than as בכבודי. The difference is that G’d feels Himself honoured and glorified by those near Him. We would be dealing with an allusion to the death of Nadav and Avihu which had been characterised by Moses as an example of the type of death granted only to those who are especially near and dear to the Lord (compare Leviticus 10,3).
    
    29,46. וידעו כי אני ה' אלוהי-הם אשר הוצאתי אותם מארץ מצרים לשכני בתוכם, “They shall know that I am Hashem, their G’d, Who took them out of the land of Egypt to rest My Presence amongst them.” The verse means that the purpose of the Exodus was to bring about that G’d’s Shechinah would rest amongst the Jewish people. This is perceived as a requirement by G’d’s attribute of כבוד rather than as a requirement of the Jewish people. This is a mind-boggling concept, meaning that unless G’d’s Presence manifested itself amongst the Jewish people His Kingdom would not be visible amongst mankind. Expressed differently: the whole Exodus was orchestrated in order for the first of the Ten Commandments, “I am the Lord your G’d, etc.,” to be acknowledged by the Jewish people. This is the reason why the words מארץ מצרים appear in he middle of this verse. I have also found words to this effect in Midrash Tehillim on the verse בצאת ישראל ממצרים on Psalms 114. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says that the Israelites were redeemed from Egypt through the merit of the Tabernacle. He bases this on the words וירא אלוקים את בני ישראל in Exodus 2,25, and compares them with the words וירא משה את כל המלאכה, “and Moses saw the entire work” (Exodus 39,43). The words וירא in the respective verses teach that G’d’s purpose in Exodus 2,25 was to achieve what Moses saw in Exodus 39,43. The words אשר הוצאתי אותם, may mean that the condition of  taking the people out of Egypt had been in order for what is reported at the very end of the Book of Exodus to occur. In Psalms 132,13 this concept is expressed in the words אוה למושב לו, “He has desired it for His seat.” There is another mention of this concept in the very next verse in that psalm where the psalmist says: “here I will dwell for I desire it.” There are numerous other verses scattered throughout the Bible as I have mentioned in my commentary on Exodus 20,1.
    
    30,1. ועשית מזבח מקטר קטרת, “You are to construct an altar on which to bring incense up in smoke.” Nachmanides writes on this verse that the Altar for incense was one of the interior furnishings and as such it should have been mentioned earlier where the Table, and the Menorah and their respective measurements and the materials they were made of were described. They were mentioned together in Exodus 37,25  where the actual construction of these furnishings is reported. The reason that the Altar for incense is mentioned here only at the end of all the instructions and after G’d having said that He would dwell amongst the Jewish people, is that the Torah wanted to wait with this seeing it (the incense) was the instrument of arresting pestilence amongst the Jewish people. In essence, the Altar of incense represented the attribute of Justice. Moses referred to this aspect when he blessed the tribe of Levi (Deut. 33,10) referring to the time when ישימו קטורה באפיך, “they would place incense to counter Your anger.” We know that the word אף is a description of anger when it is used in connection with G’d, such as in Deut. 31,17 וחרה אפי, “and My anger will be kindled, etc.” When the sons of Aaron offered unauthorised incense they died on the spot (Leviticus 10,3). There are numerous verses alluding to the extreme caution to be used when offering incense.
    Seeing that Nachmanides has already touched on this difficult subject, it is in place to comment on something Maimonides has written in his Moreh Nevuchim section 3 chapter 45 in connection with the purpose of the incense. He explains that the many animals which were burned on the Altar left behind a very unpleasant odour and that the fragrance of the incense was designed to offset this bad odour. Seeing that Maimonides has made it his task to make Torah legislation and its reason more palatable to people who are far from tradition, he was forced to adopt this kind of explanation in presenting the reason for this legislation. This does not mean, however, G’d forbid, that the entire legislation of incense and its very strict rules had such incidental considerations as its purpose. Maimonides was well aware that the karet penalty would not be decreed against someone who copied the composition of the ingredients of the incense and its proportions if all such a person had been guilty of was to alleviate bad odours by doing so (compare 30,37-38). I will have more to say about the subject of incense when we shall discuss the sin of Nadav and Avihu.
    
    30,7. בבקר בבקר, “morning after morning.” in connection with the daily communal offering known as תמיד, the Torah uses the word “morning” only once. We read in Numbers 28,4 את הכבש אחד תעשה בבקר. The reason was that the incense would be offered before the תמיד sacrifice of the morning, so that it was not the first offering of the day.
    
    30,8. בין הערבים יקטירנה, “he shall bring it up in smoke in the afternoon.” It is a well known fact that the fragrance of incense burned in the late afternoon lingers longer than its counterpart burned in the morning. This is already referred to in Psalms 141,2: “take my prayer as an offering of incense, my upraised hands as an evening sacrifice.” David emphasises that which is offered in the afteroon/evening. When referring to his offering he did not mention such offerings as sin-offerings or guilt-offerings or even burnt-offerings, but asked G’d to look kindly on his offering of incense. All the other offerings are in expiation of some sin, even sins committed only in one’s thoughts and never carried out which are atoned for by the עולה, the burnt-offering. The incense offering has no connotation of sin associated with it at all. David asked that his prayer be accepted by G’d as if it had been incense. This is also why he said in the verse following שיתה ה' שמרה לפי, “O Lord set a guard over my mouth.” I believe that the word שיתה belongs together with the word לפי, as if  David had said: שיתה ה' לפי, שמרה לפי, he meant that G’d should put suitable words in his mouth. David thereby alluded to what G’d had said to Moses in Exodus 4,11 מי שם פה לאדם, “who has provided man with a mouth?” David requested that G’d help him not to utter words which are not appropriate. This is the meaning of the latter half of the verse in Psalms 141,3 נצרה על-דל שפתי, “set a watch at the door of my lips.” The word דל is short for דלת שפתי. The idea of a mouth having a door is already described in Micah 7,5 where the prophet says שמר פתחי פיך, “be guarded in your speech.” He used the word פתח to describe the mouth which opens and closes just like a door. G’d uses similar language in Job 41,6 saying of Leviathan: דלתי פניו מי פתח, “who can pry open his face?” The word נצרה in Psalms 141,3 is in an imperative form just like מכרה in Genesis 25,31, or in Genesis 43,8 when Yehudah told his father Yaakov שלחה הנער אתי, “send the lad (Binyamin) with me!” The dagesh in the letter צ of the word נצרה is merely for aesthetical purposes to make the reading of the word more pleasant-sounding. It is similar to the dagesh in Exodus 15,17 in the letter ק of the word מקדש of the line מקדש ה' כוננו ידיך. It results in doubling the sound. The psalmist could have written נצור just as easily as he wrote נצרה. 
    Concerning the words משאת כפי מנחת ערב, “my upraised hands as a gift of the evening,” David requests here that his prayer at this time be even more welcome to G’d than an offering of incense in the morning. The reason he describes his prayer as “his outstretched palms,” is to compare it to the incense which is born on one’s hands, having in mind Leviticus 16,12: “and his cupped handfuls of finely ground incense.” Another thought David may have had in mind when he referred to מנחת ערב may have been related to the meaning of the word ערבות, “pleasing,” as in Maleachi 3,4, וערבה לה' מנחת יהודה וירושלים, “then the offerings of Yehudah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the Lord, etc.” Seeing that of all the sacrifices none is as welcome to G’d as the incense, its smoke begins to rise heavenwards immediately it is placed on the altar. This is why at the beginning of this hymn David describes it as קראתיך חושה לי, “when I call You hasten to me.”
    
    30,9. לא תעלו עליו קטרת זרה, “You must not offer on it alien incense, etc.” There is a warning contained in this verse not to offer any other sacrifice on the altar before the incense has been offered. Not even other incense offerings by individuals or groups must be offered before the daily incense offerings prescribed by the Torah to be offered on behalf of the whole people by the High Priest. Most certainly no other sacrifices of any kind are to precede the incense offering. Anyone who contravenes this instruction is guilty of violating one of the 365 negative commandments of the Torah [although such offerings are offered on a different altar, the one in the courtyard. Ed.].
   ועולה, “or a burnt-offering.” Even merely a libation of water as an offering is prohibited before the incense is offered. The precise time frame legislated by the Torah as the correct one for offering the incense is the time when the oil (of the Menorah) starts cooling. We know this from the words in verse 7 בבקר בבקר בהיטיבו את הנרות יקטירנו, “every morning when he cleans out the lamps he shall bring it up in smoke.” This verse is followed by similar instructions concerning the evening portion of the incense offering. This may be the reason that Solomon characterised the oil and the incense as things which cause the heart to rejoice (Proverbs 27,9). 
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Tetzaveh 15): The meaning of the words in that verse of Proverbs, i.e. שמן וקטרת ישמח הלב, that “oil and incense gladden the heart,” is that the anointing oil is used to anoint the High Priest at which time all of Israel rejoice that they have evidence that G’d has forgiven their sins and that the service by the High Priest has been accepted by G’d on behalf of the people. You will find that no one’s offerings have been praised as much as those of the princes. The reason is that the first thing they offered was the incense, as we read in Numbers 7,14: “one spoonful of incense.” Only afterwards does the Torah report that the princes also each offered a bull, etc., etc. This is the reason G’d Himself praised their offerings by mentioning the name of each prince separately together with the details of his offering although all twelve princes brought exactly the same offering and the Torah could have saved itself at least 60 verses in summarising these offerings.
    You will find that King Achaz (father of the famous good King Chizkiyah) was guilty of annulling large parts of the Torah and Temple service as described in Chronicles II 29,7-8. When Ezra describes how Achaz’ son Chiskiyah restored the Temple service, repaired the building, etc., special mention is made of the restoration of the daily incense offering. (compare Isaiah 8,16: צור תעוד, חתום תורה בלמודי, “Bind up the message, seal the instructions with My disciples.”) The prophet refers to the evil doings of Achaz. He did not only serve idols because he believed in them but only in order to anger the Lord G’d of Israel. Whereas G’d was prepared to forgive him for all his various sins, the unforgivable sin was the cancellation of the incense offering. This is why Ezra had added the words: ”they also shut the doors of the porch and put out the lights; they did not offer incense and did not make burnt-offerings, etc.” This is followed by: “The wrath of the Lord was on Judah and Jerusalem. He made them into an object of horror, amazement, etc.”
    Proof of how beloved the incense offering was to G’d is supplied further by the fact that in spite of all the contributions, the building of the Tabernacle, the offerings of animals, the Shechinah did not manifest itself until after the incense had been offered as we know from an allusion in Song of Songs 4,16:  “Awake from the north, (location where burnt-offerings were slaughtered) and come from the south (where peace-offerings were slaughtered) ....let their fragrant goodness flow in Jerusalem!”
    
   כי  תשא
    
   יראת ה' תוסיף ימים ושנות רשעים תקצרנה, “The fear of the Lord prolongs one’s days; but the years of the wicked will be shortened” (Proverbs 10,27). In this verse Solomon teaches that a person’s life span is extended or shortened in accordance with his merits or the punishment for which he has qualified. Such results are due to נס נסתר, intervention by G’d in a person’s fate by miraculous ways which are not visible to us. The various types of miracles are divided into two groups. 1) There are clearly manifest miracles; 2) there are miracles which are totally concealed from man as the onlooker. The miracles which are recognised as such are the extraordinary occurrences which have befallen people or which have occurred for the benefit of people such as the producing of water from a rock, the descent of bread from heaven, i.e. the manna; even the sudden appearance of the quails in large numbers after their appearance had been predicted was a clearly manifest miracle. When Avraham overcame the four mightiest kings and their armies in battle having with him only 318 men, this too was a clear miracle. Even though no specific supernatural event occurred at that time the victory was a נס נסתר, a “hidden” miracle, i.e. it became clear to everyone who knew what happened that G’d must have intervened in the outcome of that military encounter.
    Lengthening someone’s life span or shortening it is also a hidden miracle. This is what Solomon said here. Although constant worries are by definition factors which weaken a person and undermine his health, and such people could be expected to die after less than a normal life span, Solomon says that if the worry was due to their being righteous people this will contribute to their normal life span being extended rather than shortened. The reverse is true of the wicked. Although their carefree and worry-free mode of life could be expected to result in their living longer than their righteous counterparts, the facts are the reverse. Such wicked people will enjoy fewer years than the righteous who constantly worry about their sins and the retribution they will have to face eventually. The essence of Solomon’s teaching here is that the only true yardstick for who enjoys long life and who dies (apparently) prematurely, are considerations of merit and lack of merit. Our sages illustrated the truth of Solomon’s statement by pointing out that during the entire 410 years that the Temple of Solomon stood there were only 18 High Priests, whereas during the 420 years of the second Temple there were a total of 300 High Priests. The reason was that the high Priests during the first Temple were all righteous individuals whereas most of the High Priests during the second Temple were not righteous. This is why there were so many of them.
    One must not understand the verse we quoted from Proverbs as meaning that the wicked will absolutely always live short lives, and that the righteous will always live to a ripe old age. After all, we witness every day that certain wicked people live extraordinarily long lives, whereas very saintly people sometimes die very young. One of the best examples was king Chiskiyah who was about to die at the age of 39 and even after G’d had listened to his plea and added 15 years to his life he still died at a much younger age than the average (compare Kings II 20,6). Just as G’d does not lengthen the life span of every righteous person, He does not cut short the life span of every wicked person. Perhaps we may conclude from the death at a relatively young age of a person who appears to have been a great צדיק, that he was not totally righteous, and that if a wicked person lived for many long years that he was not totally wicked but had merits which enabled him to enjoy extra years. The fact is that the addition of extra years or the cutting short of one’s life span is in the category of a נס נסתר, a “hidden miracle.” It proves G’d’s intervention in nature without giving us details as to what precisely caused the intervention and to what degree G’d intervened.
    In fact it is axiomatic to remember that a person is not a true believer, i.e. does not really have a share in Moses’ Torah unless he is absolutely convinced of the fact that G’d performs such hidden miracles all the time, that there is no accident and no coincidence in the universe. G’d is aware of all that occurs and has had a hand in it. (see Nachmanides at the end of Parshat Bo.) The second part of this absolute faith that is required of each Jew is that he must be convinced that every one of his good deeds will qualify for reward and every one of his sins will be subject to punishment. The whole matter of blessings and curses which was already  spelled out in Deut. 27,15-26 and some of which has been debated in Niddah 31, i.e. that the person who is subject to a miracle being performed for him is unaware of that at the time, is the reason our sages said in Baba Metzia 42 that when one enters one’s grain storage chamber in order to measure the size of one’s crop, one should pronounce a benediction asking G’d to bless one’s store. If one first measured the size of the stored grain and pronounced this benediction only subsequent to having measured it, such a prayer is considered as using the name of G’d in vain as G’d had already decreed either blessing or curse on that grain. We have a principle that blessings are not bestowed on matters which have been measured, weighed, or counted. Only matters which have escaped our eye and its ability to measure it are subject to blessings. This is another way of saying that the principle we have called נס נסתר, the “hidden miracle,” is constantly at work. If such blessings could be applied to matters we have weighed or measured such a miracle would no longer be “hidden.” This was one of the major reasons the Torah forbade head-counts of people to ensure they would not be exposed to the “evil eye,” As long as the blessings apply to people in a manner which cannot be checked, the עין הרע, the evil eye, the negative influence brought to bear, does not have a precise target on which to focus. The evil eye can influence only matters which have been measured, weighed or counted. Having appreciated this you will understand why the count of the males over 20 years of age which is the subject of the early part of our Parshah had to be conducted by means of a coin, i.e. the half-shekel.
    
    30,12. כי תשא את ראש בני ישראל לפקודיהם ונתנו איש כופר נפשו לה' בפקוד אותם ולא יהיה בהם נגף בפקוד אותם. “When you take a census of the Children of Israel according to their numbers, every man shall give Hashem an atonement of his soul when counting them so that there will not be a plague amongst them when counting them.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the words כי תשא which do not contain a command are phrased in such a manner that it can be considered applicable for all future times as well as for immediate application. The words כי תשא certainly imply that at this time a census would take place. However, they also implied that a future census if and when it would occur would be performed in a similar manner. The Israelites were not to be counted by counting their heads.
    The reason that David erred when he ordered a head count as reported in Samuel II 24,2 was precisely because the wording of the Torah at this point sounds ambiguous. He ordered Yoav at the time to count the people without resorting to shekalim or similar devices when he said: שוט נא בכל שבטי ישראל מדן ועד באר שבע ופקדו את העם וידעתי את מספר העם, “Make the rounds of all the tribes of Israel from Dan to Beer-Sheba and take a census of the people, so that I may know the size of the population.” It is written further (verses 3,4, and 10) Yoav answered the king: “May the Lord your G’d increase the number of the people a hundredfold, while your own eyes see it! But why should my lord king want this? However, the king king’s command to Yoav and to the officers of the army remained firm; and Yoav and the officers of the army set out, at the instance of the king, to take a census of the people of Israel. But afterward David reproached himself for having numbered the people, and David said to the Lord: ‘I have sinned grievously in what I have done. Please, O Lord, remit the guilt of Your servant, for I have acted foolishly.’”
    A Midrashic approach to the words כי תשא, based on Pessikta Zutrata on our verse. G’d said to Moses: “how are you going to raise the stature of the Jewish people? By the words כי תשא,  seeing that it is written (Proverbs 14,34) ‘charity exalts a nation, the kindness of a nation is a form of sin.’” Rabbi Yehoshua interpreted this verse to mean that the nation mentioned first are the Jewish people who are elevated spiritually by giving charity. They are described in Samuel II 7,23 as “who else is like Your nation Israel unique on earth?” The second half of the verse contrasts the behaviour of the Gentile nations with that of the Jewish people, saying that whatever apparent kindness they perform is only a form of hidden sin. They do not perform good deeds for altruistic reasons but only in order to promote their own image. This perception is confirmed by Daniel 4,24 advising Nebuchadnezzar after explaining his dream to him: “redeem your sins by beneficence and your iniquities by generosity to the poor; then your serenity may be extended.”
   ונתנו איש כופר נפשו בפקוד אותם, “every man shall give an atonement for his soul when counting them.” This refers to the census in the desert. ולא יהיה בהם נגף בפקוד אותם, these words refer to counting the people in future generations. This is  why the words בפקוד אותם were necessary a second time. It is also possible that the first time the expression בפקוד אותם was mentioned it means actual counting, whereas the second time the meaning of the word is: “supervising the fate,” just as in Jeremiah 10,15 בעת פקדתם יאבדו, “in their hour of doom they shall perish.” In that event the translation of the verse would be: “they shall each give an atonement for his soul to G’d when they are being counted so that there will be no plague affecting them when G’d exercises His supervision over their fates.” The most important revelation of our verse is that all the people that were counted each enjoy individual supervision of their fates by the Lord G’d. All the deeds performed by any individual are recorded. This is why these people become potential victims of a plague. As long as they had only been part of a whole, and not individuals in their own right, the evil eye had not been able to focus on them, seeing they were not a number in themselves. The whole idea of enjoying  individual supervision of one’s fate by G’d carries with it also the awesome responsibility of ensuring one does not become a candidate for punishment by G’d.
    When the woman of Shunem for whom the prophet Elisha had offered to intercede  with the king  (Kings II 4,3) declined his offer by saying: “I live amongst my people,” (I do not need to be singled out), she had exactly this thought in mind. Once she would have become a known quantity at the king’s court, she was also liable to draw unwelcome attention to herself if she committed a mistake. As long as she was more or less anonymous, no trespass would be accounted as her personal fault specifically.
    The day on which all our actions are reviewed by G’d is Rosh Hashanah, New year’s Day. On that day each one of us is treated as an individual and this is why it is such an awesome day. On that day our deeds are isolated from the fact that all of us are also members of the community at large. (compare Jeremiah 32,19) We also find this thought in Ruth 1,1 where the prophet Samuel begins the Book by stressing the individuality of Elimelech and how by trying to be different from the community and suffering their collective fate he set himself up for punitive action by G’d involving both him and his sons. The Book stresses his name both when his emigration is reported and when he died (one verse later). [It would have sufficed to write “this man died,” without his name being mentioned again as there had not been a change of subject after his name had been mentioned first in verse 2.
    
    30,13. מחצית השקל בשקל הקדש, “one half shekel of the sacred shekel.” According to the plain meaning of the text we have to consider that Moses’ position amongst the people was equal to that of crowned heads of government in other nations. (compare Deut. 33,5: “he was king in Yeshurun,” etc.) This is why a silver coin had been minted in his honour. This coin was of a certain weight and the silver it was cast from was free from impurities. The reason this coin was called קדש, “sacred,”  was because all the commandments are “sacred,” and for the performance of some of the commandments it is necessary to pay out such a coin or multiples of it. In other words, the coin basically served a sacred purpose. One example of the need for such coins was the redemption of firstborn male babies of the average Israelite who had to be redeemed by a priest in exchange for 5 such coins (or its equivalent weight in silver). Most of chapter 27 at the end of the Book of Leviticus is devoted to the ערכין legislation which stipulates that people having made vows involving the evaluation of their own persons or others have to discharge these vows by paying varying amounts of multiples of such a coin as described here. When we call our Torah the “sacred Torah,” we are motivated by similar considerations. Even the Hebrew language is called לשון הקדש, “the sacred tongue,” as it is the foremost language in which sacred matters are written about and are discussed by the scholars.
    Even the names of the angels have the adjective “sacred” attached to them. Names of angels such as Gavriel, Rafael, etc., all reflect their association with the sacred name of G’d, hence the letters א-ל at the end of their respective names. This is also reflected in Psalms 68,18 רכב אלו-הים רבותים אלפי שנאן ה' בהם, “G’d’s chariots are myriads upon myriads, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them.” [The idea of calling chariots owned by man “G’d’s chariots” is justifiable only when such chariots are placed in the service of sacred duties. Ed.] Hebrew is also the tongue in which the universe was created [the directives were issued in Hebrew. Ed.] Our sages  (Bereshit Rabbah 18,6) are on record saying that the world was created with לשון הקדש, the sacred tongue. They base this on Genesis 2,23 לזאת יקרא אשה כי מאיש לוקחה זאת “this (woman) shall be called אשה, as it has been taken (derived) from איש.” The various names Adam gave to his wife and sons such as חוה, קין, הבל all indicate that their meanings are based on the Hebrew language which therefore must have been the original language spoken after Adam was created. All the other names mentioned in the Book of Genesis (at least prior to the building of the Tower) were based on meanings in the Hebrew language.
    Eventually, all the other nations will revert to the use of Hebrew as all peoples had done prior to G’d confusing man’s languages at the time of the building of the Tower (Genesis 11,7). We know this on the authority of Tzefaniah 3,9: “for then I will make all the peoples pure of speech, so that they will all invoke the Lord by name, etc.”
    The reason the Torah legislates that the males to be counted contribute “half” a shekel (instead of a whole one), is because when the Israelites served the golden calf they had violated the Ten Commandments, and the coin called “half shekel” weighs ten geyrah. This is why every male Israelite who had reached the age of accountability vis-a-vis the celestial court, i.e. the age of 20, had to pay the ten geyrah as a symbol of the sin of which he had been guilty. Remarkably, this half shekel amounted in value to only one tenth of the value of the five shekalim needed to redeem a firstborn son of an Israelite as the Torah wrote: “and the amount he is to be redeemed by is the value of five shekalim which is twenty geyrah each, ” (Numbers 18,16).
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 10): Seeing the sin of the golden calf took place at noon or immediately thereafter (seeing the people had been prepared up to that hour for Moses to return from the mountain), the sum fixed for the symbolic atonement was a half-shekel corresponding to the half-day. When the Torah writes in 32,1 וירא העם כי בשש משה לרדת מן ההר, “When the people saw that Moses was tardy in descending from the mountain,” etc., the word בשש may be read as ב-שש, “at six (hours)” i.e. at noon. A rational approach: The reason the Torah stipulated a half-shekel when the Torah could just as easily have demanded a whole shekel of ten geyrah weight, was to hint to every intelligent person that he must weigh his actions in life so as to give due weight to his spiritual needs as well as to his physical needs. Ideally, he should be able to give full weight to both these requirements each, i.e. a full shekel to each. In fact, he ought to be able to use his body exclusively in the service of the Lord. However, on the other hand, sometimes attention to the physical needs such as eating, drinking, sleeping, provision of clothing, etc., is essential for the continued ability to serve the Lord. Keeping these factors in mind, the Torah, by speaking of a half shekel, hinted that it is aware that we suffer from this dichotomy of demands made upon us. We have numerous sayings of our sages in which they interpret verses in the Torah as reflecting this dual-duty of the Jew to look after both his body and his soul. Examples are Pessachim 68 where the verse in Deut. 16,8: וביום השביעי עצרת  תהיה לה’ אלו-היך, “and on the seventh day there shall be a an assembly for the Lord your G’d,” is contrasted with Numbers 29,35 עצרת תהיה לכם, “it shall be an assembly for you.” Rabbi Yehoshua is quoted as saying that the Torah means that on these festivals we are to divide our time equally between religious activities and mundane activities such as eating and drinking. It goes without saying that even when indulging in mundane activities one should strive to perform this with a view to benefiting one’s soul, one’s spiritual level as a personality. This very donating of the coin, i.e. using money, must be לה', devoted to divinely inspired purposes. When this is the case then one has achieved the degree of sanctity described by the Torah when it calls the coin “sacred.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The mystical dimension of the atonement by means of a “half” shekel was to parallel the attempt to divide between what the people had seen (i.e. the fire), and what they had heard (the thunder and G’d’s voice) at Mount Sinai. The sin of the golden calf was that they related incorrectly to the two phenomena they had seen at Mount Sinai [remember the Torah spoke of the people having “seen” sounds, Ed.]. The root of the sin at the golden calf episode was doubting or undermining the Unity of G’d, His indivisible nature, in spite of the manifold ways in which He manifested Himself. Seeing that the sin involved one of the TEN commandments it was appropriate that the act of atonement would be performed by a coin worth TEN geyrah, by a half-shekel and not by a whole shekel even if it had the same weight as this half-shekel. The reason that the silver for the shekel was also described as בקע, “valley,” was that they had made a bottom of the head and a head out of a bottom when they became guilty of idolatry. [according to Torat Chayim, quoted by Rabbi Chavell, the words “making a head of the end and an end of the head,” refer to reversing the meaning of the letters of the attributes of G’d in His tetragram. By committing idolatry the final letter ה in the tetragram had been treated as separate, treated entirely out of context in which it had been when spelled correctly. Ed.]
    As a result of such considerations, the silver given for this census was used to construct the sockets (bottom) of the walls (upright beams) of the Tabernacle in order to serve as an ongoing warning how the people had committed a theological reversal in worshipping the golden calf, or considering it as a symbol of the attribute of G’d which had taken them out of Egypt (compare what we have written on Exodus 38,28). Seeing that the Israelites were “weighed” in terms of the “sacred shekel,” they were found wanting. This is perhaps best illustrated by a verse in Daniel 5,27:  תקל תקלתא במאזניא והשתכחת חסיר, “you were weighed in the scales and found wanting.” (the meaning of the writing on the wall in Belshazzar’s palace). Seeing the sin committed by the Israelites at the golden calf episode had been so grievous an error, they were required to give this sacred half-shekel to G’d in atonement for their souls.
   תרומה לה', “an offering for G’d.” The expression תרומה, gift, heave-offering, occurs three times in this paragraph. The Torah wanted to remind us that there were in fact three distinct such gifts. The first gift was the contribution of the materials for building the Tabernacle. The second contribution was the half-shekel mentioned here; the third תרומה, contribution, was the money (shekel) for the public offerings on the altar in the Tabernacle. I have already mentioned the details of this in connection with 25,2.
    The half-shekel mandatory contributions mentioned here were the ones from which the silver sockets containing the beams of the Tabernacle were constructed. Each socket was made of a whole talent of silver (38,27) so that between the 100 talents of silver contributed by 600,000 men over the age of 20 almost all of it was used up for these sockets, seeing each beam had two sockets and there were a total of 48 such beams. The pillars supporting the dividing curtain, four in number, also had one such socket each. Any overage, i.e. the shekels of the 3000 plus people over the number 600,000 was used to support the hangings of the curtains around the courtyard of the Tabernacle.
    
    30,16.  ונתת אותו על עבודת אהל מועד, “you are to give it for the work of the Tent of Meeting, etc.” I have already explained in detail how the use of these silver shekalim symbolised the sin committed during the episode of the golden calf. There had to be a visible reminder of this sin to ensure it would never be repeated. Only by being reminded of a sin, especially in such an oblique way would one continue to be full of remorse about it. This concept has been spelled out in Psalms 51,5 where David describes his sin involving Bat Sheva as one he would remain conscious of forever. At the same time, the very words לפני ה' are the reassurance by G’d to these people that they were again in His good graces. When the people are out of favour they are not לפני ה', “before, or in the presence of, the Lord.” All of this is why this silver (money) was called כסף הכפורים, “the silver (money) of atonement.” The reason the paragraph dealing with the construc-tion of the copper basin from the waters of which the priests were to wash their hands and feet is mentioned immediately after the paragraph dealing with the census, etc., is that we have a tradition that the waters in that basin were instrumental in attracting sufficient quantities of rain water for the land of Israel. Seeing that the  contributions of the shekalim were in the nature of charity, and charity is instrumental in increasing the amount of beneficial rainfall, whereas withholding promised charity results in G’d withholding rainfall, there is a conceptual linkage between these two subjects [although on this occasion only the donations of the shekalim was mandatory and had an additional function, i.e. to secure atonement. Ed.]. Proverbs 25,14 is a source for the claim that unfulfilled charity vows result in suspension of beneficial rainfall. Solomon said: “He who boasts falsely of giving, is like clouds and wind that do not bring rain.”
    
    30,18. ובין המזבח, “and between the altar.” Rashi writes that the altar mentioned in this verse is the copper altar outside the Sanctuary. Accordingly, this basin was positioned slightly to the left of the entrance to the Sanctuary so as not to block it but at the same time between the west side of the altar and the Sanctuary. There was nothing blocking the view from the altar to the entrance of the Sanctuary. This is made plainer in 40,6. The whole subject is discussed in Zevachim 59. The basin itself had 12 spouts (like the teats on the udder of a cow) so that the 12 priests who were on duty when performing the daily communal offering could wash their hands from it simultaneously (Yuma 37). [these details referred to the Temple, not the Tabernacle in the desert when there were not yet 12 priests altogether. Ed.] Actually, there were a total of 13 priests involved in the daily communal offering as the Mishnah lists 13 different tasks being performed by these priests (Yuma 25). However, seeing that from a ritual point of view the actual slaughtering of the sheep could be performed by a non-priest, only 12 priests were actually required for the service  under discussion. Even a priest did not need to wash his hands and feet prior to slaughtering the sacrificial animal.
    
    30,19. ורחצו אהרן ובניו ממנו את ידיהם ואת רגליהם, “and Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet from this basin and the water therein.” The priest would wash his hands and feet at the same time, as has been explained in Zevachim 19. He would place his right hand on top of his right foot and his left hand on top of his left foot and would wash them. According to the plain meaning of our text, the need for performing this washing (assuming the priests had not entered the holy precincts with dirty hands or feet) was that it was an accepted ceremony before facing Royalty. Any of the king’s attendants who served food at his table had to wash his hands immediately prior to serving the food, seeing that hands are by nature busy with many activities of which the owner is often even unaware. The reason the priests also had to wash their feet immediately before performing sacrificial service was because they were barefoot (Jerusalem Talmud Shekalim 5,1).
    A kabbalistic approach: the washing of the ten fingers and ten toes was an allusion to the ten emanations which enabled the physical universe to be created out of a totally abstract domain. When man raises his hands above his head he raises ten fingers, i.e. alludes to these ten emanations. By standing on the ground with his ten toes he demonstrates that his beginning and end (in our parlance “top to bottom”) is all a reminder of these ten emanations. This is also the reason that the sages decreed that  prior to praying one ought to wash one’s hands (Berachot 15).  The expression נטילת ידים for “washing one’s hands,” [as opposed to רחיצת ידים] is an allusion to Psalms 134,2 שאו ידיכם קדש, “elevate, raise your hands (before) performing something sacred and proceed to bless the Lord.” A similar expression to the word שאו is found Psalms 119,48 where the psalmist says: “I raise my hands (elevate) towards Your commandments.” This is why Onkelos translates the word ורחצו, “they shall wash,” as ויקדשון, “they shall sanctify.” Elsewhere Onkelos translates the word ורחצו as: ויסחון such as in Genesis 18,4 where Avraham asks his guests to wash their feet. The Torah hints that the priest who performs service in the Tabernacle/Temple “clothes” himself in the sanctity of the ten emanations by the act of washing his hands and feet from the basin. Nachmanides views the covenant with G’d which was both oral (mouth) and on man’s flesh (circumcision), as symbolically interposed between the ten fingers of the two hands and the ten toes of the two feet respectively. 
    
     30,23. ואתה קח לך בשמים ראש מר דרור, “and you take for yourself choice spices, pure myrrh 500 shekel-weights.” In this paragraph G’d commanded how to prepare the anointing oil out of five different components. They were: myrrh, cinnamon, fragrant cane, cassia, and olive oil. Moses was commanded to use the mixture of these ingredients to anoint Aaron, his sons, the Tabernacle, and its furnishings. It was forbidden to reproduce this mixture for other purposes. They called this mixture קדש, “sacred.” This is the reason the Torah speaks of שמן משחת קדש, “oil of anointment of sacred things.” The various commentators and Maimonides are agreed that the spice called מר דרור is identical with Almoshk (congealed blood of a certain free roaming musk deer in India).  Rabbi Saadyah Gaon also identified בשמים ראש as this musk. This is blood congealed near the throat of this free-roaming beast resembling a deer and in the summer when it is very hot and that beast walks amongst trees and its coat rubs involuntarily against the bark of the trees, some of this congealed blood leaves its body and is collected by people for the sake of its fragrance. People find it amongst the herbs. This is why in Song of Songs 5,1 Solomon describes G’d’s response to Israel as “I have already come to My garden, etc.” אריתי מורי, “I gathered My מור.” The reason the Torah describes it as דרור, “free,” is to indicate that it was to be pure and unadulterated.
    Nachmanides understands the word דרור as not referring to the spice called מר, but as describing the free uninhibited nature of the deer-like animal from which it is derived. Accordingly, the substance would have to be removed from the animal directly, while it is in its original undiluted form at a time when the animal continues to enjoy its unfettered lifestyle. If it were to be taken from the animal after same had been captured and domesticated, there would not only be very little of it available quantity-wise, but it also would already have lost its distinctive fragrance. All of the foregoing is based on the opinion of those experts who identify myrrh as an animalistic substance.
    I believe (Nachmanides) that this interpretation is completely untenable seeing that the Midrash Shir Hashirim Rabbah 1,13 (on the words צרור המור), has described the words in Song of Songs 5,1 which we quoted earlier as applying to our patriarch Avraham who was the ראש, the head, i.e. the first of all the righteous people. Just as myrrh was considered the head (best) of all the spices, so Avraham was the best of all the righteous people. [His deeds were as fragrant in the eyes of the Lord as is the perfume made of מור in the nostrils of people inhaling it. Just as myrrh does not exude its fragrance except when exposed to light, so did Avraham’s name as a person of religious integrity not become known until after he had been thrown into a furnace of white-hot fire. Just as anyone who collects myrrh with his hands experiences that the skin of his hands becomes rough and bitter, so Avraham subjected himself to a variety of self-flegallations. This Midrash is proof that מור and musk cannot be identical as musk exudes its fragrance also when there is no light. The author quotes Nachmanides as believing that the word מור refers to a herb called myrrh in Latin, and armanon (or similar) in Persian. Most languages know the herb producing this fragrance by the name myrrh. When the Midrash claimed that the hands of anyone collecting this herb become rough and bitter tasting, it referred to a taste similar to לענה, wormwood. When the authors of the Midrash described this spice as ראש כל מיני בשמים which we previously understood as “the best of the various kinds of spices,” a description hardly applicable to wormwood, the Midrash refers to the fact that it was listed as the first category of the ingredients of the anointing oil. It is not a description describing its quality as a fragrance. The word דרור, refers to the need for this מור to be pure, unadulterated, precisely because people use it in an adulterated form to counteract its negative qualities. The reason the Torah lists it first is because in the list of the ingredients for the incense offering which are enumerated later in this chapter it represents the most potent ingredient. It produced a copius cloud of incense. When we read about the preparation of the girls aspiring to become Ahasversus’ queen, we are told that they were first treated for 6 months with oil containing this myrrh. This shows how important an ingredient this spice was as a cosmetic treatment (compare Esther 2,12). Clearly the herb “myrrh” was one from which oil for perfume could be extracted also. According to Nachmanides this oil would be extracted from the bark of the myrrh plant.[According to the Encyclopedia Britannica myrrh is an agreeably aromatic but bitter-tasting resinous substance obtained from small thorny trees that belong to the genus Commiphora. The name is derived from the Arabic word for “bitter.” You will note that all the remarks made in the Midrash are reflected in that definition. Ed.]. So far Nachmanides.
    I do not believe that the case has been proven. It is entirely possible that when the Torah speaks of מור in our verse, the reference is to the substance mentioned by Maimonides and Rav Saadyah Gaon. At the same time, the expression צרור המור which we find in Song of Songs 1,13 may be the myrrh that Nachmanides is speaking about. Each one may be correctly described as ראש, “head” of all kinds of spices. The latter as the leading spice in preparing the incense, and making smoke rise, the former as the principal ingredient in preparing the oil of anointment effective also in the absence of light. Psalms 45,9 speaking of מור ואהלות קציעות כל בגדותיך, “all your robes fragrant with myrrh and aloes,” would indicate that the fragrance of מור does not necessarily depend on the presence of light.
   מחציתו חמשים ומאתים, “half its quantity, i.e. 250.” Who did not know that half of 500 is 250? Why did the Torah not merely say: “half the amount?” Our sages in Keritut 5 have had a tradition that the weight of the cinnamon was actually 500 just like the weight of the מור דרור. The Torah stipulated for reasons unknown to us that whereas the quantity of the former was mixed in all at once, the cinnamon was divided into two lots of 250 each and weighed separately each time before being mixed into the oil.
    
    30,31. שמן משחת קדש יהיה זה לי, “this shall remain for Me oil of sacred anointment.” Nachmanides explains that actually we would have expected the Torah to write יהיה לאהרן ולבניו, “it shall be for Aaron and his sons.” The reason that he Torah did not phrase it in this manner but wrote: “it will be for Me (G’d),” is to make plain that in future generations High Priests and furnishings of the Temple, etc., would also have to be consecrated by the same mixture. We might have misunderstood the words “anyone who compounds its like or uses it to anoint a non-priest shall be cut off from his people,” as applicable to anyone not directly descended from Aaron. Had this been the correct interpretation the question would be how any of the kings of Israel (Yehudah) who were not descended from Aaron but from David could have been crowned using this oil? This is why the Torah wrote: “it shall be for Me,” to teach that the title כהן could also be applied to kings approved by G’d. Both descendants of Aaron and kings descended from David are to be treated as “anointed by the Lord.” We have a specific verse in which G’d commanded the prophet Samuel to go to Chevron and there to anoint one of Yishai’s sons i.e. David, as king (compare Samuel I 16,12.). We have a further reference to this event in Psalms 89,21: “I have found David, My servant; anointed him with My sacred oil.” David meant: “with oil which is sacred for Me.” Keeping this thought in mind, the Torah added in verse 32: “it shall not be smeared on human flesh.” The word אדם in this verse makes sense only if it means “a person who is neither a priest nor a king descended from David.”
    We need to understand why the Torah first wrote the paragraph about the anointing oil and only afterwards the paragraph about the components of the incense, [something that was offered on the altar twice every day. Ed.] The two different kinds of oil and incense respectively correspond to the “head and the foot.” The people who were smeared with the anointing oil were the heads of the nation, i.e. the spiritual head, the High Priest and the temporal head, the king. Heads wore crowns, i.e. the oil was smeared on in an arc describing the shape of the letter כ as symbolising the shape of a crown. Oil is the choicest of all liquids. It was certainly appropriate to make the anointing fluid out of olive oil, appropriately aromated. We have pointed out earlier that the verse שאו ידיכם קדש describes hands raised above the head. The incense, which, as we also mentioned earlier, repre- sents the attribute of Justice and the last letter ה in the tetragram as the symbol of that attribute, is fittingly mentioned at the end of this legislation. You will note that in connection with the compounding of the oil of anointing G’d used the relatively harsh word וידבר when commencing His instructions to Moses. When He began the instructions about the incense and its components, etc., He began with the softer word ויאמר. This was probably in order to soften the impact of the fact that the קטורה appears usually in connection with G’d’s anger. The fact that it was used to assuage G’d’s anger, whether actual or potential, is reflected in the softer introduction with the word ויאמר.
    A Midrashic approach (Keritot 5): On the words שמן משחת קדש יהיה זה לי Rabbi Yehudah son of Rabbi Ila-ah taught that the anointing oil compounded by Moses was of very miraculous quality. From its beginning to its end it was totally miraculous. To start with, the quantity made was only 12 logim (about 3,3 liter). We know this as the Torah writes (verse 24) “1 hin of olive oil.” (1 hin equals 12 login). If you consider merely the fact that 100 beams of a surface of one and a half cubits by 10 cubits each ( a cubit is approx. 60 centimeters) had to be smeared with that oil, (assuming the oil was applied only to the outer side) how could 3,3, litres have been sufficient? Never mind that all the other furnishings as well as Aaron and his four sons had to be smeared with it. Consider also the fact that the oil would penetrate the wood and therefore not only the mere surface would be smeared with oil. The carpets were being smeared; the sons of Aaron and Aaron himself would be consecrated on seven consecutive days, i.e. seven times each! At the end of all this we have been told that there was enough oil left over for future applications as the Torah wrote: “it shall be” יהיה (future tense). 
    The Talmud Keritut 5 claims that the word זה with its numerical value of 12 indicated that after completion of the anointments there would remain a quantity of 12 login of this oil! On the same folio the sages state that there were 11 ingredients making up the components of the incense. The word סמים (which appears twice) in verse 34 is understood as referring to two spices; the ingredients called נטף, שחלת, חלבנה, לבונה זכה make six. Add the five ingredients of the oil for anointing and you have a total of eleven. Alternatively, the second word סמים refers to a number of unnamed spices.
    
    30,34. בד בבד יהיה, “they shall all have equal weight.” Here the Torah does not spell out the individual weight of each component as it had done in connection with the oil for anointing. The reason that only four ingredients have been clearly identified is that it was these which provided most of the smoke of the incense. It was important to the Torah that these ingredients would provide a cloud of smoke whereas it did not matter if the other ingredients also resulted in their smoke rising after they were being burned up.
    Nachmanides writes that the words קח לך סמים, “take spices for yourselves,” mean: “spices with which you are familiar because they have been mentioned previously,” i.e. the ones mentioned in verses 23-25. According to Nachmanides the words סמים and בשמים are used interchangeably as they mean the same thing. All the spices used in the mixture of the oil of anointing also formed part of the incense. According to this there would have been a total of eleven ingredients making up the composition of the incense: the ones (5+4) spelled out in the Torah plus two  mentioned only as סמים when that word is used the second time in our verse. According to tradition these latter two were שבולת נרד and כרכם. The title the Torah accorded to the finished product of the incense is טהור קודש, “something pure and holy.”
   נטף ושחלת וחלבנה, “stacte, onycha and galbanum; נטף is the same as צרי, balsam, which Rashi translates as theriaque.  Nachmanides disagrees and writes that it is a tree’s resin called gome. According to him it is a single kind of spice, supposedly similar to שחלת, חלבנה and לבונה, frankincense. The spice (mixture) called theriaque mentioned by Rashi is a mixture of a variety of spices. It includes honey, yeast, and the ashes of dead scorpions as well as the flesh of the hyena. It is quite inconceivable that such a mixture should have been included in incense which the Torah has described as טהור קודש, “something pure and holy.” How could the remains of reptiles or creeping animals which are the epitome of ritual impurity be part of such a mixture? Even honey and yeast (leavening) are matters which the Torah has expressly forbidden as being offered on the altar (compare Leviticus 2,11). To believe that they could be part of the incense is sheer nonsense! The resin called נטף (from “drippings”) which is from the balsam tree is a single ingredient of a specially aromatic quality.  The tree is called קטף, as one plucks the leaves which are dripping with resin. All of this accounts for Rabbi Shimon ben Eleazar saying in Shabbat 25 that one must not light the Sabbath lamp with resin from the balsam tree as its fragrance is strong (and one may be tempted to use some of that oil for himself thus diminishing the supply for the lamp and causing it to be extinguished prematurely).
    The incense called חלבנה is evil-smelling (Keritut 6); none- theless the Torah saw fit to include it in the list of spices for the incense. It suggests the lesson that on a fast-day, a day of supplication we must not congregate in prayer without also including people whose conduct stamped them as sinners. Our sages (in Keritut) have taught us that any congregation which does not include sinners is not really called a congregation. The meaning of this strange statement is that G’d’s “reputation” is enhanced at a time when sinners join the righteous in prayer indicating that they are becoming penitents. This also reflects positively on the righteous assembled in prayer. If there were no potential penitents in that congregation the “righteous” would share the fate of the sinners as they share responsibility for the conduct of all the Jews, not just for themselves. Every Jew has a responsibility to help the sinners return to the fold. This is the reason that the willow branch, a plant without fruit or pleasant fragrance, must make up one of the four species of plants over which we recite a benediction on Sukkot. The willow branch symbolises the Jew who neither observes the commandments regulating life between people (good deeds) nor the commandments regulating our relationship vis-a-vis G’d (performance of religious ritual) and His requirements of us directly.
    
    30,35. ממולח, “salted.” This is what our sages referred to when they said (Keritut 6) that a quarter measure of salt from the Dead Sea was added to the mixture. It is also possible to understand the word ממולח as meaning “thoroughly mixed,” as Onkelos translates it. The purpose was to make it impossible to recognise any one of these spices separately. This may be the reason that sailors are called מלחים, as they thoroughly mix up the waters of the sea with their oars. The word occurs in such a context in Ezekiel 27,27 מלחיך וחובליך, “your sailors and your pilots.”
    
    31,2. ראה קראתי בשם בצלאל, “See I have called by name Betzalel, etc.” When Moses informs the Israelites of G’d having appointed Betzalel as chief architect for the construction of the Tabernacle and all that was connected with it, he repeats this formula i.e. ראו קרא ה' בשם בצלאל. This had to be mentioned as it was quite impossible to find amongst the Israelites who had been bricklayers of a primitive kind anyone who could possibly excel in the disciplines required to master the task of constructing such a portable Sanctuary. Even if by chance there had been the odd individual who had some expertise in one of  the many arts and crafts needed for this project prior to becoming enslaved, he would long ago have forgotten it. When the Torah lists the various disciplines in which experts were required for this work this teaches us that only someone divinely inspired could possibly have mastered all these arts. It is not surprising therefore that our sages have said (Berachot 55) that Betzalel knew how to employ the letters of the alphabet and to arrange them in a way G’d had arranged them when He used them to create the universe. In our paragraph the Torah writes that G’d had filled Betzalel with “a divine spirit, with wisdom, with insight, and knowledge etc., etc.” Solomon used similar language when describing how G’d created the universe (Proverbs 3,19-20) ”The Lord founded the earth with wisdom, He established the heavens with understanding; by His knowledge the depths were broken up, and clouds drop down the dew.” The words: “see here how I have called Betzalel by name,” mean that the Israelites should marvel that already at the time of creation G’d had made provision for a man of the wisdom of Betzalel to be on earth, to be part of the Jewish people, at a time when his talents would be required. The literal meaning of his name is that “he was in the shade or shadow of the Lord.” The word בשם has a dual meaning, telling us also that He had been an intimate of G’d just as G’d would say to Moses (33,17) ואדעך בשם, “I have known you by name,” i.e. “I have given you a glimpse of part of My Holy Name (essence).”
    Not only Betzalel, but most certainly all the prophets, had all experienced emanations from this great and Holy name of Hashem. This is the meaning of the Midrash (Shemot Rabbah 40,2) in which G’d is reputed to have shown Moses “the book of Adam the original man,” a book in which there was a list of all the kings, the leaders both temporal and spiritual, the prophets, etc., who would make their mark between the time of Adam, and that of the resurrection. G’d explained to Moses that already at that time He had arranged that each one of these prominent people would be able to carry out the contribution he had to make to mankind when he would appear on earth. He showed him that the name of Betzalel had long ago appeared in that book. The background to the Midrash is the word ראה in our verse, a word which appears superfluous. The very expression בצל אל was an indication that the name of this soul had long ago been engraved in the list of those to receive this kind of emanation. When his soul was assigned a body, he sat “in the shade of the Lord,” learning how to construct the Holy Ark which is another word for “the shadow of the written Torah.” The Ark together with the kapporet and the cherubs had been a task awaiting Betzalel ever since the six days of creation. Another illuminating Midrash (Tanchuma Pekudey 3) focuses on the difference between the word ראה, “see” (sing.) in our verse and the word ראו, “see” (pl.) in 35,30. According to that Midrash the former word was addressed to the celestial beings whereas the latter word was addressed to the creatures on earth. The fact that we make such distinctions we know already from Proverbs 3,4: -ומצא חן ושכל טוב בעיני אלו-הים ואדם, “and you will find favour in high esteem in the sight of G’d and man.”
    You should know that at the time Betzalel undertook this project he was 13 years of age. Our sages in Sanhedrin 69 figured this out seeing Betzalel was the son of Uri, who in turn was the son of Chur, and Chur had been born for Calev after his first wife Azuvah had died and he had married Efrat as we know from Chronicles I 2,1. Calev himself, by his own testimony in Joshua 14,7 had only been 40 years of age at the time he was chosen to be one of the 12 spies who were to find out details about the land of Canaan and its inhabitants during the second year of the Israelites’ wanderings (Numbers 14). Seeing that Betzalel was Calev’s great-grandson he could not have been older than 13 years at this time. Even allowing for this we must assume that Calev, Uri, and Chur all fathered a son at eight years of age in order for Betzalel to have been 13 years old at this time.
    
    31,6. ואני הנני נתתי אתו את אהליאב בן אחיתמך למטה דן, “As for Me, here I have given him as an assistant Oholiav son of Achisamach of the tribe of Dan.” We read in the name of Rabbi Chanina in Shemot Rabbah 40,4 that no tribe was more exalted than Yehudah and none was less outstanding than the tribe of Dan, seeing he was descended from one of the maidservants of Yaakov. G’d decided that Betzalel and a descendant of Dan should partner each other so that neither Betzalel nor his tribe should become haughty. All human beings are equal before G’d. The fact that the Tabernacle was built by these two architects was an important object lesson teaching this parity between the tribes in their social standing. Interestingly enough, when Solomon built the Temple this pattern was repeated seeing that the principal participants in constructing it were Solomon of the tribe of Yehudah, and Chirom the son of a mother from the tribe of Dan (compare Chronicles II 2,13).
    
    31,10. ואת בגדי השרד, “and the vestments of service.” The meaning corresponds to the translation by Onkelos: לבושי שמושא, “garments for performing their tasks.” These “garments” were used to cover the furnishings of the Tabernacle (the Ark, the table, the menorah, the golden altar) when the Tabernacle and its components traveled with the people. The different furnishings were covered by “cloths,” or (“garments”) of different combinations of wool in different colours) as has been detailed in the Book of Numbers 4,13, 4,6 et al.
    It is surprising that the Torah speaks of the respective function of these various covers without having first told us that they existed and that they were to be made of certain materials and of certain combinations of colours. Actually, these sacred covers or garments which are referred to here with the letter ה in front indicating that we are familiar with them already, were not previously mentioned anywhere. How is it that they are referred to here as if they were already familiar to us? Nachmanides writes that he does not know why we do not find anywhere in connection with the construction of the Tabernacle or its furnishings any directive that such coverings were to be made.
    
    Who would dare to quarrel with Nachmanides? (the author uses a more oblique reference used by Solomon in Kohelet 2,12 “who is able to wear the king’ boots” improve on G’d’s work)? Still, with all due respect to Nachmanides it seems to me that according to the plain meaning of the text we already have a hint of the existence of the בגדי השרד at the beginning of Parshat Tetzaveh (28,2) where the Torah commences to tell Moses ועשית בגדי קדש לאהרן אחיך לכבוד ולתפארת, “you are to make the sacred vestments for your brother Aaron for glory and for splendour.” This is followed by ועשו את בגדי אהרון, “they shall make the vestments of Aaron.” This suggests that the appearance, number, as well as the materials used for these vestments were something already known. This is why in verse 4 the Torah could apply the definitive article ה at the beginning of the wordהבגדים  in the phrase ואלה הבגדים אשר יעשו, “and these are the garments they are to make.” At the end of verse 4 the Torah repeats once more ועשו בגדי קדש לאהרון אחיך, “they are to make sacred vestments for your brother Aaron.” In that instance  the Torah was careful not to describe these vestments as the ones mentioned previously otherwise it should have written את בגדי הקדש, “the (previously mentioned) sacred vestments,” just as the Torah wrote in verse 3 את בגדי אהרן. It appears therefore that at the end of verse 4 the Torah speaks of different sacred vestments than the ones mentioned previously. This was an allusion to the בגדי השרד in our verse which are presumed as a known quantity. This leaves us with the question why the בגדי השרד whose function was merely to act as covers for holy furnishings when same were not in their regular place in the Tabernacle have been described and introduced as בגדי קדש, “sacred vestments” equal in rank to the priestly vestments? These covers were given such a distinguished title because they did for the holy furnishings what the sacred vestments did for the priests when the priests wore them. They drew attention to the fact that what was underneath them must be holy, just as when people see men wearing priestly garments they assume that the people wearing them are holy. [I have paraphrased this. Ed.]
    
    Our sages (Rashi) say that these בגדי שרד were made in the shape of hanging curtains, drapes, like the קלעים, a word which Onkelos translated as סרדין, “nets.” This is the reason the Torah uses the word שרד to describe the material woven out of the components stipulated by the Torah.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Yuma 72): we learn from the words ואת בגדי השרד that had it not been for them not a single Israelite would have survived the journey through the desert (as without the sacrifices which atoned for their sins they would have perished (Rashi). It happened once in the days of Alexander the Great that the High Priest Shimon the Just went out to welcome him (when he was about to conquer Jerusalem). As soon as the mighty king saw him he descended from his chariot and prostrated himself in front of the High Priest. When Alexander’s attendants asked him about the meaning of their king’s strange behaviour he told them that he had seen the image of the High Priest in a dream every time before he went into battle and that this angel-like figure had assured him that he would be victorious in battle. [In the Talmud the word שריד is used to describe that not a single Jew would have “survived, escaped alive.” The meaning of בגדי שרד then would be “garments assuring survival of the Jews.” Ed.] 
    Another meaning of the expression בגדי שרד, also mentioned on that folio in Yuma, is that they used to knit the garments (all the priests’ garments) in such a fashion that there was no need to stitch anything afterwards in order for there to be no loose ends, etc. [at any rate according to the Talmud the expressionבגדי שרד  applied equally to the garments worn by the priests, not just to the covers of the holy vessels inside the Tabernacle. Ed.]. According to Targum Yerushalmi the words בגדי שרד simply mean: “woven garments.”
    A kabbalistic approach: it is possible that the letter ה in the word השרד is an allusion to the final letter ה in the tetragram. It would be logical for this to be so, seeing that they were covers for the holy vessels. Holy vessels, by definition, are hidden, concealed under these covers and eventually become revealed when the covers are removed. The final letter ה also “conceals” the three basic letters of the tetragram i.e. י-ה-ו, allowing it to be revealed when the occasion demands it.
    
    31,13. אך את שבתותי תשמרו, “However, My Sabbaths you must observe.” This verse teaches that the construction of the Tabernacle did not supersede the laws of the Sabbath. Our sages in Sifra Kedoshim 3,7 explain that the sequence of the words את שבתותי תשמורו ומקדשי תיראו, “observe My Sabbath days and revere My Sanctuary” (Leviticus 19,13), clearly shows that Sabbath observance takes precedence over the commandment to construct the Sanctuary. This is why the word אך in our verse should be translated as אכן, i.e. ”surely, indeed.” The meter of the verse is: “I have indeed commanded you to proceed with the construction of the Tabernacle; however you must continue to observe the laws of the Sabbath inasmuch as they interfere with construction of the Tabernacle.” Seeing that the word אך always is used to exclude something, (compare Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 9,7 that the words אך, רק are always used to exclude something), it seems to me that also in this instance the use of the word אך conforms to that Talmudic principle. The Torah teaches with the word אך that here too it conforms to the principle mentioned by the Talmud and that certain communal sacrifices which are brought at a certain time as directed by the Torah override the Sabbath legislation. Whenever the rules about such offerings are accompanied by the word במועדו, “at its appointed time,” this means that the offering overrides the restrictions imposed on such work on the Sabbath. (compare Pessachim 66 on Numbers 28,2). We have another example of the word אך being used in such a context in Leviticus 23,27 where the Torah writes אך בעשור לחודש השביעי הזה יום הכפורים הוא which is also an exclusion. The Talmud explains that the word אך excludes atonement being granted on the Day of Atonement to people who are unrepentant. Delving still further into the meaning of the restrictive אך, the Talmud reasons that if we took the lesson from the word אך in our verses at face value then even violating the Sabbath in order to save a life would be forbidden; in order for us not to make this mistake, the Talmud points out that the word אך was placed in a position where it restricts the application of the very commandments it promotes (Yuma 85). 
    Our sages (Shabbat 119) state that Jerusalem was destroyed only on account of desecration of the Sabbath. They derive this from Ezekiel 22,26: ”they have closed their eyes to My Sabbaths so that I became profaned in their midst.” Jeremiah 17,27 warned the Jewish people concerning the observance of the Sabbath telling them that both Jerusalem and the dynasty of the house of David would survive only by merit of Sabbath observance. Failing such observance, the prophet warns that the city would be burned and that the fire would not be extinguished.
    Concerning the positive value of Sabbath observance, we are told in Shabbat 118 that if the Israelites (all of them) were to observe only two Sabbath days (in a row?) they would be redeemed from exile immediately. They base this on the wording in Isaiah 56,4אשר ישמרו את שבתותי , “who will observe My Sabbath days.” Even as few as two such Sabbaths qualify for the plural used by the prophet in describing the result of such observance as being: “I will give them My house and within My walls a monument and a name better than sons and daughters; I will give them an everlasting name, etc.” The passage concludes with the words: “I will bring them to My sacred mount and let them rejoice in My house of prayer.”
    On the subject of Sabbath observance our sages in Shabbat 118 continue that if someone observes the laws of the Sabbath meticulously he will be forgiven such sins as the type of idolatry committed by the first generation of idolaters, the people at the time of Enosh, seeing that the prophet said אשרי אנוש יעשה זאת...שומר שבת מחללו, “hail to (even someone like Enosh) who does this and makes sure not to desecrate the Sabbath” (Isaiah 56,2). The sages substitute the word מחול לו, for the word מחללו, in the verse, i.e. he who does not desecrate it (מחללו), will be forgiven (מחול לו) for his sins.
    The plain meaning of the text, i.e. why the Torah here speaks about the Sabbath in the plural, is simply because there are many Sabbath days in the course of a year as distinct from the other festivals which occur only once a year.
    A kabbalistic approach: The reason for the plural, i.e. שבתותי is that each Sabbath is in fact 2 Sabbaths, seeing that it consists of the commandment to remember it and the negative commandment not to violate it, i.e. זכור ושמור, respectively. Pay careful attention to how the Torah phrased this paragraph. It says of שבתותי, “My Sabbaths,” אות היא, “it is a sign,” i.e. the Torah speaks of a single day in reality, as otherwise how can several Sabbaths be described as a single אות, sign? The Sabbath as an institution is equated with Israel as an institution, i.e. the concept known as כנסת ישראל. This “institution” in turn is an allusion, or אות, to the שבת הגדול; in other words, every week there is a day which is a signאות  of something spiritual. This day is the regular שבת. Over and beyond that there is the fact that the Sabbath itself  (not just as the seventh day of the week) is a concept representing a supreme spiritual domain, such as we are to experience by means of the נשמה יתרה, the additional soul we are given for the duration of that day. This is the “sign” which is not merely an אות, but an אות לעולם an allusion to concealed higher worlds. It is something which reflects a bond (ברית) which exists only between G’d and Israel. When the Torah wrote (Exodus 14,31) וירא ישראל את היד הגדולה, this יד הגדולה was a reference to the כנסת ישראל which was also an אות a “sign, reminder” of Hashem as we read that as a result of the Israelites realising that they were an incarnation of the כנסת ישראל, they developed true reverence for the Lord, i.e. וייראו את הי-ה-ו-ה. The Torah describes that realisation of spiritually higher concepts as something which occurs by means of intermediaries here described as אות, “sign,” or “symbol.” I have already elaborated on these ideas in connec- tion with my commentary on Exodus 20,8 (my translation page 1097). You will find the mystical dimension of the subject explained there.
    
    31,14. ושמרתם את השבת, “you shall observe the Sabbath.” After the Torah had already written את שבתותי תשמרו, “observe My Sabbaths,” why was this commandment repeated? It teaches that there is an aspect to Sabbath observance prior to the Sabbath’s commencement just as there is an aspect of Sabbath observance immediately after the sun has already set. We are to add to the sanctity of the Sabbath by commencing to observe it even before sundown and we are to add to its sanctity at the end of the day by waiting until it is completely dark before declaring it over. Our sages in explaining the verse: “the column of cloud would not depart by day nor the column of fire by night,” (Exodus 13,22) explained in Shabbat 23 that the wording implies that the column of fire did not withdraw from its position until the column of cloud had taken up its position, whereas similarly, the column of fire did not depart from its position in the morning until the column of cloud was firmly in its assigned position. [there was no vacuum when neither column was in its place to perform its task for the Israelites. Rashi explains that the entire verse was unnecessary as the previous verse had already spelled out the function of each ”column.” Ed.].
    Our sages (Yuma 81) also commented on the verse מערב עד ערב תשבתו שבתכם, “from evening till evening you shall rest on your Sabbath” (Leviticus 23,32), that at first glance we might have thought that this directive applied only to the Day of Atonement (where it was written). However, seeing that both the word תשבתו and the word שבתכם were really not needed to teach us this for the Day of Atonement, the extra words mean that the same rule applies to the festivals generally as well as to every Sabbath day. The extra word שבתכם means that every day of rest you observe shall be earmarked by a slight addition both at its commencement and at its end.
   מחלליה מות יומת כי כל העושה בה מלאכה ונכרתה הנפש ההיא, “anyone desecrating it shall be put to death; for anyone performing work on it, that soul shall be cut off, etc.” The meaning of the verse is that the penalty for deliberate desecration of the Sabbath is death by a human tribunal, provided there are witnesses who have warned the guilty party. If there were either no witnesses or no warning, the penalty is death at the hands of heaven (based on Rashi).
    
    31,16. לעשות את השבת, “to observe the Sabbath actively.” The plain meaning of this line is: “to provide himself with the necessities required on the Sabbath.” The expression לעשות is found in this context in Genesis 18,7 and 18,8 where the Torah reports Avraham as preparing the luncheon for the three angels who had come to visit him. The basic meaning of the verse is to encourage people to prepare for the Sabbath in time so that they can enjoy the day when it occurs. Our sages (Beytzah 16) understand the exhortation to mean that one is to plan from one Sabbath for the next, and that this is the implied meaning of the prophet (Isaiah 58,13) who said: “you shall call the Sabbath ‘a delight.’” When the prophet employed the word וקראת in that verse, as if one were to “call towards the Sabbath,” he meant we should “invite the Sabbath” as one invites guests to one’s table.
    A Midrashic approach: anyone observing the Sabbath properly on terrestrial earth is considered as if he had “made” it in the celestial regions. What is meant by this Midrash (Mechilta Ki Tissa) is that keeping the Sabbath is testimony that a person is a true believer in G’d and His Torah. Anyone who ignores the laws of the Sabbath thereby testifies that he is an heretic and does not believe. This is why the word לעשות was used here instead of the more common לשמור אותה. The Torah wanted to allude to the fact that Sabbath observance is a concept which also exists in the celestial regions.
    
    31,17. ביני ובין בני ישראל אות היא לעולם, “between Me and the Children of Israel it is an everlasting symbol.” It is possible to understand that the word לעולם in this verse means that the Sabbath is a symbol attesting to the fact that G’d created the world out of nothing. This is why our verse describes how the Sabbath functions as a sign (proof) for the entire world. Cessation of creative activity signals that the person so refraining believes that G’d made the world in six days (without drawing on existing raw materials).
    The words ביני ובין בני ישראל, “between Me and between the Children of Israel,” teaches that there was a hidden aspect which had been conveyed to the Israelites privately. There is a mystical, hidden aspect to the Sabbath.” When a king issues a command to a son or trusted servant, something not everyone knows about, he is apt to say to his son: “remember the thing that is between me and you.” These are the things which had been agreed upon between father and son without any written protocol having been made of them. This is the reason our sages explained in Beytzah 16 in the name of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai that G’d gave the Israelites all the commandments in public with the exception of the Sabbath. He based himself on the words in our verse [the word לעולם, derived from נעלם, “hidden, secret,” is probably the way Rabbi Shimon understood our verse. Ed.]. Seeing that the Sabbath is one of the Ten Commandments and as such was certainly given to the Jewish people in public at Mount Sinai, what did the Rabbi mean when he spoke of the Sabbath having been given secretly, in private? Moreover, Isaiah 48,16 states specifically that “from the beginning I did not speak to you in secret, etc.” How do we reconcile his words with those of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai? Also, in Psalms 138,4 David exclaims: “All the kings of the earth shall praise You, O Lord, for they have heard the words You spoke.” What did Rabbi Shimon have in mind? The sages referred to a hidden, mystical element which is part of the entire complex of the Sabbath laws and concept, not to the actual positive and negative commandments which have all been spelled out in public.”
    
    31,18. ויתן אל משה, “He gave to Moses, etc.” The meaning of the line is: “G’d gave to Moses, etc.” [although it is a new paragraph the Torah omitted mentioning the subject. Ed.]. Seeing that the last-named subject had been Hashem, the Torah did not bother to repeat His name once more at this stage. Furthermore, the name of the subject, i.e. אצבע אלו-הים as the One who did the writing on the Tablets is mentioned at the end of our verse. It was quite clear that everything which occurred at Sinai, the word, the writing, the tablets, were all orchestrated by and originated with G’d. (compare my comments on Exodus 20,1, where I dealt with the reason why different attributes, names of G’d, are used there and here). I have also explained that at the time the universe was created the attribute Hashem was “co-opted“ by the attribute of Justice as demonstrated by the letter ה in the word בהבראם in Genesis 2,4. [read my translation of the author’s comments on pages 75-76. Ed.]
   ככלתו, “when He had completed, etc.” The reason the word is not written plene, i.e. ככלותו, is to draw our attention to the word כלה, bride, which is part of the spelling ככלתו, “like His bride.” The handing over of the Torah to the Jewish people was in the nature of the groom receiving his bride as a gift. Had this not been the case Moses could not have learned the whole Torah in forty days. 
    In fact, a Midrash (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 16) asks: “how could Moses possibly have learned the entire Torah within forty days? Is it not written (Job 11,40) ‘its measurements are longer than the earth and its width wider than the oceans?’” We are forced to answer that what G’d taught Moses during these forty days were the rules governing study of the Torah and their application. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, extrapolating on the spelling of the word ככלתו in our verse said that anyone teaching Torah who does not succeed in making its words as beloved as a bride is to her groom would have done better not to lecture at all. At the time when the Torah was received by the Jewish people it was as beloved to them as a bride to her groom. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish added that just as a bride requires no fewer than 24 different kinds of ornaments, as mentioned in Genesis 2,22 ויבאה אל האדם, “G’d brought her (Chavah) to Adam,” so the Torah requires 24 ornaments [the numerical value of the letters in the word ויבאה is 24. Ed.]. G’d had decorated Adam’s bride with 24 ornaments. The ornaments are listed in Isaiah 3,18-23. Similarly, a Torah scholar needs to be decorated (thoroughly familiar) with 24 books; (the books of the Bible). Seeing that the Sabbath is perceived as the bride of the Jewish people, this may be the reason that the authors of the oral Torah divided tractate Shabbat into 24 chapters. 
    Another reason that the Sabbath is called כלה, “end, completion,” is that it occurred for the first time at the end of the six days of creation. It had been the objective, “end purpose,” of all that had been created before both in the heavens and on earth. The Sabbath in the celestial regions is perceived as the end of emanations. It is customary in our terrestrial world that as a man prepares for adulthood the final stage is that he picks a bride (after having established an economic base, acquired a field, or something like it, built a house). Solomon instructed us in this sequence of events when he wrote in Proverbs 24,27: “prepare your outside work; make ready what you have in the field; and after that build yourself a house.” The word אחר “afterwards,” in that verse is not a preposition but a command and refers to the founding of a family as making the acquisition of a bride the last of these endeavours. A similar construction is found in Psalms 55,10 פלג לשונם, ”confound their speech!” [where this root is used as a verb in the imperative instead of as an adjective or preposition. Ed.]
   שני לוחות העדות, “the two Tablets of Testimony.” It was a testimony for the Jewish people that the Shechinah resided amongst them, (Pessikta Zutrata). Receiving the Tablets was similar to being handed the seal of the King as proof of the validity of his document.
    According to the plain meaning of the text: Why did there have to be two Tablets? Testimony is not valid unless given by two people. Besides, (second Tablets) the material, (stone) was from earth whereas the writing was by the hand of G’d, i.e. originated in heaven. There had to be two Tablets as a reminder of this combination of contributors. We have a verse illustrating this concept in Deut. 31,28 "I will call as witnesses against  them heaven and earth.”
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 16). The word two in “two Tablets of Testimony“ alludes to heaven and earth, bride and groom, the two friends assisting bride and groom each; the two worlds.” Rabbi Chanina said that the spelling of the plural לוחות without the letter ו in front of the letter ת at the end (which makes the uninitiated reader think the word is in the singular), is accounted for by the fact that both were of identical dimensions. The reason the raw material used for these Tablets was stone and not some more precious material was to hint at the fact that most serious sins carry with it the penalty of death through stoning.
    Another explanation for the fact that these Tablets were made of stone is in Genesis 49,24 where Yaakov blessed Joseph. He referred to משם אבן ישראל, “from there he (the foundation stone) known as Israel acted as shepherd.” This teaches that Yaakov was also known as אבן, and is an allusion to the fact that it was his merit which was instrumental in Israel securing for themselves these Tablets.
    Still another explanation: the Tablets were given to Israel through the merit of the Holy Temple. Isaiah described this Temple as אבן, stone, when he said הנני יסד בציון אבן, “Thus says the Lord G’d: ‘Behold I will found in Zion stone by stone a tower of precious cornerstones’” (Isaiah 28,16). Thus far Tanchuma.
    A kabbalistic approach: We have already explained why there were two Tablets in our commentary on Exodus 20,1. It is important to understand that although both Tablets had precisely the same measurements, one was “bigger” than the other (in that more was inscribed on it than on the second Tablet). This was most appropriate as the attribute of Justice receives its input from the attribute of Mercy. When you examine what is written on the first Tablet you will find the tetragram mentioned in connection with every single commandment, whereas this name of G’d (Hashem) does not even appear once on the second Tablet. However, when you count the number of words which are written on the second Tablet you will find that there are 26 words, i.e. that the entire Tablet may be perceived as alluding to the attribute Hashem, the tetragram (numerical value 26). The Tablets were cubes six handbreadths long, six handbreadths wide and six handbreadths thick (compare Baba Batra 14).
    We have already explained that this calculation (these identical measurements) made the Tablets equivalent to a king’s seal seeing that they had been inscribed with ten commandments, each of them containing five separate directives. The number “ten”, i.e. the י in the tetragram, plus the two letters ה, i.e. 5, plus the allusion to the letter ו in the tetragram seeing the dimensions of the Tablets were 6 by 6 by 6, all allude to the name Hashem. Moreover, if you multiply the three dimensions of 6 handbreadths by each other you will have the number 108, equivalent to the numerical value of the word חק, “law or statute.” A good way of remembering all this is the verse שם שם לו חק ומשפט, “there He provided them with statute and social laws” (Exodus 15,25). The combined measurements of the two Tablets were 216 handbreadths which is the total of the 72 names which can be permutated from the tetragram by writing those letters as words rather than as mere letters ( for instance instead of י write יוד). The way to remember this is by means of the verse ויעבור ה’ על פניו, (the letters in ו-יעבור amount to (עב) 72-+(יור) 216). (Exodus 34,6). All of these symbols and concepts had been revealed to Moses while he was on Mount Sinai. The spiritual benefit we (the Jewish people in the desert) derived from all this was that when the Tablets were reposing inside the Holy Ark, the tetragram in all its permutations was represented inside that Ark.
    It is known further (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 29) that the kind of stone used for the tablets was called Sanpiryon, (sapphire) and that this stone had been hewn from the throne of G’d’s attribute כבוד. This is why we find Ezekiel 1,26 describing his vision of that throne as consisting of אבן ספיר, “sapphire-stone.” The word לחת when spelled according to the principle of inverting the alphabet such as ת=א, ש=ב, ר=ג would look like this: כסא, “throne.” This is why the Shechinah rests above the Holy Ark like a throne. The reason the Torah has also been called כבוד is because the sapphire stone on which G’d inscribed it has been taken from the throne of His attribute כבוד. The verse from which all this is derived is found in Proverbs 3,35 כבוד חכמים ינחלו, “the (Torah) scholars inherit kavod.” The source of our intelligence is also rooted in that celestial region and is known as kavod, as we know from Psalms 30,13 למען יזמרך כבוד ולא ידום, ”so that it will sing to Your attribute kavod endlessly.” The soul of a person who is occupied with Torah will merit to return to its holy roots as we know from Psalms 19,8 תורת ה’ תמימה משיבת נפש, “the Torah of the Lord is perfect, it restores the soul.”
    
    32,1. וירא העם כי בשש משה לרדת מן ההר, “when the people saw that Moses was tardy in descending from the mountain, etc.” This occurred on the 16th day of Tammuz. How do we arrive at this date? The Torah (Ten Commandments) had been given on the sixth of Sivan seeing that for six days commencing with the first day of Sivan the mountain had been covered in cloud (compare 24,16). On the sixth of these six days the revelation occurred. On the following day Moses ascended the mountain as the Torah wrote: “He (G’d) called to Moses on the seventh day (24,16). He remained there for forty days as we know from 24,18. “Moses remained on the mountain for forty days and forty nights.” When did all these days come to an end? On the 17th day of Tammuz, seeing Moses had told the people that he would return at the end of forty days at noon (according to Rashi). The people had made a mistake thinking that the day on which Moses ascended the mountain, i.e. the seventh of Sivan, was one of the forty days of which he had spoken. If that had been so, Moses should indeed have returned on the 16th of Tammuz. When the people noticed that by noon on that day Moses had failed to return they thought that someone had detained him and he would not return altogether.
    The Midrash (Shabbat 89) says that Satan had brought darkness and confusion on to the globe at that time, and that he showed the Israelites an image of Moses lying on a bier. This accounted for the people saying: “arise let us make gods who will go before us, for this man Moses who brought us out from Egypt-we do not know what became of him.” 
    Moses had spoken of 40 whole days not including  the day on which he ascended the mountain. Accordingly, the people should not have expected him before the 17th of Tammuz. When the Torah writes (verse 6): “they rose early in the morning,” this was the 17th of Tammuz. It was ממחרת, “on the day after the 16th of Tammuz.” On that day they offered sacrifices to the golden calf. At noon on that day Moses returned and smashed the Tablets. On the day after that, the eighteenth of Tammuz, he burned the golden calf and convicted the people who had actively participated in the cult of the golden calf and commanded the Levites to execute these people. On the nineteenth of the month he ascended the mountain again pleading for forgiveness for the people, remaining there another forty days. He spent the entire period in prayer and pleading with G’d as he himself testified in Deut. 9,25: ”the forty days during which I threw myself down, etc.” These days came to an end on the first day of Ellul. On that same day, after having briefly returned to the camp, Moses ascended the mountain again after having been invited to do so by G’d, (34,2) and remained for forty days. This was in preparation of receiving the second set of Tablets. These forty days came to an end on the Day of Atonement, the tenth day of Tishrey. On that day the sin of the golden calf was finally forgiven; on the day following the day of Atonement the people began bringing their contributions for the building of the Tabernacle. The Tabernacle was erected on the first day of Nissan following, i.e. close to a whole year after the Exodus. All of this teaches you that the sin of the golden calf preceded the matters described in Parshat Ki Tissa. [The instruction to make sockets for the Tabernacle from the half-shekel contributions which were to atone for that sin  would not make sense if the Tabernacle had preceded the sin of the golden calf. Ed.] This is merely another example of the fact that the Torah did not see itself as obliged to report matters in chronological order (compare Tanchuma Ki Tissa 11).
    
    32,4. ויעשהו עגל מסכה, “he made it into a calf cast of gold.” Nachmanides writes that the fact that the mass of gold emerged in the shape of a calf was Aaron’s doing as the people had merely demanded: ”arise, make for us a deity, etc.” They had neither stipulated that the cast symbol be an ox, a sheep, or a goat. Aaron’s considerations in deciding to make a calf were based on the fact that the Israelites were in a desolate desert, and desolation and disaster are always perceived as emanating from the north (compare Jeremiah 1,14: ‘for from the north disaster will break loose’). When Jeremiah made this statement he did not only have in mind the impending invasion by the Babylonians who were situated north of the land of Yehudah. That this is true is evident from  the text of that chapter seeing that in verse 15 G’d speaks about “summoning all the peoples from all the kingdoms of the north.” This is merely a symbolic way of telling us that the attribute of Justice always comes from the north to bring retribution upon the peoples of the earth in proportion to their wickedness.
    When you consider the visions Ezekiel saw when he portrayed for us the מעשה מרכבה in the first chapter of his book, you will find described that the face of the ox was on the left of the four chayot he saw (Ezekiel 1,10). Aaron believed that seeing that destructive forces emanate from the north and the calf symbolises destructive forces, if, on the morrow, as he suggested, the people would declare a holiday dedicated to Hashem (verse 5), this would be a way to ward off evil and harmful influences. He hoped -as described in Isaiah 32,15 where the prophet describes a desolate place turning into a beautiful mountain like Mount Carmel- that spiritually negative forces could be sublimated into spiritually positive forces. After all, at this very Mount Chorev, his brother Moses had first become imbued with prophetic insights and had developed into the outstanding personality he had become.
    Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 3,3-42,8-and 15,9 have taught us the mystical dimension of all this when they commented on Exodus 3,7 where G’d told Moses ראה ראיתי את-עני עמי, “I have most certainly seen the afflictions suffered by My people in Egypt.” The Midrash quotes G’d as saying to Moses: “you Moses see only one single instance of such an affliction of the Jewish people; I, G’d see two such “afflictions” (this is why the wordsראה  ראיתי were repeated). “You, Moses, see the people arriving at Mount Sinai and accepting My Torah, I on the other hand, can see how when I am about to give them this Torah they have many thoughts so that they even upset one of the four supports of My מרכבה, “My carriage,” so that they cause Me to become angry at them. (The Midrash quotes Ezekiel 1,10 and Psalms 68,18 in support of its illustrations). The word טטרא used there in the Midrash when it speaks about  מטטרראמולין to describe a carriage drawn by four animals, (mules) means “four.” It is a reference to the four animals which Ezekiel saw in his vision, i.e. the מרכבה, the carriage transporting the glory of the Lord. Thus far the Midrash.
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra claims that the word אלוהים in this instance (the one in verses 5 and 1) means that they wanted the attribute כבוד of G’d to rest in a stationary position in the form of a body, as a symbol of G’d’s Presence amongst them. If you will reflect on the first journey of the people in chapter 14,19 where the Torah describes the מלאך האלוהים which traveled  first in front of the camp of the Israelites and afterwards behind them, you will understand the true nature of the people’s request. The stationary columns of cloud or fire were described as מלאך אלהים. [I have found this Ibn Ezra in his introduction to the episode of the golden calf. Ed.] Nachmanides disagrees with the Ibn Ezra he just quoted, seeing that none of the other reproductions of zodiac signs portrayed the golden calf as reposing. Thus far Nachmanides.
    The truth is that the whole point of making the golden calf was not to duplicate what the idolaters who construct a lifeless form do when they hope to imbue this lifeless stature or hewn image with some spirit and powers of prophecy. These idolaters expect  the creation of their hands to have some form of life breathed into them by their counterparts in the cosmos, much as they imagined the first man to have had life breathed into him.
    When Aaron constructed the golden calf he intended for it to be a body which would receive divine input from the angel Mattatron, the one in charge of the universe and the powers assigned to the planets and their constellations in the sky. He thought in terms of the ox which is one of the four “animal-like faces” (concepts) supporting the throne (carriage) of G’d. He assumed  that such insights would be provided by the ox seeing it is on the left side of the מרכבה, and it would show the Israelites the way so that it would counteract the negative northern influences. [The journey of the Israelites towards the Holy Land took them straight north. Ed.] At that time the Israelites found themselves within the domain of the planet Mars (as Pharaoh had already warned them about, see Exodus 10,10 compare Rashi). That planet derives all its celestial input from the attribute of Justice. Aaron hoped that just as the Israelites had been guided under the leadership of Moses by the attribute of Justice, so now, under the auspices of that attribute the Israelites would continue to receive celestial guidance. The calf merely symbolised which attribute of the מרכבה would guide the people. He misunderstood such verses as על פי ה’ ביד משה at the command of G’d by means of Moses (Numbers 9,23), as being something that could also apply to על פי ה’ ביד העגל, “at the command of the Lord by means of the ox.”. Aaron’s fatal error was to build an altar in front of this calf. Seeing he announced that the celebration on the following day would be in honour of Hashem (only), he had not become guilty of an act of idolatry by building this altar.
    You have to realise that when the Israelites said: “these are your gods O Israel, who brought you out of Egypt,” there would have been nothing wrong with this if what they had in mind had been the same as what Aaron had in mind when making the calf. After all, we have already explained that Exodus 14,19 accorded the title “elohim” to a column of cloud and a column of fire; there was therefore nothing inherently wrong in the use of the word אלוהים or אלוהיך. The sin was prostrating oneself in front of such a symbol and in offering sacrifices to it (verse 8). Aaron’s intention had been that the calf, while representing the attribute of Justice, would not be removed from the domain of Hashem at all. The Israelites reversed what he had had in mind and turned the “body” of the calf into an independent deity by offering sacrifices to it and prostrating themselves in front of it. This is what the psalmist  Psalms 106,20 had in mind when he wrote: “they exchanged their glory (G’d’s attribute כבוד) for the image of a bull that feeds on grass.” Aaron also explained to Moses in answer to his question that when he said: “I told them that whoever has gold?” “They removed it from themselves and I threw it into the crucible and there emerged this calf.” Aaron implied that his intention had been to address the attribute of Justice. Only in retrospect did it become clear that the people’s intention had been to idolise this calf, to prostrate themselves in front of it, and to offer sacrifices to it (based on 32,24). All of this was the reverse of what my intentions had been, i.e. to assure their continued support by the attribute of Justice.” Keeping this in mind there is no room for the question why Aaron chose gold rather than silver as the metal the people were supposed to bring him. Gold represents the attribute of Justice [compare author’s comments on 25,24 my translation page 1253] as its appearance resembles that of fire. Our sages (Yuma 45) said that the word Parvayim in Chronicles II 3,6 means  that the gold came from a place called Parvayim, so called as its gold was similar in colour to the blood of bulls. The house in which the sacrifices were prepared (Solomon’s Temple) was all of gold as well as the altar of incense and the cherubs. The Mechilta Bachodesh, section 10 explains that if they had made parts of the Temple out of silver, this would have looked too similar to making deities of silver and gold, something prohibited expressly (see our author’s comment on 25,24.)
    A Midrashic approach of the words ויעשהו עגל מסכה, (based on Tanchuma Ki Tissa 19): as soon as Aaron threw the gold into the crucible, the sorcerers amongst the recent converts came and used their tricks to ensure that what would emerge from the crucible would be a calf. Others say that a certain Michah who had been saved at Moses’s insistence as a baby when he was already in the form of a mud brick intended to substitute for a shortfall in the number of bricks produced by the Israelites on that day was to blame for the emergence of the calf. According to the Talmud, when Moses complained about the injustice of an innocent baby being killed, G’d taught him a lesson no to second-guess His wisdom. After sparing the baby’s life, Moses adopted him and he followed him everywhere. At the time of the Exodus when Moses could not find the coffin of Joseph and he threw a parchment with the holy name of G’d plus the words “arise ox” (a name applied to Joseph by his father) inscribed upon it into the river Nile, the coffin floated up. The boy [he must have been at least 60 by then] Michah dived into the river and retrieved this parchment. Now, after Aaron had thrown the gold into the furnace, this Michah threw in the parchment with the words עלה שור, signed with the tetragram into he crucible; thereupon the golden calf emerged from the crucible. After seeing this miracle, the Israelites who had observed it began to chant: “these are your gods O Israel.”
    I have found in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 45 that Aaron found amongst the golden jewelry contributed by the people a headband on which the tetragram had been inscribed. It also had  engraved on it the likeness of a calf. According to Rabbi Eliezer this was the only piece of gold Aaron threw into the crucible. He based himself on the fact that the Torah did not quote Aaron as saying ואשליכם באש, “and I threw them (the contributions of golden jewelry) into the fire, but he said: ואשליכהו באש, I threw it into the fire (verse 24). When the Israelites witnessed a golden calf emerging, this was perceived as a miracle especially since the calf was heard to low, to moo, and this is why they mistakenly ascribed prophetic or divine powers to this golden calf. 
    Rabbi Yehudah said that Samael entered the calf and lowed, making the Israelites think that the calf itself was capable of mooing and therefore was alive. He bases himself on the verse in Isaiah 1,3 that “every ox knows its owner,” i.e. that every creature acknowledges its Creator by its mouth. Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer.
   אלה אלוהיך ישראל, “these are your gods O Israel” Our sages in Sanhedrin 63 derive from this that these Israelites strove to have many deities. They derive this from the word אלה “these,” instead of זה, “this,” if they had referred only to the golden calf. We do indeed find the latter expression in Nechemyah 9,18: זה אלוהיך אשר העלוך ממצרים, “this is your god who took you out of Egypt.”
    
    32,5. וירא אהרן, “Aaron saw.” The reason the Torah does not specify what he saw is that he saw many things. One of the things he saw was that Chur, the son of Miriam had already been murdered (for trying to stop the people from worshipping the calf).
   ויבן מזבח לפניו, “he built an altar in front of it.” He realised that someone had already been slaughtered before this calf (Chur). Perhaps Aaron was afraid that if he too were to allow himself to become a martyr, all of the Israelites would become guilty of death. We have a verse in Lamentations 2,2 אם יהרוג במקדש ה’ כהן ונביא, “if a priest and (or) prophet were to be killed in the Sanctuary,” which suggests that this is the ultimate crime. He preferred to personally shoulder the guilt than have all the people become guilty.
    Another consideration which might have accounted for Aaron’s conduct is that during the time it would take to build the altar, each Israelite bringing a stone, this would be accomplished very quickly. By undertaking to do the building himself he was stalling for time hoping that Moses would show up before too much spiritual damage had been done (compare Rashi). Still another reason prompting Aaron to act as he did was the fact that legally speaking the building of the altar was not something forbidden on pain of death requiring one to become a martyr rather than to respond to pressure. The prohibition to build such an altar per se is only in the order of the average negative commandment, possibly carrying a penalty of 39 lashes if performed with negative intent. The operative verse in the Torah is only “do not make for yourself a hewn image;” Aaron certainly did not make it for himself nor with intent to sacrifice to an idol.
    
    32,7. לך רד כי שחת עמך, “Go, descend, for your people have become corrupt.” The grammatically correct form (passive) should have been כי נשחת עמך, “for your people have been corrupted.” Why did the Torah choose the strong active form of the פיעל construction? Actually, the Torah wanted to get across the point that not only did the people become corrupt on earth but their deeds also caused corruption (actively) in the celestial regions. The meaning of the word השחתה here is equivalent to the tearing down of a structure. The idolatry of the Israelites at the time ruined a spiritual facade in the celestial regions also. This is what our sages referred to as קצץ בנטיעות, “chopping off the young shoots.” There is no question that what the Israelites did at the time of the golden calf episode was similar to what Adam and Chavah had done when they ate from the tree of knowledge, when they sinned both in thought and in deed. [compare author’s words on Genesis 2,9; my translation page 94 section “a kabbalistic approach.” Ed.] Unfortunately, history repeats itself, the children not learning from the mistakes of their parents. (Chagigah 14). This is what our sages alluded to when they reported that Adam offered a single-horned ox as sin-offering as he wanted to make his atonement fit his crime. (compare what I wrote on Genesis 3,6 where I explained this statement of the Talmud Chulin 60).
    A Midrashic approach (Pessikta Zutrata): the words of G’d to Moses to descend implied that His creatures had already caused Him  to descend and inspect how rotten they had become more than once before. Just as G’d “descends” in a situation such as this as we know from Genesis 11,5, so now Moses too was told by G’d to “descend from his formerly lofty position.”
    32,8. סרו מהר, “they have quickly departed, etc.” This term was most appropriate seeing that the people had apparently forgotten the miracles they had seen at the revelation only forty days ago and had committed idolatry at a time when the Shechinah was still present amongst them on Mount Sinai. Solomon paraphrased this when he said (Song of Songs 1,12 as interpreted in Shabbat 88) ”while the king was still at the table (Sinai), my nard gave forth its (evil) smell.” Being unfaithful while under the bridal canopy is the ultimate insult by the bride to the groom. The words used by the Torah here have also been paraphrased by David in Psalms 106,13: “but they soon forgot His deeds; they would not wait to learn His plan.” The word עצתו, “His plan,” in that psalm refers to the Torah which Moses would bring with him on the morrow.
   עשו להם עגל מסכה, “they made for themselves a cast calf.” There are a number of surprising statements in this passage. 1) Seeing the Israelites had attained the spiritual niveau of the ministering angels at the time of the revelation by having heard G’d directly speak to them, how is it possible that they would request or demand from Aaron that he make for them an idolatrous image? 2) How can we understand the fact that they were now prepared to believe that the very earrings which they had worn in their ears had brought them out of Egypt, that they said concerning this gold: “these are your gods who have taken you out of Egypt?” 3) How is it possible that Aaron, second only to his brother Moses in his qualities as religious figurehead, could be prepared to go along instead of becoming a martyr when faced with the alternative of death at the hands of the people? Is it not a clear-cut rule that when it comes to a choice between committing idolatry and saving one’s life one must be prepared to give up one’s life rather than commit that sin? 4) How could Aaron say to Moses: “please do not be angry my lord,” shifting the blame to the people etc. (verse 22)? What other provocation would entitle Moses to become angry if not the commission of such a terrible sin?
    The answer to all these questions is that they were based on the wrong premise. The last thing on the people’s mind was that Aaron should construct an idolatrous object for them; they did not demand a deity but a leader during their travels in the desert, just as Moses had been their leader. They said this clearly when they told Aaron אשר ילכו לפנינו, “who are to walk ahead of us (verse 1).” The “leader” was to show them the direction they were to travel in the desert. Up until now Moses had told them what route to take, and now there was no one to tell them in which direction to move. The words עשה לנו אלוהים, are to be understood as “make us a new leader seeing we have just lost our previous leader.” [They wanted a replacement for Moses, not for G’d. Ed.] The whole reason that Aaron involved himself in this project was to gain time, to procrastinate, in the hope that before he would complete it Moses would return so that the whole premise for the people’s request would collapse. The reason Aaron did not refuse and thereby risk becoming a martyr was that there was no need to do so for all the people wanted was a new leader to take the place of Moses. [in fact, refusing under the existing conditions could have been tantamount to suicide. Ed.] When Aaron remonstrated with Moses why the latter had become angry at him, he meant that seeing that the people had not demanded anything in the nature of idolatry there was no cause to get so excited. He added verbatim what the people had said to him, namely: “make for us an elohim who will walk ahead of us.” [Moses himself had been told by G’d that he would be elohim for Pharaoh (Exodus 7,1) and that Aaron would be his prophet.] Aaron added that the immediate cause for such a request in the words of the people themselves had been Moses’ tardiness in returning from the mountain. He implied the people’s readiness to immediately be led again by Moses now that he had returned. The proof for reading the mind of the people correctly was that they had not said simply: “make us a god,” but had said: “make us a god, for this man Moses, we do not know what became of him.” In other words, they wanted to replace Moses “the man,” not the Lord G’d. If the people had not had idolatrous thoughts when making their request, the idea that Aaron had assisted them in an idolatrous undertaking was preposterous! This is why Aaron had not hesitated to announce חג לה’ מחר, “tomorrow will be a festival for the Lord G’d.”
    Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 10,3) point out that it is not written חג לעגל, “a festival in honour of the calf.” This proves that Aaron’s intention was crystal clear, oriented exclusively towards Hashem. Perhaps the most convincing proof that the people had not considered the calf a deity is the fact that when Moses proceeded to burn it [verse 20, before any of the people who had danced around it had been executed, Ed.] not a single Israelite is reported as trying to interfere with Moses attacking and destroying his deity. Had even a small group of people seriously considered this golden calf to have any divine powers, surely they would have stoned Moses to death for depriving them of their god! (compare what Moses said to Pharaoh when asked by him to slaughter the lambs in Egypt instead of in the desert, Exodus 8,22). All of the above is based on Nachmanides.
    Having read Nachmanides’ defense of the Jewish people and Aaron, the obvious question is why the people were punished so severely that we still suffer part of that punishment today whenever we are being afflicted for our personal sins? Why were the Levites allowed to execute 3,000 Israelites? Why did G’d dispatch a plague which killed many of the people (verses 27 and 35 respectively)?
    
    The answer is simply that whereas the whole episode with the golden calf began innocently enough as an error at worst, as it progressed it turned into deliberate acts of idolatry. This is why the Torah wrote that the people “prostrated themselves before the calf, that they offered peace-offerings to it, that they danced around it, etc. “(32,6; 32,19).
    Actually, at that time, the Israelites were divided into different groups. Some of them had pure motives when offering sacrifices; the Torah reflects this by writing (verse 6): ”they offered burnt-offerings and prepared peace-offerings.” The Torah did not write: “they offered burnt-offerings to it, and they prepared peace-offerings to it.” The ones whose motives were idolatrous were the ones of whom the Torah writes (verse 8): “they prostrated themselves before it, and they slaughtered offerings for it.”
    Midrash Tanchuma Ki Tissa 19 states explicitly that the mixed multitude (of Egyptian converts) who joined the Jewish people at the Exodus were the ones who made the golden calf. The Midrash proves this from the words אלה אלוהיך ישראל, “these are your gods O Israel.” Had the makers of the golden calf been natural born Jews they would have chanted: “these are our gods O Israel, who have brought us out of Egypt.“ This episode prompted our sages in Yevamot 16 to say that the process of assimilating converts is as much of an affliction for Israel as being struck with a form of skin eczema called ספחת on raw flesh, a dread disease, (compare Leviticus 13,2). On the same subject of accepting converts Shemot Rabbah 42,6 has stated that the reason G’d told Moses: “go on down for your people have become corrupt, was that Moses had accepted these converts at face value without having first obtained G’d’s permission to convert them. G’d reminded Moses that He had specifically said to him (Exodus 7,4) “I shall take out My hosts, My people, the Children of Israel. He had never mentioned taking out people who were not “Children of Israel,” whereas Moses had taken it upon himself to accept the mixed multitude. G’d now made it plain that He did not consider these converts as “My people.” In spite of what the Midrash writes, the fact remains that though these converts originated the disaster, the natural born Jews joined in of their own accord. This is why all of them were punished.
    
    32,11. ויחל משה את פני ה’ אלו-היו, “Moses pleaded before Hashem, his G’d.” Moses pleaded with the attribute of Justice; the word פני when used in connection with G’d always refers to the attribute of Justice. To mention just a few examples: (Leviticus 20,5) ושמתי אני את פני באיש ההוא, “I shall set My face against that man;” or (Psalms 34,17) פני ה’ בעושי רע, “the face of G’d is set against evildoers. I have already dealt with this word in my commentary on Exodus 20,1.
    We are familiar with the meaning of the word ויחל from Maleachi 1,9 חלו נא פני א-ל, “please implore the favour of G’d.” Alternately, the word may be derived from תחלה, “beginning, at first.” It would mean that Moses began something that would continue through to its end. He would implore the attribute בינה until he would reach the attribute דעה, which is above it. The description by Moses of G’d as אלו-היו is something that does not occur anywhere else in the whole Torah. It would normally indicate that Moses related to “his” G’d as no one else ever did or could and G’d acknowledged this during his life time. Nowhere else do we find that the Torah described G’d as specifically Moses’ G’d, such as we find frequently in connection with the patriarchs. G’d is often described as “the G’d of Avraham,” or as “the G’d of Yitzchak,” or as “the G’d of Yaakov.” Even in connection with David we find that Isaiah 38,5 quotes G’d telling Chiskiyah: “thus said the Lord, the G’d of your ‘father’ David, etc.” However, in Moses’ case this is the only time G’d associated His name with Moses and even then only by means of a pronoun, almost like an afterthought. I believe that the Torah’s intention was to give us a hint of G’d’s partial withdrawal from the Jewish people and even from Moses due to this grievous sin. This is confirmed by G’d describing the people to Moses as עמך, “your people.” He hinted that as of then they were not “His” people. How could they be, seeing they had been unfaithful to Him?
   למה ה’ יחרה אפך בעמך, “Why, Hashem, should Your anger flare up against Your people, etc.” In Deut. 9,26 Moses elaborates in greater detail about this prayer he offered up pleading with G’d not to destroy the Jewish people. Our sages Shemot Rabbah 43,10, ask why Moses mentioned the Exodus at this time? They answer that Moses asked G’d to consider the background of the Jewish people, where they had been and under what circumstances He had taken them out of a land infested with all kinds of idolatry such as the land of Egypt. After all, it was probably not the first time Israelites had made a cast calf- though they could not make it out of gold because they were too poor.
    32,13. זכור לאברהם ליצחק לישראל עבדיך “Remember for the sake of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yisrael Your servants;” If even Moses, the greatest of all our prophets had to remind G’d of the merit of the patriarchs in his plea to G’d in order to secure a favourable hearing, how much more so must we make such a reminder a pivotal part of all our prayers. G’d likes to be reminded of the patriarchs by us in all generations.
    A Midrashic approach (Shemot Rabbah 44,1-2): the words “remember Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, tell us that Moses’ prayer did not evoke a response until he had mentioned the dead and departed; this explains why Israel has been compared to a grapevine as we know from Psalms 80,9 גפן ממצרים תסיע, “You plucked up a grapevine from Egypt.” Just as the grapevine is alive and remains alive even when attached to dead trees, trees which are far bigger than it, so Israel will remain alive and prosper by supporting itself by the dead (patriarchs). You will note that whereas Elijah offered up numerous prayers at Mount Carmel, G’d did not respond to him until after he had mentioned the dead. When he pleaded ענני ה’ ענני, “answer me O Lord, answer me,” nothing happened until he added the words ה’ אלו-הי אברהם יצחק וישראל, “Lord G’d of Avraham, Yitzchak and Israel, today let it be known that there is a G’d in Israel.” As soon as he had concluded this particular prayer, fire fell from heaven and consumed the burnt-offering as well as the firewood and the stones. [I find this Midrash difficult as in the text you will note that Elijah mentioned the patriarchs before pleading ענני ה’ ענני. We may have to assume that the previous prayers are simply not recorded in the text. (Compare Kings I 18,36)]
    Moses, likewise, remained on Mount Sinai for forty days to ask G’d’s mercy for His people for the sin of the golden calf and he was not answered until he mentioned the dead by saying: “remember Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov.” As soon as he did that, the Torah writes וינחם ה’ על הרעה אשר דבר לעשות לעמו “The Lord reconsidered the evil He had said to do to His people.” The whole episode helps us understand what Solomon referred to in Kohelet 4,2 when he said: “I praise the dead who are dead already.” He meant that such dead are even more effective in death than live and righteous people are while still alive. This is what the sages meant when they said that the righteous dead are greater in death than while they were still alive” (Chulin 7).
    Another approach to this verse in Kohelet: Solomon meant that the dead who were righteous during their lives long ago were greater in their lifetime than the righteous of the present generation in their lifetime (Shabbat 30,1). The proof is that the decrees handed down from the times of Moses are still being observed (though Moses has been dead a long time), whereas the decrees issued by kings nowadays, kings who are alive, are frequently not being observed. Moses himself had introduced numerous תקנות, ordinances, over and above the explicit laws spelled out in the Torah. To name but one: when the Torah writes in Leviticus 23,44 וידבר משה את מועדי ה’ אל בני ישראל, “Moses stated the laws about the festivals of G’d to the Children of Israel,” the Talmud Megillah 32 explains that Moses instituted the rule that the laws about keeping these festivals have to be expounded publicly on that day or earlier. We find that Ezra also added new such ordinances which are still being observed in our time (compare Baba Kama 82). All this is part of what Solomon had in mind when he praised the dead as being better off than the living as the ordinances of the living are often not accepted by their contemporaries
   ונחלו לעולם, “and it shall be their heritage forever.” What Moses meant was that the patriarchs would transmit that heritage forever. Even if the Israelites would be exiled from their land, no other nation would receive it as their heritage. This is the meaning of the words אחוזת עולם, “an eternal possession,” which G’d promised to Avraham in Genesis 17.8. Another meaning included in the words ונחלו לעולם is that the reference is to another, eternal world. When we think about that meaning of the word לעולם in Moses’ plea we  would have an assurance in this verse, (or by Moses quoting G’d back to Himself) of G’d’s promise that the Israelites would exist forever, in this world as well as in the hereafter.
    
    32,15. ויפן וירד משה מן ההר. “Moses turned and descended from the mountain.” Rabbeinu Chananel writes in this connection that Moses must have been facing the cloud during his descent. In other words, just as he had ascended facing the cloud, he now descended keeping his face towards the cloud, walking back-wards. The High Priest emulated Moses’ withdrawal from facing the Shechinah on the Day of Atonement when he also walked backwards out of the Holy of Holies after having offered the incense before the kapporet as well as some of the blood of the two offerings on behalf of the people, as well as on to the dividing curtain. The Mishnah Yuma 52 states: “in the manner he had entered he exited.” This is also the way Leviticus 16,24 “he exited and completed the ritual of his own burnt-offering as well as that of the people,” has been interpreted by our sages to mean that the wordלבמה , “to the altar” must also be read as מבמה, “from the altar,” when he was headed back to Jerusalem (Yuma 53). There is a precedent for this in Numbers 31,21, where the words הבאים למלחמה must also mean הבאים מן המלחמה, “the ones who were returning from the war.”
    In the present situation what happened was simply a putting into practice of the well known principle (Psalms 16,8) שויתי ה’ לנגדי תמיד, “I always keep the Lord (Shechinah) before my eyes.” How do we know that the Shechinah was on the mountain at the time Moses descended from the mountain? In Deut. 9,15 where Moses refers to his descent from the mountain, he adds the words: “and the mountain was burning in fire while the two Tablets of the covenant were on my two hands.”
    We have also been taught in Yuma 53 that any student taking leave from his teacher has to follow the procedure Moses taught us and depart facing his Rabbi until he can conveniently hide his face behind something between him and his Rabbi. All of Israel symbolically perform the rite of withdrawing from facing G’d while taking three steps backwards at the end of the central prayer, the עמידה. Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel
    When you examine this verse together with the verse following it you will find a total of 108 letters, corresponding to the 108 handbreadths of the combined length, width, and depth of one of the Tablets. The two Tablets combined comprised 216 such handbreadths corresponding to the number of letters in the great name  (based on the three verses in Exodus 14,19-21 being written one above the other giving 72 three-lettered “words.” Compare our comments on that verse.). When these Tablets rested inside the Holy Ark they symbolised the fact that the great name of the Lord in all its permutations was contained in the Holy Ark. When you consider the number of letters between the beginning of Exodus 34,4-6 where the making of the second set of the Tablets is described, you will also find a total of 108 letters followed by the words: ויעבור ה’ על פניו, “Hashem passed before him (Moses).” This is all a clear hint that the presence of these measurements and letters symbolised the presence of the Shechinah. Moreover, the remarkable number of letters on both occasions in connection with the Torah describing the Tablets is a powerful proof for the way the Kabbalists have determined that there are actually a total of 216 letters which form the complete great name of the Lord. Moses had been taught all this explicitly while he was on Mount Sinai.
   לוחות כתובים משני עבריהם מזה ומזה הם כתובים, “Tablets inscribed on both of their sides; they were inscribed on one side and on the other.” It was a great source of wonderment that the writing could be read from either side as if it had been written on that side originally. When we humans write, say on transparent glass, anyone standing on the other side while seeing the letters has to read them in reverse order for the writing to make sense to him. It is possible to explain the words משני עבריהם as meaning that any word in the Torah has two kinds of meaning. There is the obvious meaning, called נגלה, and the hidden, mystical meaning, called נסתר. Solomon alluded to this in Proverbs 25,11 when he wrote: “a word properly spoken is like a golden apple in a silver setting.” We also have a verse in Job 11,6: “for there are multiple aspects to wisdom.” Torah is a source of wisdom on different levels. In addition to its plain meaning, the פשט, there are still worlds of hidden wisdom. In Psalms 62,12 David refers to this by saying: G’d has said one thing, but I have heard two (messages) out of the one thing.”
    
    32,16. והלחות מעשה אלו-הים המה, “and the tablets were G’d’s handiwork.” The reference is not to G’d’s “manually” having made the Tablets, but that they came into existence at a verbal directive of G’d just as the world came into existence by verbal directives of G’d, i.e. בדבר ה’ שמים נעשו, “by the word of the Lord the heavens were made” (Psalms 33,6). A similar expression is used in Genesis 2,4: ביום עשות ה’ אלו-הים ארץ ושמים, “on the day the Lord G’d made earth and heaven.”
    	והמכתב מכתב אלו-הים הוא, “and the script was the script of G’d.” Nachmanides writes that the verse praising the distinctive features of the Tablets should by rights have been written earlier, right next to 31,18 where the Torah reports G’d giving the Tablets to Moses, that they were made of stone and written with the “finger” of G’d. The reason the details written here have been delayed is to draw our attention to the fact that what Moses was about to smash was something so extraordinary that the very idea that he would smash it is mind-boggling. This is how Nachmanides accounts for the positioning of this verse at this point. While this makes sense, the bigger problem is how Moses, the trusted servant of the Lord, could initiate such an act of deliberately destroying G’d’s handiwork without having obtained G’d’s permission to do so. If, due to Israel’s sin, they had forfeited the right to receive the Tablets, Moses should have returned them to G’d! Alternatively, he should have asked G’d what to do with them. When a mortal king dispatches a sealed document to someone by means of a messenger and the messenger is unable to make delivery because the recipients do not want to accept said document, a loyal servant brings the document back to his king explaining that he was unable to deliver it. He would most certainly not treat it disrespectfully by tearing it up!
    The reason that Moses smashed the Tablets was that he had observed that the letters on it had already flown away (Shemot Rabbah 46,1) as soon as he was approaching the area where the calf was positioned, an area which had become defiled by the calf’s very presence. In other words, continuing with our parable, the king’s seal had already disappeared, so that the rest of the document was no longer of any value.
    We may compare the Tablets themselves and the writing on them to the relationship between body and soul. The Tablets were the body, the writing was the soul. Once the soul has departed the body is of no value whatsoever. Such a dead body deserves to be buried under the earth. This is why Moses’ mind told him that the proper thing for him to do was to bury the Tablets beneath the mountain. The proof for our sages’ statement that the letters had flown away is found in Berachot 8 where the rabbis warn of treating scholars who have forgotten their learning due to some accident such as sickness or economic hardship without respect. They meant that even the broken pieces of the first set of Tablets were deemed worthy to be placed inside the Holy Ark. Even the stone devoid of script was not considered as having lost all sanctity. The scholar who had once been a receptacle of Torah knowledge deserves to be treated with respect even when he can no longer disseminate his knowledge (provided his present condition was due to an accident beyond his control). This is also what our sages had in mind when they said that Moses did  not smash the Tablets but they fell out of his hands. As long as the letters were on the Tablets they supported not only themselves but “carried” the entire weight of such massive stone cubes. Once the letters had flown off, it was quite impossible for mortal man, even a giant such as Moses, to carry such a weight. The text supports our approach for as long as the letters were on the Tablets the Torah reports Moses as carrying both Tablets בידו, in one of his hands (verse 15). As soon as he saw the calf and the dances, he could not even carry the Tablets with both his hands (verse 19).  We find something parallel with human beings. As long as the body contains a soul, i.e. is alive, it weighs less than after the soul has departed. Even a piece of iron which is white-hot weighs less than the same piece after it has cooled off, i.e. after the “life, the fire” has gone out of it. In halachic terms (Shabbat 94) this is the meaning of the principle החי נושא את עצמו, “that living people or animals carry themselves,” i.e. that one does not incur a penalty for carrying living people on the Sabbath [providing they could have walked if they had not been carried. Ed.] 
    
    32,17. את קול העם ברעה, “the sound of the people in its shouting;” the final letter in the word is the letter ה although it should have been the letter ו seeing that the subject is masculine. However, we may see in this an allusion to five different sounds or voices such as described in connection with the idolatrous cults performed in front of the golden image Nebuchadnezzar had made (compare Daniel 3,7). We are told there about five different sounds, “horn, pipe, zither, lyre, psaltery, bagpipe, and more.“ Another meaning of the word ברעה may be that the wordרעה  is an allusion to the planet Mars of whose negative and destructive influence on the Israelites Pharaoh had already warned Moses as we pointed out repeatedly, based on Exodus 10,10. This is also why the Israelites (worshipping the calf) used the musical instrument מחול as the music produced by it is reputed to counteract harmful radiations from Mars. This is also why Aaron said to Moses: “you know that the people are ברע,“ i.e. are under the influence of that planet.
    Joshua had not ascended the mountain with Moses, neither had he remained in the camp during the entire 40 days Moses had been on the mountain. The word וישמע, “he heard,” rather than “he saw,” is clear proof of that. While waiting for Moses at the base of Mount Sinai, a special portion of manna descended for his benefit, as basically, no manna fell on the mountain. Our sages in Yuma 76 have explained the expression לחם אבירים אכל איש, (Psalms 78,25) as applying to the special portion of manna G’d made it rain around the site where Joshua had positioned himself. The Torah (G’d) refers to Joshua as איש in Numbers 27,18 where He responds to Moses’ request to appoint a successor for him by mentioning that Joshua was suitable, that he was -in the words of Moses- a man with the right kind of spirit.
    
    32,19. וירא את העגל ומחלות, “and when he saw the calf and the dances, etc.” Of all the various musical instruments which were being used at that time, the Torah identifies only the מחלות,  The fact is that you find that Scriptures lists a total of seven varieties of musical instruments each one corresponding to one of the seven fixed stars (galaxies, which formed the basis of astronomy and astrology until Copernicus). The instrument known as כנור corresponded to the planet Saturn, whereas the instrument known as תוף, drum, corresponded to the planet Jupiter. The instrument known as עוגב corresponds to the planet Venus; the instrument known as צלצלי שמע corresponds to the planet Mercury. The instrument known as צלצלי תרועה corresponds to the moon, whereas the instrument known as מחול corresponds to the planet Mars. The instrument known as מנים corresponds to the planet Sun.
    In Psalms 150 there is a list of nine different musical instruments corresponding to nine planets (galaxies). The experts of music know how each of these instruments match the specific nature of the planets and zodiac influences they are to represent or counter, respectively. The שופר and נבל which are unaccounted for in our list but have appeared in Psalm 150 each have their cosmic function also. The שופר represents an all-embracing planet, one that orbits all the other planets, whereas the instrument known as נבל, corresponds to the eighth planet the sphere within which all the stars we observe are orbiting. The reason that in connection with the golden calf the instrument מחול  is singled out for special mention is that in the desert the influence of the planet Mars is exceedingly potent. You will note that already after the Israelites had been saved by walking through the sea whereas their pursuers the Egyptians perished in that same sea, Miriam and her companions took two instruments with which they accompanied their song of praise to G’d, namely the מחול and the תוף. (compare Exodus 15,2). In that connection the Torah mentioned that Miriam was the sister of Aaron, a fact familiar to every reader of the Torah. It appears that some of the ladies banging the drums at that time directed their thanks-giving at the planet Jupiter, the planet to which this instrument corresponds. In order to offset such erroneous כוונות the Torah (Miriam) mentioned that her brother Aaron represented צדק seeing that he was such a perfectly righteous and lovable person. This thought about Aaron would deflect what could otherwise have been a serious theological error on the part of the women playing the drums.
    A Midrashic approach views the expression מחולות as derived from מחילה, “pardon, forgiveness.” According to this view when Moses looked at all the musical instruments being used in these festivities, none evoked within him any hope of these people being forgiven eventually, until he saw the מחולות. As soon as he saw that instrument, he regained confidence that there was hope that G’d would eventually forgive them for this grievous sin and he immediately proceeded to burn the calf, etc. This whole matter is an illustration of the old adage of our sages that סימנא מילתא הוא, that one must not dismiss symbols as of no consequence and not related to the essence of a matter, but that on the contrary, any symbol may trigger something which will prove to be very important (compare Horiot 12). 
    When Moses sprinkled the ash of the golden calf on the water and made the Israelites drink the mixture, he did so in order to disgrace them as they would excrete this in the form of diarrhea, not as urine. Compare Isaiah 30,22: “who says of idolatry and its remains: ‘you will cast them away like a menstruous woman.’” Another thought which motivated Moses was to examine the Israelites just like women who are suspected of infidelity against their husbands, סוטות. If the faces of the people drinking this mixture would turn green (like the face of a guilty סוטה), it would become public knowledge who amongst them had enjoyed watching the dancing and the festivities around the golden calf. The people who had participated in the golden calf cult in deed and had been witnessed and identified as such had already been condemned to die by tribunal; the identity of those, however, who had committed the sin only in their hearts had not been known and became known only as the result of their drinking this water with the ash of the golden calf.
    This is what our sages meant in Yuma 66 when they said anyone who had slaughtered a sacrifice or offered incense to the golden calf was executed by the sword. The ones who had merely kissed the calf died at the hands of G’d. Those who had enjoyed the proceedings without participating actively except with their hearts were struck by dropsy. Another source distinguishes between the ones who had been legally warned of the penalty they would face and those who had not been warned. The former were executed by the Levites, the latter died at the hand of G’d. Those who had participated actively but had not been seen by valid witnesses nor been warned properly would die at the hands of G’d. Had G’d performed a miracle and the people guilty only in their hearts would have been struck by dropsy without having drunk from the water with the ash of the golden calf, the people might have said that the afflicted person while dying because of a sin he had committed did not die on account of his enjoying the cult of the golden calf. Having first drunk from this mixture made it reasonable to attribute their dropsy to a sin connected with the golden calf. The reason the Torah reported Moses as “grinding” the gold was to achieve as near a replica of the Sotah procedure when earth is taken from the floor of the Tabernacle and mixed with the water before the Sotah is given it to drink (compare all the details in Numbers 5,17.)
    
    32,24. ואשליכהו באש ויצא העגל הזה, “I threw it into the fire and there emerged this calf.” Our sages called whatever has  been mentioned in connection with the calf up to this point, “the first calf.” The story from this point on, i.e. Aaron’s personal account is known as the “second calf.” This is important to realise as our sages have said (Megillah 25) that the portion of the “first calf” may be read from the Torah as well as translated into another language, whereas the part commencing here may be read in public only in Hebrew. The reason our sages gave for this difference is that they were concerned with the image of Aaron. Anyone who does not know Hebrew well may draw the wrong conclusion from the translated version. We need to consider that although the episode has been described impersonally by the Torah as well as in Moses’ own words in verse 8 where he said: “they have made for themselves a cast calf, etc.,” in the eyes of our sages verse 4 and verse 8 are all considered as part of one story. This is why both these verses may be read in public in translation. Here, however, where Aaron tells of his own involvement it became important to insure that he would not be accused of sinful action which he had not in fact been guilty of. To give just one example. The words ויצא העגל הזה when read in translation and out of context give the impression that Aaron wanted to whitewash his part in the affair saying the calf had come out by itself. It might also give the impression that if it had walked out by itself , it was alive,  another wrong impression.
    32,25. לשמצה בקמיהם, “to disgrace amongst those who rise up against them.” Both Rashi and most other commentators understand the word לשמצה as meaning the dissemination of evil reports. Our sages use the word in this sense when they speak about שמץ פסול  in Pessachim 50. Moses said: “Aaron was the cause that future generations will spread evil reports about the generation of the Jews at this time, saying that all of them had been of an idolatrous mind at the time. Evil gossip would take hold amongst all those who would rise up against the Jewish people at a future time. It would disgrace the people in the eyes of their adversaries.”
    The correct interpretation of these words is what Nachmanides writes, i.e. that the word לשמצה is a word denoting “reduction, diminution.” A Biblical parallel is found in Job 4,12: ותקח אזני שמץ מנהו, “my ear caught just a little bit of it.” Another example where the word is used in a similar fashion is Job 26,14: ומה שמץ דבר נשמע בו, “the mere whisper that we perceive of Him.” According to this approach what Moses meant here was that Aaron’s part in the golden calf episode would diminish the ability of the Jewish people to stand up against their adversaries whenever the occasion would arise as they had fewer merits going for them. This same thought is also expressed in Ezekiel 29,15: “I (G’d) shall diminish them so that they shall not rule over the nations.” [The prophet describes the re-emergence of the state of Egypt as a greatly reduced world power. Ed.] Jeremiah 10,24 speaks of a “reduction” in the amount of G’d’s wrath when disciplining the Jewish people.
    	
    32,27.  כה אמר ה’ אלו-הי ישראל, “thus has said the Lord G’d of Israel, etc.” We do not find that G’d’s instruction by word to Moses of this matter is recorded in the Torah other than that Moses quotes G’d. Nonetheless, he did receive such instructions. Moses refers to the Lord as אלו-הי ישראל in order to teach us that even the makers of the golden calf intended to offer their sacrifices to the “G’d of Israel,” (not to the golden calf). Still, the attribute of Justice decided to punish these people as true heretics as the Torah has taught us (Deut. 1,17) that המשפט לאלוהים הוא, the “judgment,” i.e. the evaluation of our deeds is something that G’d has reserved for Himself. This is the way Nachmanides explains these words. We find something analogous in Numbers 16,9 where Moses tells the Levites that אלו-הי ישראל, “this attribute of Justice has separated, (distinguished) the Levites from the remainder of the community of Israel.” This was another example of G’d exercising His right to evaluate the deeds of men. In that instance it meant that the performance of service to אלו-הי ישראל in and around the Tabernacle  would be reserved for the tribe of Levi. Seeing that it had been the members of this tribe who had sanctified the Lord’s name in public, they were rewarded by sanctifying the Lord’s name on a regular basis. The moral lesson is that that the appropriate way to atone for desecration of the Lord’s name publicly is to sanctify it publicly.
    
    32,31. אנא חטא העם הזה, “I implore!” This people has committed a grievous sin.” This is the source for the High Priest in the Yom Kippur service introducing the various confessionals with the word אנא. Our sages in Yuma 35 say that the prayer resulting in the granting of atonement was derived from Moses’ prayer at Mount Sinai when he said to the Jewish people (Exodus 32,30) “perhaps I can achieve atonement for your sin.” Hence it is fitting that the formula used by the High Priest on the Day of Atonement introducing the confession leading to atonement should be one that has proven effective in times past. Furthermore, the Talmud there queries the need to mention the holy name of G’d in the confessional. It concludes that seeing this is done in the case of the עגלה ערופה, the heifer that gets killed as atonement for the possible indirect involvement of the people in a town near which an unsolved  murder occurred (Deut. 21,8), it is most certainly appropriate for the High Priest on the Day of Atonement to invoke the holy name of G’d for sins which most certainly have been committed by unknown parties and which require atonement. It is customary nowadays (when there is no Temple or High Priest) to invoke the name of the Lord when reciting a prayer beginning with the word אנא. Examples are such prayers as  אנא ה’ הושיעה נא, אנא ה’ הצליחה נא. This parallels the prayer of the High Priest which commenced with the words אנא ה’ כפר נא לעמך ישראל, “please O Lord forgive Your people Israel, etc.” When Samson appealed to G’d to restore his physical strength to him one last time (Judges 16,28), he also invoked the name of the Lord saying: אדני ה’ זכרני נא וחזקני נא אך הפעם, “My Lord G’d remember me and grant me my strength only this one time, etc.” If nonetheless, we find that Moses in our verse did not add the name of the Lord after saying אנא, it is possible to explain this by saying that Moses was simply ashamed to utter the name by means of which the Torah had been given to the Children of Israel, the same people who had now violated this Torah in such a gross fashion. Even though Moses did not explicitly mention the holy name of G’d on this occasion, it was alluded to in the very word אנא, the numerical value of its letters being 52, i.e. twice the number of the holy name of G’d, i.e. the attribute of Justice as well as the attribute of Mercy. That very name, referring to both attributes is mentioned at the beginning of the list of the thirteen attributes of His which G’d revealed to Moses in Exodus 34,6.
    It is also possible to explain the absence of the name of the Lord in Moses’ prayer at this juncture by the requirement to immediately spell out the precise nature of the sin for which atonement is being sought. This is why Moses said immediately “they made for themselves gods of gold, etc.” It would have been inappropriate to invoke the name of G’d which symbolises Unity, at a time when the sin for which forgiveness was being sought symbolised the very opposite of Unity, i.e. diversity. Moses acted in line with a famous saying of our sages in Pessikta Zutrata on Exodus 5,2: “what business does a king have in a slaughter- house, and what business does a priest have in a cemetery?” Indeed, we find (Exodus 33,7) that as soon as the Israelites had constructed the god of gold the Shechinah withdrew from their midst as Moses henceforth was obliged to leave the camp if he wanted to communicate with G’d.
    32,32. מחני נא מספרך, “blot me (my name) out from Your book, please.” According to the plain meaning of these words the “book” Moses spoke of was the Torah.
    A Midrashic approach: The word “from Your book” which Moses uttered here as simply a possibility, teaches that the curse of a Torah scholar, even if only conditional, is apt to come true. This is based on what Moses said here. Even though the essence of his prayer, namely forgiveness of the sin of the Jewish people, was accepted by G’d, Moses’ name does not appear in the entire portion of תצוה as a direct consequence of his uttering the words מחני נא מספרך. Whereas G’d forgave the grievous sin of the golden calf, He did not ignore these words of Moses which He considered as out of place. 
    A more rational/investigative approach: The word מספרך, is a reference to the horoscopes, something known as the “book (handbook) of the Lord.” Just as a book consists of impressions of letters and pictures, etc., imprinted in order to be a permanent record, so the stars in the sky represent a similar book of reference of the Lord in which He predetermined the fates of all those who do not qualify for His personal supervision of their fates, i.e. the book of horoscopes. Such a book contains a list of the life spans of each individual before he is born, as well as other data relevant to his life on earth. King David already referred to this in Psalms 139,16: “Your eyes saw my unformed limbs, they were recorded in Your book;” Man’s potential in the celestial spheres (what is inscribed in that book) enables him to accomplish whatever it is that he will accomplish while alive on earth. When this potential is erased in G’d’s book, this means that he will die here on earth forthwith. In other words, the essence of Moses’s prayer was that unless G’d would forgive the people their sin, he, Moses, would not want to live. He simply could not bear to watch the misery that would befall his people if G’d were not to forgive them. On another occasion Moses phrased the same sentiment more directly when he said הרגני נא הרוג אם מצאתי חן בעיניך, “please kill me (now) if I have found favour in Your eyes” (Numbers 10,15). This is a typical expression used by the righteous when they experience mental anguish and despair of the usefulness of their lives. The prophet Elijah used similar language after the failure of his demonstration at Mount Carmel, when he had walked for forty days to Mount Chorev and said to G’d that He should take his soul as he had not proved more effective than other prophets who had preceded him (Kings I 19,4). Another prophet who used similar language as a death wish  was Jonah who said to G’d: “please take my life for it is better that I die than that I live (Jonah 4,3). 
    
    The reason Moses added the words אשר כתבת, “which You have written,” is a reference to something new, a recognition that G’d had been the one who called the universe into existence. Anything “new” testifies to the existence of the One who created something new, just as the written word testifies to the fact that there was someone who did the writing. Moses implied that seeing it had been G’d who had initiated all these forces it was also within His power to cancel such evil decrees at will. G’d answered him that He reserved the right to erase the people who had sinned from His “book,” not the ones who had not. The fact that G’d did not even name the sinners, i.e. the Jewish people, reflects the depth of G’d’s anger at them (32,33). G’d said to Moses in effect: “You are not deserving of any punishment seeing that you have not sinned at all. However, all those who have sinned are the ones who are in line for being erased from My book.” G’d meant that He would nullify the potential of these sinners’ power as predetermined in the handbook of G’d which we described earlier. It is in line with verse 10 where G’d exclaimed that “My anger has flared against them and I will destroy them within a moment.”
    
    A kabbalistic approach: the word מספרך, is equivalent to מן הספירות, “from the list of emanations.” It is as if Moses had said that he wished to be erased from the lower six of these emanations. They represent G’d’s activity when beginning to create the universe. It is a reference to the six extremities of the universe which are also known as the מלאכת שמים וארץ, “the work of (constructing) heaven and earth.” This is also the mystical dimension of Psalms 69,29: ימחו מספר חיים, “may they be expunged from the ‘book’ of life.” David also referred to these emanations, calling them ספר. This enables us to understand a statement by the sages (Rosh Hashanah 16) that three “books” are open before the Lord on New Year’s day. One contains the names of the fully righteous people, one contains the names of the definite sinners, whereas the third contains the names of the  people who fall into an in-between category, being neither considered righteous nor evil. The three books referred to may also be understood as  חסד, דין, רחמים “loving kindness, Justice, Mercy.” G’d relates to the totally righteous with loving kindness; to the wicked He relates with Justice. To the category which has not yet crystallized as either of the former two, He relates with “Mercy.” The attribute of Mercy is called upon to decide to which category to consign these people who by reason of their deeds are not yet properly categorised. The מלך, “King” whom we address on Rosh Hashanah deals with all three categories on that day.
    
    33,4. וישמע העם את הדבר הרע הזה, “when the people heard this bad tiding, etc.”  It appears to me that the Israelites imposed upon themselves various kinds of afflictions, corresponding to the sin they had committed. Whereas previously they had worn crowns on their heads, reflecting their joy of being alive, now when they heard that the Shechinah had removed itself from their midst they responded by foregoing their previous joy in being alive. This the Torah describes in stages; 1) ויתאבלו, “they went into mourning;” 2) לא שתו, “they did not put on their jewelry.” The prophet Hoseah 2,5 describes the removal of jewelry as equivalent to being stripped naked of one’s garments when he says פן אפשיטנה ערומה והצגתיה כיום הולדה, “lest I strip her naked and display her as on the day she was born.” What he meant was that G’d threatened to deprive the Jewish people of the glory of the presence of His Shechinah. The Israelites had been in the habit of using this presence just like other people use their clothing to cover their nakedness to give them dignity. The Israelites would remain as they had been before G’d gave them the Torah, i.e. “naked.” Targum Yonatan understands the words of the prophet similarly when he wrote: דלמא אסליק שכינתי מנה ואעדי יקרה ואשוינה רטישא כזמני קדמאי עד לא אתקריבת לפולחני, “lest I remove My presence from them and My precious jewelry, and I will make them forsaken like before I brought them close to My service (the giving of the Torah).”
    
    33,5. ועתה הורד עדיך מעליך, “and now remove your jewelry from yourself, etc.” this was a reference to the garments the Israelites wore when Moses sprinkled from the blood of the covenant on them, the blood from the sacrifices offered by the firstborn  (Exodus 24,5; see our commentary). This is the opinion of Rabbeinu Chananel in that chapter on verse 8. Seeing that the Israelites had violated this covenant when they made the golden calf G’d commanded them to divest themselves of the symbol of that covenant. This is the meaning of the words ויתנצלו בני ישראל את עדים מהר חורב, “the Israelites stripped themselves of the jewelry they had received at Mount Chorev” (verse 6). In other words, they complied with G’d’s instructions. As to the meaning of the earlier verse (4) where the Torah states that they did not put on their jewelry, this has to be understood to mean that they did not put on all their jewelry, but only part of it. In other words, they understood even without being commanded that in their present circumstances it would ill become them to behave as if nothing had happened and to act as if they were entitled to wear all their jewelry. Now that G’d had commanded them to remove their jewelry they divested themselves of all of it.
    
    According to the interpretation of our sages  that the jewelry referred to was the holy name of the Lord (compare Midrash Tehillim 103) the meaning of these verses is as follows [starting with verse 4, Ed.] “they did not put on their jewelry (their clothing).” In response to the command to remove their jewelry they removed the item bearing the holy name of the Lord. This is the reason the Torah did not use the customary word for stripping one’s clothing off, i.e. הפשט מעליך, but it used the expression הורד, “lower!” When they removed the item in question their spiritual distinction disappeared simultaneously.
    
    Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 45,2 describe this as זיגאות שחגר עליהם, “ a reference to some kind of weapon upon which the holy name of G’d had been engraved.” This is also the meaning of the saying in the Midrash Rabbah in 41,9 that  חרות על הלוחות, that on the Tablets was engraved the motto “freedom from the angel of death.” In other words, the weapon the sages speak about was the weapon designed to neutralise the angel of death. Seeing the people had been equipped with knowledge of the various names of the Lord, they had an effective antidote against the angel of death as normally such knowledge can be obtained by man only after death. This is also what Onkelos had in mind when he translated the words ויתנצלו את עדים as ואעידו. He meant to convey that  the spiritual accomplishments the people had worn proudly ever since the revelation at Mount Sinai, something which had put them on a par with the ministering angels, were now lost to them, disappeared. It was Moses who removed these symbols of their accomplishments from them. This is why the Torah continues ומשה יקח את האוהל, “that Moses would take the Tent (Tabernacle) and pitch it outside the camp.” The word אעדי refers to the loss of some power. It is therefore an appropriate rendering of the Hebrew word ויתנצלו. The word אוהל in this instance is derived from בהל נרו, another word for “light becoming frightened.” the meaning of Moses taking the “Tent” is therefore to be understood as something allegorical, not that he literally moved the entire Tabernacle. Moses removed the spiritual light which had been part of the Tabernacle to a place outside the camp to indicate that the people had now forfeited this dimension of their relationship with G’d. The word אוהל should be understood in a similar manner in Numbers 24,8 where Bileam praises the Jewish people describing מה טובו אוהליך יעקב something normally translated as “how goodly are your tents O Yaakov.” The meaning would be “how goodly are your spiritual lights O Yaakov.” I will explain this in due course when discussing that verse in detail. I have already explained the reason why the Torah refers to the spiritual accomplishments of the Jewish people in terms of “jewelry” in connection with Exodus 24,11 and why this term is spelled out only when the people lost this jewelry and not when they were given it.
    
    33,7. ומשה יקח את האוהל, “and Moses would take the tent, etc.” The word יקח in this instance is the present tense. It means Moses would do this on a regular basis. The words הרחק מן המחנה mean that Moses had to go some distance away from the encampment of the Israelites seeing the Israelites were in a state of disgrace vis-a-vis heaven due to their great sin. Moses applied the ruling we have learned in Rashi that whenever the student is in a state of disgrace so is his teacher. Hence Moses had to leave the environment of people whose sin had caused the Shechinah to withdraw.
   והיה כל מבקש ה' יצא אל אוהל מועד אשר מחוץ למחנה, “and whoever sought Hashem would go out to the Tent of Meeting.” This teaches that the Shechinah was no longer resident within the camp of the people. Actually, we would have expected the Torah to write: “whoever wanted to seek out Moses, etc.” The fact that the Torah does not use this syntax indicates that seeking out Moses was equated with seeking out G’d’s presence. Moses was described by the Torah as “Hashem” in this regard. We find that our patriarch Yaakov was also accorded the title “G’d” in Genesis 33,20 where the Torah wrote: ויקרא לו אל אלו-הי ישראל. I have explained all this in connection with that verse. [seeing that every judge is called אלוהים in the Torah, this is not as mind-boggling as it appears at first. It is simply an extension of the principle that the messenger is equipped with the status of the sender, a well-known principle in the Talmud. Ed.] When Rivkah experienced an unusual pregnancy, the fetuses struggling within her womb, the Torah describes her as inquiring from G’d what all this meant. The words used by the Torah are ותלך לדרוש את ה'. The meaning there is that she went to a representative of G’d to ask the meaning of her experience. There too the person whom she inquired from is described as Hashem (Genesis 25,22). There are numerous other examples of the same thing throughout the Bible. We learn from Rivkah’s experience that when the Torah wrote ויאמר ה' לה, that she did not experience a revelation or direct message from G’d, but that she received the word of G’d by means of a person designated by G’d to tell her that she would give birth to twins, etc. We find that both the Messiah and the city of Jerusalem have been accorded the title “G’d” on occasion, such as in Jeremiah 23,6 and Ezekiel 48,34. In the latter instance the word שמה must be read with the vowels קמץ twice instead of a שוא under the letter ש. In all the instances mentioned the rule is simply that the messenger adopts the name of the Sender.
    A Midrashic approach: The word הרחק is similar to the same word describing Hagar seating herself a distance away from her son Ishmael whose weeping she did not want to hear (Genesis 18,13). The distance in question was approximately one kilometer. Tanchuma Ki Tissa 27 bases this on Joshua 3,4 where the text describes a distance, i.e. רחוק, as being 2,000 cubits, i.e. approx. 1200 meters. In our verse the Torah continues with והיה כל מבקש ה' instead of והיה כל מבקש משה, “It would be whenever someone sought out the Lord,” instead of “whenever someone sought out Moses.” This teaches that if one welcomes a Torah scholar this is equivalent to welcoming G’d Himself. Even when the angels seek out the Lord they described Him as being within the tent of Moses. When the sun or the moon seek out the Lord, they too say that He is to be found in the tent of Moses. 
    33,10. והשתחוו איש פתח אהלו, “and they would prostrate themselves, each one at the entrance to his tent.” They did not bow down and prostrate themselves on account of the presence of the pillar of fire or the pillar of cloud, but as a sign of respect for the attribute of כבוד which was present in Moses’ tent. The matter is similar to the respect we show to the Torah scroll. When we bow down before it we do not mean to honour the scroll but what the scroll represents, i.e. the word of G’d which is written on the parchment.
    33,11.  פנים אל פנים, “face to face.” According to the plain meaning of the text we may explain this expression as belonging to what follows, i.e. “as a man  speaks to his fellow.” The meaning of the entire line then would be: “and G’d communicated (spoke) with Moses in a similar fashion to people who speak to each other, i.e.”face to face.” It means there is no intermediary between the speaker and the one being addressed. The purpose of the verse is to describe the level of Moses’ prophetic powers; he was the only prophet capable of being addressed by G’d in such a fashion.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 27). The expression פנים אל פנים denotes anger. G’d said to Moses: “have I not told you that whenever I am angry with the Jewish people it is your task to defend them and to be well-disposed towards them, whereas whenever you are angry with them I will demonstrate that I am well-disposed towards them? Now we have reached an impossible situation when both I and you are angry at the people.” G’d therefore instructed Moses to return to the camp of the Israelites forthwith. When the Torah writes in verse 11 concerning Moses that ושב אל המחנה, we have to read it as if it were spelled ושוב אל המחנה, “and return to the camp!”  The reason for all this is that if both G’d and the Jewish people’s leader are angry, who will bring them back closer to G’d?
    Rabbi Yoshua ben Levi said that we are not able to judge if in our relationship with G’d we experience an elevation on our part or a deliberate effort on G’d’s part to “lower” Himself to our level. At the revelation at Mount Sinai the Lord definitely “lowered“ Himself as the Torah writes that “G’d descended in a cloud” (Exodus 34,5).
    Another Midrashic comment concerning the words ושב אל המחנה is found in Berachot 63  where the Midrash claims that G’d said to Moses: “return your tent to the camp, else  your disciple Joshua will not move his own tent from amongst them and will take over your functions.” Even though Moses did return to the camp G’d’s conditional promise to Joshua was not an empty promise. [Joshua who was mentioned only as a potential successor of Moses at that time did indeed become his successor eventually. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: The words ודבר ה' אל משה פנים אל פנים are to be understood in the sense of פה אל פה אדבר בו, “I speak with him mouth to mouth” (Numbers 12,8). The meaning is not the same as if it had said פנים בפנים דבר ה' עמכם which we find in Deut. 5,4. The description of G’d speaking to the entire Jewish people פנים בפנים implies that they saw a vision within a vision. such as is alluded to by Numbers 14,14 אשר עין בעין נראה אתה ה' “that you have been granted a vision of the Lord  eye to eye.”
   ומשרתו יהושע בן נון נער, “and his personal disciple, Yehoshua son of Nun, a lad, etc.“ Joshua lived a total of 110 years (Joshua 24,29). If you deduct the 40 years the Israelites marched through the desert and the 14 years which Joshua spent in the land of Israel prior to his death (seven years of war and seven years of distributing the country and allocating it to the various tribes) you will note that at this time Joshua was 56 years old. How is it then that the Torah refers to him as a נער, “a lad?”  The answer is that the word נער means “personal valet.” The master is known as איש, whereas the valet is known as נער by comparison. This is spelled out in greater detail in Esther 2,2 where the text speaks of נערי המלך משרתיו, “the lads of the king, i.e. his personal valets.” The word משרתיו in that verse is used to define who were the people called נערי המלך.
    33,13. הודיעני נא את דרכיך, “make Your ways known to me.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word דרכיך means “Your attributes.” The “ways” of the Lord are His attributes, His virtues. This is the way David used the expression in Psalms 103,7 where he wrote יודיע דרכיו למשה, “He would make Moses conversant with His attributes.” The fact is that in that psalm David immediately proceeds to list these attributes of the Lord, such as רחום וחנון ה' ארך אפים ורב חסד, “the Lord is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger abounding in steadfast love.” Moses attempted to gain an understanding of G’d’s essence by means of being told His attributes. G’d’s activities were to be the clue to understanding His essence.
    G’d responded to him in the following way: “I will allow all My goodness to pass before you” (verse 19). Moses’ second request, i.e. הראני נא את כבודך, “let me see Your glory” (verse 19), was denied. In response to this second request G’d told Moses that it is not given to mortal man to have a vision of G’d’s glory while alive.
    Solomon elaborates concerning these two requests of Moses  in Proverbs 25,2 where he writes: “it is the glory of G’d to conceal a matter; but it is the glory of kings to search out a matter.” The meaning of that verse is that knowledge of the Lord consists of two aspects, one of which is granted to man whereas the other is denied to man. The knowledge which is granted to man is not something which is self-evident to everyone but requires serious study and investigation. Solomon means that by careful analysis of how G’d responded to a variety of events we can form a reasonably accurate picture of His essence. This is what Jeremiah 9,23 had in mind when he wrote: “but only in this should one glory; in his earnest devotion to Me. For I the Lord act with kindness, Justice, and equity in the world.” In other words, knowledge of G’d means familiarity with His attributes; man is to recognise the extreme wisdom with which the Lord acts as a leader in His universe. It is not possible to get to know G’d in abstract terms by talking about attributes in a theoretical way; the only way to obtain a working knowledge of the Lord is to study His actions to the extent He has revealed them throughout history. G’d is distant from us by reason of the essence of His glory, whereas on the other hand, He is most close to us by reason of His actions, i.e. His constant involvement in all that goes on in our lives. This can best be illustrated by means of a parable using the sun as our example. On the one hand, the sun and its effect on our lives is visible and is felt on an ongoing basis; on the other hand, it is millions of miles removed from us. In spite of the great distance the sun is separated from us  we are unable even to look at it without becoming blinded. If this is true of a visible and tangible body such as the sun, how much more so is it true of the essence of G’d. This is what Solomon meant in the verse we quoted earlier.
    A rational/investigative approach to Moses’ request “please me know Your ways.” Moses referred to the way G’d revealed Himself when He created the universe and man. Just as He knows man, seeing that every creator is thoroughly familiar with his creatures, so Moses asked to be thoroughly familiar with G’d by means of His various creative acts. He who is familiar with all that G’d has accomplished will find favour in His eyes. This is the reason Moses added the words: “so that I may find favour in Your eyes.” Moses added a further justification for his request, saying “see, this is Your nation;” he meant: “if I am to be an effective leader for Your nation, I must know how You would proceed to act in the event different scenarios develop.” [this is a free translation of the author’s words; a literal translation would not help the reader. Ed.]
    G’d responded to this request by saying: פני ילכו, “My Presence will go (accompany you every step of the way.).” The word פנים in this instance (verse 14) is an expression denoting anger just as in Samuel I 1,18 where Channah is described as being no longer angry when she had been reassured by the High Priest Eli who had become privy to the nature of her prayer. The wording there is ופניה לא היו לה עוד. Obviously this cannot mean that she no longer had a face or a presence, but must mean that her countenance which previously had reflected her anger or anguish no longer reflected such feelings.
    What Moses requested when he said: “please show me Your ways,” was something that it is possible for G’d to grant, i.e. a display of His adjectives, attributes. This is why He said: “I will let all My goodness pass before you, i.e. I will display all these adjectives of Mine to you.” G’d referred to the description of the מעשה בראשית, the story of creation, as reported in Genesis chapter one which concluded with the words that after G’d had reviewed it He described it as “very good.” [perhaps we are justified in understanding the author to mean that this chapter of the Torah was inserted in response to Moses’ request at this time. Ed.]  When G’d used the expression: “it was very good,” He meant that having reviewed the universe’s response to His creative directives convinced Him that nature would accomplish the task the Creator had set for it. By piecing together the various directives G’d had employed in creating the universe, Moses was able to obtain a good picture of G’d’s various attributes in action.
    Concerning Moses’ second request that G’d reveal to Him His essence, i.e. הראני נא את כבודך, G’d responded that this was a request which could not be granted to mortal man by reason of the fact that he was only a mortal creature. G’d “softened” His refusal by adding: “there is a place beside Me,” i.e. I will grant you as much insight into the nature of My being as it is possible for man while a living human being to absorb. When G’d added; וראית את אחורי, He referred to all the tangible matter He had created. A creator or artist leaves behind him tangible traces of the objects he has formed. G’d meant that the physical world such as it is is the evidence which reveals something about the nature of the Creator who called it into existence. The word אחורי is similar in meaning to “something which was left behind, thrown away, discarded.” G’d meant to convey that His discards are a far cry from granting insight into His true essence. This may be the reason why Onkelos translated the words את אורי as ית דבתראי, “that which is behind Me.” He meant all the evidence of My creative activity I have left behind for all to see. All of them are only incidental to me, not related to My essence.
    The words ופני לא יראו, “My face is not subject to being seen by man,” mean that the true essence of G’d cannot be comprehended by man at all.
    According to Onkelos who renders the word ופני as ודי קדמאי, the meaning is that there are imposing creations, i.e. supra-terrestrial beings, beings which have no bodies, which can also not be properly understood by man. G’d relates to these beings as being “in front” of Him rather than the terrestrial beings which He described as being “behind” Him.” This means also that seeing these beings are “in front” of G’d they are constantly under His active supervision. In order to make it quite clear to Moses that these latter insights had been denied him, the Torah writes (34,6) that ויעבור ה' על פניו. In this instance the meaning of the word ויעבור is equivalent to Samuel I 20,36 והוא ירה החצי להעבירו, “he shot the arrows past him. (compare Moreh Nevuchim 1,21). It means that someone has failed to achieve a certain objective and reached a different objective instead. In other words, G’d deliberately deflected Moses’ request and channeled it into something else.
    The words על פניו in 34,6 are a substitute for the name of the Lord. The message of the whole verse is that the Lord, the Creator, withheld from Moses the type (the ability to foresee) of Divine supervision accorded to the beings which are described as על פני. The fact that Moses had requested to be granted these types of insights becomes clear from the response of G’d rather than from the words הראני נא את כבודך which Moses used in 33,19. Instead of complying with Moses’ request, G’d responded by revealing to Him the thirteen attributes, i.e. G’d fulfilled his request הודיעני נא את דרכיך, “please make me familiar with Your attributes.”
    According to Onkelos who translates the words ויעבור ה' על פניו in 34,6 as ואעבר ה' שכנתיה,  G’d’s Shechinah passed in front of Moses, something also known as כבוד נברא. When G’d spoke of והיה בעבור כבודי in 33,22, this lends strong support to Onkelos’ interpretation. In that event the wordsעל פניו  in 34,6 refer to Moses. The meaning of על פניו would be the same as לפניו, “in front of him.” We have similar construction of the expression על פניו in Genesis 32,22 ותעבור המנחה על פניו, “the gift passed before him.”
    Another way of explaining the words ויעבור ה' על פניו is that the voice of the Lord passed in front of Moses. It is not unusual to 
find the ,עבר or העברה in connection with a voice or with a sound. We find an example of this in Exodus 36,6 ויעבירו קול במחנה, “they made a voice (command) traverse the camp.” The word ויקרא in 34,8 refers to that voice which called out. The repetition of the word השם is similar to the repetition of the word אברהם אברהם in Genesis 22,11 or the word משה משה in Exodus 3,4. This, at any rate, is the opinion of Maimonides in his Moreh Nevuchim 1,21.
    [At this point the author copies the relevant pages from the Moreh Nevuchim. I have not included this as the Hebrew in the M.N. is itself a translation from the Arabic. Ed.]
    Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon explains the words כי לא תוכל לראות פני to mean that “you, Moses are incapable of seeing the ‘beginning’ of the light whereas you will be able וראית את אחורי ‘to see the end of the light’” (compare Emunot Vedeyot 2,12). G’d applied the cover to Moses’ eyes while the beginning of the light passed before him whereas He removed this cover when the end of the light passed before him. It is possible that Ezekiel’s comment (Ezekiel 1,27) “I saw a gleam of amber from what appeared to be his loins up, and from what appeared to be his loins down, I saw what looked like fire,” relates to this phenomenon. The former refers to the beginning of the light, whereas the latter statement refers to the tail-end of the light mentioned by Rabbi Saadyah gaon. Concerning this same phenomenon, Chabakuk said (Chabakuk 3,5) “pestilence marches before Him and plague comes at His heels.” In that verse too, the word “before Him” refers to what comes at the beginning, and the word “at His heels,” refers to what comes at the end. Psalms 50,3 speaking of “devouring fire preceded Him, whereas around Him storms swirled fiercely,” suggests that it is impossible to escape the fire that precedes the Lord, whereas the storm swirling around Him may be capable of being survived. When the Torah speaks here about וראית את אחורי, it refers to the aspect of G’d’s “light” man can endure, whereas whatever is described as “in front of Him,” is what man cannot endure if he becomes a witness to it.
    
    A kabbalistic approach. When Moses asked: “please show me Your ways,” he meant “the paths of goodness by means of which you G’d guide and govern Your universe. It is the means by which You become known.” These are the paths of righteousness and kindness, the mark of the righteous person who is the foundation of the earth. Of such a righteous person David said in Psalms 145,17: “the Lord is righteous in all His ways.” These ways which Moses requested are the same as the ones described by Solomon as the ones which he considered beyond his ability to understand when he wrote: in Proverbs 30,18-19: “three things are beyond me, and four I do not know. The way an eagle flies in the sky, the way of a serpent over a rock, how a ship makes its way across the seas, and the way of a man with a virgin.” Solomon meant that the activity of the Just in this world which is described as “the foundation of the earth” is beyond his ability to understand. This is why he included in the random examples he chose both activities in the air, on the water, and activities performed by man. These three realms comprise the totality of the terrestrial universe. The birds roam the atmosphere; the free-roaming beasts roam the earth, the dust; the people traveling in ships roam the waters, and the human species comprised of males and females are what are meant by “the way of a man with a virgin.” Whereas Solomon understood these phenomena, what he did not understand was what is meant by the “activity of the righteous, the Just.” Moses sought clarification of the very thing Solomon failed to understand. [If I understand this correctly, both Moses and Solomon failed to understand how the activity of the Just is responsible for the continued existence of the universe so that it is termed “the foundation of the world.” Ed.] Moses said ואדעך, “so that I will know You,” meaning “so that I can properly appreciate Your uniqueness.”
   למען אמצא חן בעיניך, “in order that I may find favour in Your eyes.” This teaches us that a person who properly appreciates the unity and uniqueness of the Lord will find favour in His eyes.
   וראה כי עמך הגוי הזה, “and see that this nation is truly Your people.” He meant that seeing he was in charge of leading this people, G’d’s people, it was imperative that G’d should grant him these insights in order for him to discharge his duties optimally.
    When G’d responded by saying פני ילכו, this was a reference to the angel Mattatron who is the instrument by means of which the Lord is known throughout the universe for the marvelous and sometimes dreadful events which He orchestrates. Observing these phenomena set in motion by this angel is what was meant in Exodus 14,31 when the Torah wrote: “Israel saw the great hand which the Lord had employed against Egypt, and the people were afraid and they believed in the Lord.”
    The words והניחותי לך, “I will give you rest,” are derived from the word נחת רוח, “peace of mind.” G’d told Moses that he should not worry that He, G’d, would apply the yardstick of the attribute of Justice in its full measure when relating to the Jewish people but only  what is known as the attribute of Justice in its diminished form. This form of the attribute of Justice co-opts a measure of the attribute of Mercy. The “messenger” (Mattatron) to whom G’d referred at this time is known as the attribute of כבוד, more popularly known as the Shechinah. This is the reason Onkelos translates the words פני ילכו as שכנתי תהך, “My Shechinah will go.”
    Moses was not satisfied with this response, seeing  that it represented the attribute of Justice, albeit, the watered down variety. This is why he insisted אם אין פניך הולכים אל תעלנו מזה, “if Your Presence does not go along do not bring us forward from here.” Moses meant that he did not want any intermediary to be the agent that would accompany the Jewish people on their journey. After all, when G’d took the people out of Egypt He had employed two attributes, both the יד החזקה and the כח גדול, “the strong hand (attribute of Justice) as well as the attribute of Mercy (Exodus 14,11). Our sages in the Haggadah shel Pessach used this wording to state that the process of redemption (killing the firstborn of Egypt while saving the firstborn of the Jews) was possible only because G’d did not entrust this to any of His agents. G’d personally involved Himself in that redemption. Moses demanded no less at this time. G’d consented to Moses’ request in this regard, saying: “also the thing that you have said I shall do for you have found favour in My eyes” (verse 17).
    Seeing that G’d had responded favourably to his last request, Moses was now encouraged to ask for even more by saying: “please show me Your glory.” In this matter Moses did not elicit a positive response, G’d explaining that it was impossible to grant this request. Onkelos translates the words לא תוכל לראות פני, as לא תיכול למחזי אפי שכינתי, “you cannot see the face of My Shechinah.” Seeing that in Psalms 104,17 the Shechinah is referred to in terms of חסידה ברושים ביתה, that “the stork makes its home in the lofty cypress,” a simile for the far end of the אצילות, (a region of the celestial world), the near end of that region is understandably described as the “face,” פנים. When G’d said “there is a place beside Me,” He referred to the tail-end of that celestial region we described as אצילות, meaning that this was a region Moses would be able to see. This was not a new concession on the part of G’d, but merely a repetition in different words of what He had said previously when He told Moses: “I will make all My goodness pass before you.”
    The expression אחורי derived from אחור refers to the “West.” similarly to Psalms 139,5 אחור וקדם צרתני, “You have shaped me at the rear and at the front (to look alike from both sides).” [the reference is to Adam prior to Eve having become a separate body. Ed.] It is well known that the Shechinah‘s residence is in the West. [Man (Adam) looked both to the west and to the east simultaneously at that stage of his existence. Ed]  Though he was able to view the “western” end of the Shechinah he was not able to view its “eastern” end. Seeing that Moses had already attained a level enabling him to comprehend the emanations כבוד ותפארת, G’d said to Moses that he would enable him to comprehend the higher emanation חכמה also. This is the true meaning of the words וראית את אחורי. The letter א at the beginning of the word אחורי is not part of the word itself, which is derived from חיור  a form of light. G’d told Moses that he would be able to see a reflection of G’d’s “Light.” The emanation חכמה, “wisdom” (its source) is also sometimes called לבנון, [from לבן “white,” i.e. reflecting all the light aimed at it. Ed.] “Seeing” that emanation חכמה was not merely for the sake of seeing it, but as our sages said (Berachot 7), G’d showed Moses the knot with which the phylacteries of the head are to be tied. The knot is formed in the shape of the letter ד, and it is a well known fact that the letter ד represents the foundation of all wisdom. This is spelled out in the Sefer Hayetzirah in connection with the meanings of the letters  בג’ד כפר’ת. Solomon has already alluded to this in Song of Songs 7,6 where he wrote ודלת ראשך כארגמן, “and your crowning braid is like purple.” He meant that this was the highest level of insight that could be achieved by man, the  emanation כתר, the highest of the emanations, is not subject to man’s comprehension. This was meant by ופני לא יראו.
    After these introductory remarks by G’d the Torah proceeds to describe (34,5) that G’d “descended” in a cloud and “stood” beside Moses proclaiming the holy name of the Lord.” The expression וירד, a word which we normally translate as “He descended” is here an expression of השגה, “achievement,” attainment.” [The word is used in Talmudic Hebrew when describing that someone “descends” into the deeper meaning of something and as a result gains full understanding. The meaning of the entire verse is that Moses now attained a comprehension of the meaning of the holy name of G’d, the attribute כבוד, which is also known as שם with the vowel kametz. The word occurs in that connotation both in Genesis 2,10 and in Samuel II 6,2. In Genesis the meaning of the word is that from that location and upwards the disembodied beings, angels, would ascend to the higher celestial regions. In the book of Samuel where the author speaks of the Holy Ark, the meaning of that word is justified also as the “ark” is also known as shem, i.e. representing the name of G’d. We find that Moses had already been described as shem in 33,2.
    When the Torah writes at this juncture: ויקרא בשם ה’, the meaning is that the attribute כבוד proclaimed this name of the Lord. The word בשם in this verse is a possessive clause of the word י-ה-ו-ה. This is also the way Onkelos understood it when he translated the sequence as בשמא דה’, “in the name of the tetragram.” When the Torah continues (verse 6) with ויעבור ה’ על פניו, the word Hashem here is a reference to the attribute כבוד.  Seeing that this attribute is equivalent to the Shechinah, Onkelos translates the words as ואעבר ה’ שכינתה “G’d let His Shechinah pass before him (Moses).” The word ויקרא “He called out,” refers again to the subject, i.e. the attribute כבוד. It was this attribute which proclaimed the thirteen attributes of G’d and their functions which were revealed to Moses at this stage. These attributes were part of the emanation תפארת, “harmony,” the sixth emanation [commencing with the emanation מלכות at the lower end of the scale. Ed.] This emanation is equated with the attribute of Mercy, and all the 13 מדות, “virtues,” mentioned here are merely different nuances of the attribute of Mercy and how and when it is invoked. The word ויעבור introduces the point when G’d fulfills His previous promise אני אעביר כל טובי לפניך, “I will let all My goodness pass before you” (33,19). The Zohar, when referring to our verse (Parshat Vayakhel page 202) refers to these 13 virtues as מכילין דרחמי, “degrees of mercy.” After Moses had learned how to employ prayer in order to activate these various forms of Mercy, he asked G’d to be constantly personally present during the Israelites’ trek to the Holy Land. The line אם נא מצאתי חן בעיניך אדו-ני, ילך נא אדו-ני בקרבנו means that “if I have found favour in the eyes of the attribute of Justice, let the Shechinah go in our midst.” Onkelos also understands this verse in the same manner. Moses’ prayer focused on the constant presence of the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire as evidence of the presence of the Shechinah. [remember that the Tabernacle had not been built yet at this time. Ed.] The people needed the presence of the Shechinah precisely because they were a “stiff-necked people” as the presence of the attribute of Justice in its diminished form on a constant basis was preferable to the sudden manifestation of the attribute of Justice in its most severe form should the people become guilty of another serious sin. What Moses asked for here was a presence of the Shechinah in a more manifest form than what G’d had spoken of in 33,2 when He had said: “I will send My angel before you.” The kind of angel G’d had referred to at that time was one of the disembodied spirits. G’d now consented to Moses’ request to upgrade the manifestation of the Divine presence accompa- nying the Jewish people. He assured him of an upgrading involving two attributes: 1) The Shechinah would remain manifest amongst the people. To this end G’d said “Here I will make a covenant with the people in the presence of the entire nation, etc.” (34,10). This was a reference to a special angel whose presence symbolised this covenant. 2) He added that this angel (read Shechinah) would perform manifest miracles for the people indicating its presence. The miracles would be of the quality never before performed and witnessed by human beings. In order to  prove that  Moses had attained close contact with the emanation תפארת, G’d added the peculiar phrase את מעשה ה’ כי נורא הוא, switching from the attribute אדו-ני which had been used so far to the tetragram. Not only this, but the Torah should have continued in the plural after having spoken of a variety of miracles and should have written: את מעשי ה’ כי נוראים הם, “the works of Hashem which are awesome.” The reason the Torah employs the singular is that it refers to the emanation תפארת which is equivalent to the attribute of Mercy. When G’d added the words אשר אני עושה עמך, “which I perform with you,” this was an assurance that G’d would relate to Moses personally with the attribute of Mercy. After this paragraph both Moses and the people of Israel were assured that G’d would relate to them primarily by drawing on the attributes of תפארת and כבוד. This had been the intent of Moses when he had asked that G’d demonstrate the distinction of the Jewish people compared to other nations, begging ונפלינו אני ועמך. When Moses said אני, he meant the attribute תפארת, whereas when he said ועמך he referred to the attribute  כבוד, i.e. the Shechinah. [Moses, the most humble individual that ever lived, would certainly not have referred to himself before mentioning his people. This why a translation of these words as “I and your people,” would be totally out of character]. We have now explained the entire paragraph.
    I have already explained under the heading “mystical dimension” on Parshat Yitro on chapter 20 verse 1 that Moses attained familiarity with the seven lower emanations. These seven emanations were symbolised in the text by the seven occasions on which the word קול or קולות appears in connection with the revelation at Mount Sinai. I have elaborated on the subject there.
    When Moses in our paragraph requested הראני נא את כבודך, he obviously requested a dimension of insight over and beyond the seven emanations with which he had already become familiar. He was not granted this. This is also the opinion of Nachmanides in his discussion of the matter from a kabbalistic vantage point. Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra (in the abbreviated version of his commentary on verse 14) takes a different view of the meaning of the wordsפני ילכו , saying that this refers to the angel Mattatron, an angel whose “face” indicates anger. He claims that when Moses said to G’d אם אין פניך הולכים, he referred to manifestation of G’d in His attribute of Mercy, the attribute of תפארת, the manifestation of Mercy which is apt to pardon and to forgive. Once G’d agreed to this request, Moses  pressed his advantage  asking הראני נא את כבודך, a reference to the כתרים, the attributes of חסד and תפארת. Moses phrased it thus, cautiously, in order not return empty-handed after having offered this prayer. At that point he was told לא תוכל לראות את פני, i.e. “this ‘beginning’ (highest) of all the attributes, you cannot see.” According to Ibn Ezra’s understanding of our paragraph Moses never attained any level beyond תפארת. He only attained the lower levels מלכות, יסוד, נצח, הוד, and תפארת. Nonetheless, we believe that the opinion of Nachmanides is more likely the correct one.
    33,18. הראני נא את כבודך, “please show me Your glory.” There is an emanation called כבוד beyond what is generally perceived as כבוד, “glory.” Seeing that Moses had already achieved seven emanations at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai, he now asked for still greater insights into the workings of G’d, and better understanding of G’d’s essence. The כבוד mentioned in this verse is the emanation כתר, the highest (10th) of the emanations. It is a reference to the tetragram, i.e. the level of י-ה-ו-ה, and this is the reason the word כבדך here is spelled without the letter ו before the ד. Also, the addition of the word את in front of כבדך which is always an allusion to something additional may refer to the emanation חכמה which Moses included in his request. Our sages, when dealing with the word את when applied to what appears to be a reference to G’d,- a problem seeing that G’d has no-one beside Him,- have stated that in Deut. 6,13 where the Torah writes את ה' אלוקיך תירא, “fear the Lord your G’d,” that the word את is meant to include a measure of reverence for the Torah scholars.
    Alternatively, the word כבדך does not refer to this highest emanation but to the כבוד אחרון, i.e. that Moses requested the insights into G’d’s workings to be made visible to his physical eye rather than to his mental eye. We need to examine how Moses could have assumed that the abstract, i.e. any aspect of G’d’s כבוד, could possibly have qualified for perception by the human eye. Moses who was on a level where his physicality had receded into an insignificant aspect of his being [had he not gone without food and drink for 40 days? Ed.] was not conscious of such limitations as he had not really experienced them. He did not think in terms of his physical attributes losing their effectiveness as he had long since ceased to rely on his physical attributes. He thought in terms of what he would retain of his physical attributes after he would leave an earthly existence. He hoped to attain already at this time what he felt sure he would attain as soon as he would die. G’d told him that this was not possible. The fact that his soul was housed in a functioning body made the granting of such a request impossible.
    	
    33,19. אני אעביר כל טובי על פניך, “I shall make all My goodness pass before you.” We would have expected the Torah to write לפניך instead of על פניך, just as the Torah wrote וקראתי בשם ה’ לפניך in the second half of this verse. According to the plain meaning of the text, I believe that Moses had difficulty with understanding the term ארך אפים as part of the nuances of the attribute of Mercy. He could not understand why G’d had not said ארך אף, “holding back anger (sing.), but had said “holding back angers” (pl.). G’d answered him that He practiced this nuance differently when relating to a righteous person who had sinned and when relating to an habitual sinner. When Moses heard this he exclaimed that the wicked should get their just deserts and perish. G’d responded that Moses would experience in his own lifetime that this nuance of G’d’s attribute of ארך אפים was indeed necessary. When Moses prayed for forgiveness after the sin of the spies (Numbers 14,17-18) we find him asking G’d to apply this very nuance of the attribute of Mercy when he said ועתה יגדל נא כח ה’ כאשר דברת לאמור ה’ ארך אפים ורב חסד וגו’. In other words: Moses reminded G’d of what He had told him here that the attribute of Mercy reflecting G’d’s patience with man would be applied differently to the righteous and to the wicked, but it would be applied in some measure to both  the righteous and the wicked. Seeing that this was so, G’d had to use the plural, i.e. על פניך, to allude to the fact that the time would come when Moses himself would invoke this aspect of G’d’s Mercy against his better judgment.
    An alternative way of understanding the unusual wording in our verse, i.e. the expression על פניך instead of לפניך, is that it was a reference to the rays of light which Moses would emit from his forehead when he would return from his final visit on Mount Sinai with the second set of Tablets. By allowing all of His goodness to literally pass over Moses’ face, enough would be stored there to enable him to radiate it for the rest of his life unless he covered his face with a veil of some sort (compare Shemot Rabbah 16,11 in reference to Exodus 34,29).
    A Midrashic approach (Shemot Rabbah 45,6) to our verse, i.e. the words כל טובי. The word כל refers to an additional dimension of this attribute, a dimension which appears to the recipient as if  some disaster struck him.
   וחנותי את אשר אחון, “and I shall show favour when I choose to show favour, etc.” At this particular time G’d showed Moses all the kinds of reward in store for the righteous, each one in accordance with the deeds he had performed while alive. Moses would look at the various treasures and ask: “whose treasure is this?” G’d would answer that it was in store for Torah scholars. Of a different kind of treasure G’d would say that it was in store for people who had shown honour and respect to Torah scholars. Eventually, G’d showed him another treasure greater than any of the previous ones. When Moses inquired who this treasure was for, G’d answered that it  was reserved for people who perform good deeds (practical good of immediate benefit to their fellow man). G’d added that whereas the people who had various merits to their credit would receive part of the treasures Moses had been shown first, the ones who did not have such merits would receive part of that great treasure He had shown Moses last. This is what is meant by the words: “I shall show favour to the ones I choose to show favour to.” The word כל in such verses as כי לי כל הארץ (19,5) or in כי כל בשמים ובארץ, (Chronicles I 29,11) i.e. the word כל is a reference to an attribute of G’d.
    33,20. כי לא יראני האדם וחי, “for man cannot both have a visual perception of My essence and remain alive at the same time.” According to the plain meaning of the text this line means that man cannot live on physically if he is granted a vision of G’d’s essence. We find something similar in Judges 13,22 where Manoach voices the opinion that he and his wife are going to die forthwith as they believed they had “seen G’d.” If he thought that even seeing an angel of the Lord was beyond living man’s capacity to endure, the same applies all the more so to someone who beheld an even higher celestial being. Of course, the difference is that the essence of G’d, unlike the appearance of a angel, is never something that can be perceived with the human eye. After death, such essence does become visible to the soul’s mental eye; this is what our sages meant when they said (Sifra Vayikra first section chapter 2,12) that whereas during their life on earth they cannot see Him, they are able to do so after they have died.” This concept is confirmed by David in Psalms 22,30 where he writes: “all those at death’s door whose spirits flag shall bow down before Him.” [If they could not see Him how would they know before whom and when to bow down? Ed.] We also find a statement in the Jerusalem Talmud Avodah Zarah 3,1 that shortly before his death Rabbi Avuhu was granted a vision of the reward in store for him in heaven. He marveled at the vastness of that reward, exclaiming: “is all this for Avuhu?”
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: “for man cannot see Me and remain alive.” It is noteworthy that G’d did not say כי לא יראה אותי but כי לא יראני  האדם וחי. Had the Torah used the former wording we would have concluded that man’s inability to behold G’d was due to an objective reason, i.e. that G’d had categorically ruled this out. By using the wording in front of us, the Torah made it plain that our inability to behold Him is rooted in subjective causes, i.e. as long as man is subject to influences originating in his body he cannot qualify for such insights as looking upon the essence of G’d. Proof that theoretically, man can behold G’d is found in Isaiah 6,1 who said: ”I have seen the Lord.” [in fact King Menashe used this line as the excuse for condemning Isaiah to death as a false prophet citing our verse as proof that seeing G’d while in a mortal shell is impossible. Ed.] Another verse in which “seeing” G’d is reported as something a number of people were able to do is Exodus 24,10: ויראו את אלו-הי ישראל, “they saw the G’d of Israel.” In that verse the word את which does not appear in our verse of כי לא יראני האדם וחי gives food for thought. I have explained in that instance that the word את in the verse in Parshat Mishpatim refers to these people having had a vision of the Shechinah rather than of the essence of G’d. This is also why Ezekiel used the word את when describing his vision in Ezekiel 2,2 ואשמע את מדבר אלי. Clearly, the word את with the vowel tzeyreh is a reference to a noun, i.e. the Shechinah. We find the word את being used in a similar capacity in Psalms 145,20 ואת כל הרשעים ישמיד, “He will destroy all the wicked people,” where that word also refers to a certain attribute of G’d (the attribute of Justice) carrying out this retribution, seeing that the attribute of Mercy is the one which ensures that the ones who love the Lord stay alive as mentioned in the first half of that verse.  
    The word אדם in our verse is preceded by the letter ה meaning that the verse speaks about someone familiar to the reader. Had the verse intended to make an all-encompassing statement including  all humans, the Torah should have written כי לא יראה אותי אדם וחי, “for man will not see My essence and live.” This would have proved conclusively that G’d had initiated this denial of man’s insight on a unilateral basis. The failure of the Torah to use the wording we just described makes it clear that the denial of the insight Moses requested was not rooted in the nature of the essence of G’d Himself. Ezekiel could not have had the visions he described in chapter one of his book (the famous Maaseh Merkavah 1,10), if the inability to see the essence of the Lord had been decreed by Him as something absolute. This then is the true meaning of the words: “for man (such as he is) cannot see Me and live.” Rabbi Akiva adds (in the Sifra mentioned earlier) that the chayot (high-ranking angels) which Ezekiel depicted as the carriers of G’d’s throne in his vision, cannot see Him either. Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai adds further that even the ministering angels who are equipped with eternal life (not subject to the limiting factor וחי, “while alive”) cannot behold the essence of the Lord either.
    
    
    
    34,1. פסל לך שני לוחות אבנים כראשונים וכתבתי, “carve for yourself two stone tablets similar to the original ones and I shall write, etc”. When G’d said: וכתבתי, “I will write,” the meaning is “with a finger,” just as we had been told of the first Tablets that they had been written “with the finger of G‘d” (32,18). When G’d spoke of the second Tablets being כראשונים, “like the first ones,” the reference was to the writing not to the material they were made of. The first Tablets were made of material provided by G’d, not material provided by man which Moses carried all the way up the mountain.
    Shemot Rabbah 46,2 states that the instruction to Moses to carve for himself two stone tablets is an illustration of what Solomon had in mind in Kohelet 3,5 when he said: “there is a time to throw stones away and another time to assemble stones. He first referred to Moses who had smashed the first set of Tablets, whereas in the second half of his statement he referred to G’d’s instruction to Moses to carve for himself two stone tablets as mentioned in our verse. The latter statement was an illustration of the verse (Proverbs 10,23) “the blessing of the Lord makes people wealthy.” The blessing Solomon had in mind when he wrote that was  the wording chosen by G’d here i.e. פסל לך, as if G’d had said: “the פסולת, “discarded (slivers of stone) used to carve out these tablets will remain your personal property.” G’d showed Moses a kind of large sapphire from which to carve the tablets. This made Moses a wealthy individual and enabled him to act as king over Israel. This also teaches you that anyone who makes Torah his vocation will find that his livelihood will somehow be provided by the Torah. This is the meaning of the words (Joshua 1,8) “for then (if you preoccupy yourself with Torah on an ongoing basis) you will succeed in your path and will be successful.”
    Such a person will not experience pain or anguish in the process of securing his livelihood and will not have to leave his home even in order to work for his livelihood.
    Another meaning of the words: “carve for yourself!” The matter can be illustrated by means of a parable. A king took a trip abroad, overseas, leaving his wife and the various female servants of the palace behind. The queen now became the subject of the same kind of cheap gossip as is invariably spread about such servants. When these tales reached the ears of the king he wanted to execute his queen. When a companion of the queen who had been a witness to the marriage heard about  this he tore up the marriage settlement which had been given to him for safe-keeping. He reasoned that if the king were to accuse his wife of misconduct he would tell him that she was not his wife anymore (seeing she had no marriage settlement). The king examined the reports that had reached him and did not find any substance in them. Only accusations against the maid servants could be substantiated. He immediately changed his mind and his wife became very dear to him again. Thereupon the witness who had previously torn up the marriage contract said to the king: “please write a new marriage contract for your wife.” The king responded that seeing that it was the witness who had torn up the original it was up to him to provide the means to write a replacement. The king was willing, however, to do the writing on the replacement contract. This is the reason G’d said to Moses: “carve for yourself!”
    	
    34,2. והיה נכון לבוקר ועלית בבוקר אל הר סיני, “Be prepared in the morning; ascend Mount Sinai in the morning.” The wording we would have expected should have been והיה נכון לבוקר ועלית אל הר סיני. Why did the Torah have to use the word בבוקר, “in the morning,” a second time? The Torah wanted to allude to the attribute בוקר, another synonym for the attribute of Mercy. This attribute is usually evident in the morning [as opposed to the attribute of Justice. Ed.] An example of the attribute of Mercy being in the ascendancy in the morning is found in Psalms 5,4 ה’ בוקר תשמע קולי בוקר אערך לך ואצפה, “Lord, hear my voice at daybreak; at daybreak I plead before you and wait.” David prayed for the attribute of Mercy which is the strength of the morning that He should listen to his plea.
    	
    34,3. ואיש לא יעלה עמך, “and no one is to ascend together with you.” This wording caused our sages (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 34) to say that the second set of tablets was given to the people without fanfare, in relative secrecy. It is meant to teach you the power of the evil eye. The evil eye is potent even in matters which are being orchestrated by a miracle of G’d. This is why they wound up being broken. The second set never were broken because the evil eye did not have something to focus on.
    
    
    34,6-7. ויעבור ה’ על פניו ויקרא ה’ ה’ אל רחום וחנון ארך אפים ורב חסד ואמת, נוצר חסד לאלפים נושא עון ופשע וחטאה ונקה, “Hashem passed before him and proclaimed: ‘Hashem, Hashem, G’d, Compassionate and Gracious, Slow to anger, and abundant in Kindness and Truth; Preserver of Kindness for thousands of generations, Forgiver of Iniquity, Wilful sin, and Error, and Who cleanses.” According to the plain meaning of the text these attributes are the ones a king practices in his dealings with his people. All of these attributes are subsumed under the heading חסד ואמת, “kindness and truth.” A king needs to employ these attributes when dealing with his people and his officials, i.e.  not to insist on the application of absolute justice, but tempering justice with mercy. On the other hand, there are situations in which the king has to exert his full authority and employ the harshest measures of justice. This is why Solomon said (Proverbs 20,28) “mercy and truth preserve the king; he upholds his throne by loving kindness.” A judicious application of these two attributes ensures the stability of the king’s throne.
    You have to appreciate that everyone who properly understands these thirteen attributes and invokes them in his prayers meticulously will never experience that his prayers went totally unheard (Rosh Hashanah 17). The only reason that his prayer would go unheard would be certain specific sins which are not subject to G’d’s forgiveness. In our times, when we are bereft of the priests, the holy Temple, the altar and the sacrifices, all of which were meant to assure us of atonement for our sins, the only thing left for us with which to appeal to G’d are our personal prayers and the invoking of these thirteen attributes (nuances) of G’d’s Mercy. By knowing of these thirteen attributes of Mercy our sages were able to properly edit our prayers so that they will enjoy maximum effectiveness.
    Know that mention of the tetragram, i.e. Hashem, for the first time is not an attribute but a reference to the very essence of the Lord. The second time this word appears it is used as an attribute, i.e. the invoking of the attribute of Mercy when the sinner has not previously confessed his sin and has repented it. G’d is appealed to as our father, someone who naturally extends his mercy to his children; just as the father is aware of his children’s needs, so G’d, our collective father, is aware of our needs. Such a father will not wait until his son asks for what he needs but will supply it even without being asked to do so. G’d therefore responds to the needs of even the wicked sinner as he too is one of His children. G’d employs this attribute even in His dealings with idolaters as we know from Sanhedrin 39 where G’d is telling the angels to suppress their songs of praise at a time when His creatures are drowning in the sea. He grieves over the need to exact this kind of retribution from them. In fact, G’d’s Mercy extends even to the animals as we know from Psalms 36,7: “Man and beast You deliver, O Lord.
    The attribute אל is the one dealing with forgiveness in response to the sinner’s request. This is what is meant in Psalms 99,8 אל נושא היית להם, “You have been a forgiving G’d for them.”
    The attributes רחום וחנון are two attributes applied in response to requests for forgiveness when such forgiveness is granted in connection with the sinner experiencing afflictions and having repented properly. We find that these terms always appear in connection with afflictions such as in Deut. 4,31 כי אל רחום ה’ אלו-היך לא ירפך ולא ישחיתך, “for Hashem, your G’d is a merciful G’d He will not abandon you nor destroy you.” The expression השחתה is found in connection with afflictions such as in Isaiah 52,14 כן משחת איש מאיש מראהו, “so his appearance is like that of a man who has suffered afflictions.” An even more outspoken verse describing the connection between afflictions and השחתה is Job 33,24 ויחננו ויאמר פדעהו מרדת שחת מצאתי, “then He has mercy on him and decrees: “redeem him from descending to the pit.”
    The attribute known as ארך אפים applies to both the righteous as well as to the habitual sinners. Moses said to G’d concerning the application of this attribute: ”You have to forgive the people on account of Your having told me that this is one of Your attributes, i.e. to hold back with venting Your anger.” “You explained to me that the reason for calling it ארך אפים instead of ארך אף means that even the sinners qualify for the application to them of this attribute.” Moreover, Moses added, assuming that the people concerned have already used up this attribute, ‘You are also רב חסד, abundant in kindness, a fallback position for people who have exhausted their claim against You on the basis of Your being ארך אפים.’ Moses reminded G’d that as long as the Torah had not been given, during the first 26 generations of man’s existence on earth, You fed them due to Your attribute of רב חסד.  If You were to say that the very absence of the Torah was a factor in Your applying the attribute of רב חסד, because they did not violate any of its commandments, Moses said that due to G’d’s attribute of חסד i.e. an attribute of undeserved kindness known as “true kindness,” He would still have to extend forgiveness to the sinners. If even that nuance of the attribute of Mercy would not suffice to obtain forgiveness for a sin (such as that of the golden calf) then the next fallback position would be the nuance called נוצר חסד לאלפים, “preserver of kindness for thousands of generations,” i.e. what is popularly known as zechut avot, the accumulated and unexpired portion of the merits of the patriarchs. In the event that G’d were to reply that even this aspect of the attribute of Mercy had already been exhausted by the people (compare Shabbat 55), Moses would appeal to the nuance described here as נושא עון, G’d’s  attribute of being “a forgiver of iniquity,” a reference to sins committed knowingly. The word פשע which follows the attribute of נושא עון, refers to sins committed with the express intent of asserting man’s independence vis-a-vis legislation perceived as decreed by G’d. The word וחטאה is applicable to sins committed erroneously, unwittingly. Finally, the word ונקה, refers to sins one did not even find out one had committed, sins for which one cannot ask forgiveness as they cannot be spelled out, be confessed. This is what David had in mind when he appealed to G’d (Psalms 19,13) מנסתרות נקני “cleanse me from the guilt I bear for hidden sins, sins unbeknown to me.”
    Actually, logic dictates that the sequence of the last few categories of sins which are subject to G’d’s attribute of Mercy should have been  חטאה, עון, פשעi.e. if G’d invokes forgiveness for sins committed as an act of rebellion the Torah surely did not have to tell us that He forgives sins committed unintentionally!  Our sages in addressing this problem (Yuma 36) explained the existing sequence by saying that Moses prayed that the intentional sins be raised to the level of unintentional sins which are easier to forgive. This is the reason why the word וחטאה appears at the end of that sequence. Another reason for the inverted sequence is the fact hat the sin of the golden calf began as something relatively harmless, i.e. unintentional, as I have explained on 32,4. Moses did not want to mention the need to forgive unintentional sins first, as he then would have drawn attention to the sin of the golden calf specifically.
    A Midrashic (Rosh Hashanah 17) approach: The words ויעבור ה’ על פניו were a lesson by G’d how to act as a counsel of defense on behalf of the Jewish people. Moses asked G’d: “if the people did not have some merit going for them would You have destroyed them? Remember the merits of the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov Your servants!” This is what is meant by the words ה’ ה’ אל רחום וחנון ארך אפים, “the Lord, the Lord, is merciful and gracious slow to anger.” Moses suggested that it was in order to destroy those sinners who had absolutely no claim on G’d’s consideration. G’d explained that His attribute included both the righteous as well as the wicked, and that Moses himself would soon need to have recourse to that nuance of the attribute of אל ארך אפים. 
    We find that after the sin of the spies who caused the entire people to refuse to march to the Holy Land and to prefer to return to Egypt (Numbers 14, 17-18), Moses invoked this very attribute אל ארך אפים on behalf of the people (he had learned the lesson G’d taught him here). At that time he prefaced his plea with the words: “and now let Your power be great O Lord as You have said.” He referred to the need to extend the attribute of Mercy also to the wicked [seeing that all (except Joshua and Calev) had become wicked, as distinct from the graduated involvement by different sections of the people in the sin of the golden calf and the total innocence of the entire tribe of Levi. Ed.]
    It is appropriate for you the reader to pay attention to the words of Onkelos on our passage. Onkelos translates the words ארך אפים as מרחיק רגז, “keeping destructive anger away.” This is a reference to the tradition that G’d had already instructed certain angels to proceed to destroy the people as they were now considered “distant” from the parameters of the Divine establishment. You will find a passage in the Jerusalem Talmud Taanit 2,1 which describes a similar phenomenon. Rabbi Levi, when asked the meaning of the expression ארך אפים, said it meant “to keep destructive anger at a distance.” The whole matter can be illustrated by a parable.” A king had two heavily armed divisions of troops at his command. He reasoned that if he were to allow the soldiers of these divisions to dwell in his proximity this would have dire consequences for his citizens in the event that those would commit acts angering their ruler. The soldiers would take immediate drastic steps against such disobedient citizens. The king therefore decided to station his troops some distance from his capital so that in the event the people became guilty of a misdemeanour they would have time to repent before falling victim to the wrath of these soldiers in their fierce loyalty to their king. Here G’d informed Moses that He had stationed His agents (who would act as executors of His decrees) far enough away to afford the errant sinners an opportunity to repent in time. 
    There are some Biblical verses which appear to support this idea, such as Isaiah 13,5: “they come from a distant land, from the end of the sky; the Lord with His weapons of wrath- to ravage the earth.” [in other words, retribution, though on its way, is some time away. Ed.] Rabbi Yitzchak goes further, basing himself on Jeremiah 50,25: “the Lord has opened His armory and brought out the weapons of His wrath;” he interprets these verses as describing how much time will elapse between the sin causing the wrath of the Lord and the enactment of punitive decrees against the sinners in question. During all this time the attribute of Mercy may be activated through prayer and repentance. Rabbi Meir interprets the word יוצא, “comes forth,” in Isaiah 26,21: ”the Lord shall come forth from His place to punish the dwellers on earth,” as G’d leaving (forsaking) the attribute of Justice in favour of the attribute of Mercy. [The prophet speaks about the Gentiles who will become the object of G’d’s wrath thus affording the Jewish people a breathing space, i.e. treatment by the attribute of Mercy. Ed.] Thus far the quote from the Jerusalem Talmud in Taanit 2,4.
    Our sages in Rosh Hashanah 17 also mention that the covenant G’d made with Moses concerning these thirteen attributes includes the promise that the people who invoke them will not return empty-handed from their prayer. They base this on the wording in verse 10 הנה אנכי כורת ברית נגד כל עמך, “here I enter into a covenant with you in the presence of all your people, etc.”
    
    Nonetheless, if the sins of the people are too numerous and have accumulated, G’d will reverse the attributes of Mercy mentioned here; this is what was meant by Isaiah 1,4 when he said: ‘they have forsaken the Lord, spurned the Holy One of Israel, turned their backs on Him.” The words נזורו אחור in that verse describe that the behaviour of the Jewish people caused G’d to reverse the attributes with which He relates to them.  Concerning the words: “they have abandoned the Lord,” G’d asks rhetorically: “I who have been known as the compassionate and gracious G’d have now been forced to reverse My attributes and have appeared to them as the cruel G’d.”
    A rational/investigative approach:  the words ויעבור ה’ על פניו ויקרא ה’ ה’ אל. These words contain three references to the tetragram. The balance of the words in that whole sequence are names for attributes of the Lord. In other words, the Torah here lists a total of ten attributes.The word מדות, “attributes” applies also to the names of G’d. The reason that the name of the Lord appears three times in this verse is to hint at the fact that the Lord is the G’d is unique and in charge in all three worlds, the world of the angels, the world of the planets, (outer space) and our terrestrial universe. Regarding the two worlds which are of infinite duration, i.e. the world of the angels and that of the planets, the Torah used the two names of G’d which do not undergo any changes. [they are not used as different attributes on different occasions. Ed.] The Torah used the name אל in connection with the terrestrial world which is subject to a metamorphosis. We find these views reflected in Psalms 148,6  “He made them endure forever, establishing an order that will never change.” David had already referred to the world of the angels in the opening verses of the same Psalm when he said: “Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him all His angels, praise Him all His hosts.” In respect of the “lower” world, the part of the universe we humans inhabit, a universe which is subject to renewal, to destruction in its present form, the Torah uses the name אל, which is actually the name of an adjective. It is the attribute which can change from being the attribute of Justice to becoming the attribute of Mercy and vice versa. This is reflected in Psalm 22,2 אלי, אלי, למה עזבתני, ”My G’d My G’d, why have You abandoned me?” Clearly, this was a reference to the attribute of Mercy as one does not complain about being abandoned by G’d’s attribute of Justice.
    
    At any rate, we are left with ten attributes used by the Creator to run His universe. The attributes רחום וחנון are two attributes  which apply to the guidance of our fates by what is known as השגחה כללית, “G’d’s general system of supervising our fates,” and השגחה פרטית, “G’d’s specific supervision of the fates of individuals. The former refers to the השגחה כללית, as we are reminded in Psalms 145,18: “His רחמים extends to all His works.” The word חנון describes the attribute which supervises individual fates. You will never encounter this attribute mentioned in connection with any creature which is not a human being. In the book of Job (33,24) Elihu refers to it when he says ויחוננו ויאמר פדעהו מרדת שחת מצאתי כפר, ”then He has mercy on him and decrees ‘redeem him from descending into the Pit.’” We also encounter the word חנון in Genesis 43,29 where Joseph blesses his brother Binyamin commending him to the special attention of G’d. Seeing that man is the most accomplished of all of G’d’s creations, it is no more than natural that G’d should relate to him with special attention. Man therefore rates an attribute of G’d which is exclusive to his species.
    The attribute ארך אפים is an attribute everyone is in need of, regardless of whether they are G’d-fearing, Torah-observant people or not. After all, we have been told by Solomon in Kohelet 7,20 “that there is no single individual alive on earth who does good only and does not commit a sin on occasion.” We do not need to mention that the habitual sinners are in need of this attribute of G’d. This too is an attribute reserved for the human species and relates to the dispensation of reward or punishment respectively, a concept unique to the relationship between man and his G’d.
    
    This leaves us with seven more attributes, three of which basically favour man while four discriminate against him. The attributes רב חסד, ואמת basically work in man’s favour, whereas the attributes נושא עון, ופשע וחטאה as well as the attribute ונקה basically are attributes which man has to be afraid of. The attribute of נושא עון refers to G’d considering sins committed in thought only, whereas פשע וחטאה are attributes activated by actually committed sins, the former referring to deliberately committed sins whereas the attribute חטאה refers to unintentionally committed sins. Concerning the attribute ונקה, the Talmud Yuma 86 claims that it is an attribute reserved for penitents. It is certainly inconceivable that G’d should completely exonerate anyone who did not even repent his sins. A sinner who maintains his rebellious posture against G’d does not qualify for G’d’s favourable consideration as if G’d did extend such consideration to him the result would contradict a long-standing principle that sinners must not be perceived as actually benefiting from their sins (Yevamot 92). The institution of purgatory as an instrument of punishment was invented for the sake of the unrepentant sinner.
    
    A kabbalistic approach holds that all these thirteen attributes derive directly from the emanation כתר, the highest emanation downwards. The very word מדות represents vessels, recipients. The mystical dimension of these attributes must be viewed in the following order: the attributes ה’, ה’, represent the emanation חכמה ובינה; the attributes אל, רחום represent the emanation גדולה. The attributes חנון וארך אפים represent the emanation גבורה; the attributes רב חסד ואמת represent the emanation תפארת; the attributes נוצר חסד לאלפים represent the emanation נצח. The attributes פשע וחטאה represent the emanation הוד, whereas the attribute ונקה represents the emanation יסוד. Everyone of the emanations [exclusive of the emanation מלכות which has none, Ed.] has been allocated two attributes except for the emanation  יסוד which has been allocated only one attribute. [The reader who is familiar with the currently accepted table of emanations is reminded that this table was not in use during the author’s time. Ed.] The holy name of the Lord who passed in front of Moses was the one reciting this list of attributes as they derive from the highest emanation כתר. 
    The view of Nachmanides and his interpretation of the thirteen attributes is that the word י-ה-ו-ה when it appears here for the first time refers to the highest emanation, whereas the second and third time the tetragram appears here it refers to the emanations תפארת and כבוד respectively. All of these three appearances of the tetragram between them comprise the essence of G’d, i.e. His holy name. This is followed by the remaining ten attributes. The attributes רחום, חנון, ארך אפים are part of the term generally known as אל עליון, and this is the reason that such words as מרחם, מחונן or מאריך (i.e. verbalised versions of these attributes) do not appear in that list. They are, after all, only the practical application of these attributes. The attributes רב חסד, אמת, נוצר חסד are allocated to the emanation תפארת, whereas the attributes נושא עון ופשע וחטאה ונקה are allocated to the emanation כבוד 
    It is well known that when reading these attributes, one is to make a comma between the first and second mention of the tetragram. Anyone who fails to make this separation will have to account for his mistake.
    There is still another method of relating to this list of thirteen attributes, a method employed by a minority of the Kabbalists, (a method mentioned by the Zohar). With the exception of the first-mentioned attribute, the attributes appear in four groups of three each thus alluding to the four carriers of the throne of G’d. The reason that three attributes may be perceived as forming a self-contained group is that they represent the three patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov. Concerning these patriarchs we say in the opening paragraph of the עמידה prayer “האל הגדול, הגבור, והנורא.” 
    
    All these thirteen attributes are subsumed in these three words (adjectives) applied to G’d in the opening lines of the עמידה. When mentioning the word הגדול in that benediction it includes the four attributes of חסד, whereas the word הגבור includes the four attributes comprising the attribute of Justice. Finally, the word הנורא includes the four attributes of Mercy, רחמים, (applicable to people who have at least some claim to milder treatment. The reason that we find that the letters of the words ה’ in the sequence ויעבור ה’ על פניו  are decorated with two tagim (crown-like decorations) on top as distinct from the attributes ה’,ה’, in the middle of the list of attributes shows that the sages who arranged these tagim wanted to draw our attention to the fact that the compliment which G’d paid Moses by revealing to him His thirteen attributes was in the nature of granting him additional spiritual insights and powers. These tagim always are a reminder to the reader that careful study of the text of the Torah yields additional insights for the reader. Such insights, i.e. whether they will indeed be attained depend on the attitude of the reader rather than the fact that G’d has made available to us the knowledge that these nuances of G’d’s attributes exist.
     
    Rabbi Hai Gaon points out that though there are thirteen attributes and we have said that they parallel the ten emanations, and the expression “emanation” and “attribute” appears to be used interchangeably, the fact is that they are clearly interrelated deriving from the same source although their numbers do not coincide. The reason for this apparent discrepancy is the fact hat he three levels of the עולם האצילות “regions” beyond the “highest” emanation כתר have no clearly defined beginnings  as they are so closely interwoven with the root of roots. Rabbi Hai Gaon, if pressed, named these three “super-emanations” אור קדמון, אור  מצוחצח, אור צח the three nuances of the original light. Our sages sometimes referred to this as the קוצו של יוד, something alluded to in our world by the little point-like tip of the letter י. I have referred to this already in my commentary on Genesis 1,1 “a kabbalistic approach.” May the Lord pardon us and enlighten us with ever more insights when we apply ourselves to the study of the Torah.
    
    34,7. פוקד עון אבות על בנים, ועל בני בנים, על שלשים, ועל רבעים. “recalling the iniquity of the parents upon children and grandchildren to the third and fourth generations. This verse occurs in the Torah on four separate occasions. We find it in both versions of the Ten Commandments, and twice again when G’d’s attributes are listed, once here and once in connection with the sin of the ten spies and the people who believed their words (Numbers 14,18). When this verse appears in the Ten Commandments the word פוקד עון is to be understood negatively, i.e. G’d will not forget the iniquity of the parents, etc. This is made clear by the Torah adding the words לשונאי, “to those who hate Me,” at the end of the respective line (Exodus 20,5, and Deut. 5,9). The Torah warns that failure of subsequent generations to resume a lifestyle acceptable to G’d makes such generations liable to be destroyed even if their personal guilt is not sufficient to bring such a tragedy upon themselves. The same words when mentioned as part of G’d’s list of attributes indicates merely that G’d will add afflictions to successive generations for sins committed by earlier generations in order to bring about repentance and to have an excuse to save those generations. By suffering these afflictions, sins and guilt incurred previously even by their progenitors would be atoned for. The afflictions would result in the eventual good that the later generations would experience.
    
    There are problems to be explained in connection with G’d visiting the sins of the fathers on their children. Such an interpretation appears to contradict what is written in Deut. 24,16 that “parents shall not be executed for the sins of the sons nor sons for the sins of the parents. Each (individual) generation is to be executed only for its own sin.” However, our sages (Berachot 7) have already explained how to reconcile what is written in these verses. The verse threatening that he sins of the fathers will be visited upon their sons or later generations presumes that the sons or grandsons will continue in the evil path their parents had walked before them. When this is the case G’d will not feel unjustified in applying His retribution to the sons or grandsons of the original sinners. The reason that the Torah limits such retribution to four generations after the original sin has been committed is explained in Job 42,17 where the blessing Job received is that he lived to see the fourth generation of his descendants. The Torah (Genesis 50,23) also reports that Joseph was blessed to see the fourth generation of his offspring. In other words, biological relationships are presumed to be meaningful up to and including the fourth generation, not beyond that. Seeing that a person may live to see his great-great grandchildren, their death may remind him of his being punished for his original sin. If the fifth generation were to be punished for that sin it would have absolutely no impact on the original sinner. When in a patriarchal society the senior member of the family is concerned about his offspring, he does not include in such concern the fifth and subsequent generations. If a wicked person has observed that his father, his grandfather and his great-grandfather had been guilty of similar sins and had not been punished to the best of his knowledge, it is important that he be punished and that he bear the collective responsibility.
    Upon hearing such an explanation any intelligent son is bound to ask that if this is indeed so why did the Torah write (in Exodus 32,34) “on the day when I make My account, I shall bring their sin to account against them?” Our sages (Jerusalem Talmud Taanit 4,5 have stated that there is not a single generation in history which has not accumulated a small measure of the sin of the golden calf in its own time. Elsewhere, (Rashi) this statement is understood to mean that whenever a generation of Jews is being punished for their transgressions, a small amount of afflictions are added to reduce the outstanding guilt of the generation which made and worshipped the golden calf. Whichever is the correct interpretation, how is this delayed punishment compatible with the limitation to four generations which we read about in our verse? The answer provided by our sages is that the meaning of the verb פוקד in 32,34 is not “settles accounts” but merely “He remembers.” Whenever the Jewish people in any generation commit any sin, such a sin reminds G’d of their original collective sin, the sin of the golden calf. He no longer has to settle an account with us as that account has been paid in full when the Temple was destroyed. 
    
    We find (Ezekiel 9,1) that the prophet quotes G’d as saying קרבו פקודות העיר ואיש כלי משחיתו בידו, “bring near those appointed over the city, each with his weapon of destruction in his hand!” The Torah in 32,34 refers to what the prophet Ezekiel referred to, i.e. an imperative to G’d’s agents to liquidate the Temple, etc. We also have a statement in Midrash Eycha in which the time when the guilt of the sin of the golden calf expired is discussed. One scholar said that it expired at the time when King Jerobam made new golden calves which he placed on the road to Jerusalem. He based this on this verse in Ezekiel. Another sage, Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmeni said that hat the remnants of the guilt of that sin did not become wiped out until the Temple was destroyed. Even though it was no longer subject to retribution, G’d did continue to mention it on occasion. This is what is meant in Chagigah 13 that as of the time when the Temple was destroyed the wingspan of the chayot which were to cover the feet of the  chayah described as possessing the feet of a calf in Ezekiel 1,9 was diminished so that the lower part of these feet remained exposed. Unless the wingspan of this chayah had been diminished, how would Ezekiel have known that its feet were like the feet of a calf? It is possible that in his vision of this chayah it had briefly raised its wings so that its feet and their shape became visible. If we were not to accept this possibility, how would Ezekiel have been able to identify the faces of the chayot in his vision? Surely the explanation must be that the wings moved momentarily to reveal what was hidden behind them. The Midrash rejects this kind of reasoning out of hand. It considers it as normal that the wings momentarily exposed the faces, as faces are to be revealed by definition. If a face were not to be visible and therefore identifiable, it would simply not qualify for the definition “face.” Feet, however, are not subject to being exposed. Hence the fact that the feet of this particular chayah looked like that of a calf is proof of something unusual, i.e. that the wingspan of the chayah was shortened so that it was unable to cover the feet with its wings. The purpose of all this was to remind the prophet and through him the Jewish people of the sin of the golden calf and that though G’d no longer had an account to settle with us, He had not “forgotten” about it having occurred. Such a mention, remembrance, of that sin, while not producing retribution, does make the application of the attribute of Mercy more difficult, “weakens” that attribute when we invoke it. I will discuss this subject  when discussing the law of ציצית, the wearing of which is meant to remind us of G’d’s commandments (Numbers 16,38).
    A kabbalistic approach: The words פוקד עון אבות על בנים are a reference to the mystical dimension of what is known as סוד העבור, “the mystery of the transmigration of souls.” G’d may allocate (impose the need) of a second and even a third repetition of physical life on earth to the soul of the sinner to give him a chance to rehabilitate himself in those lives on earth in different bodies. When combined with the original life on earth this makes a total of up to four lives on earth experienced by some people.  This aspect of G’d’s retribution was mentioned by the woman from Tekoah to David (Samuel II 14,14) when she spoke about certain מחשבות, calculations which G’d makes in His administering His Justice. G’d calculates all this in order to ensure that as few souls as possible will be consigned to eternal oblivion.
    It is important to understand a very important saying found in the Sefer Habahir on this subject (item 16, Margolies edition.) Rabbi Rechumai is quoted as saying the fact that light was created before the universe was created is documented in Genesis 1,3 where G’d said: “let there be light and there was light.” G’d’s advisors said to G’d: “before You create Your son Israel (or man) make a crown for him.” G’d responded positively. He said to them that the matter was comparable to a king who was very anxious to have a son. He found a beautiful crown  whose beauty he praised by saying: “this crown will be fit for my son.” They said to him: “does he know that the son will be worthy of such a crown?” The king retorted (angrily) ‘be silent,’ this is what I have in mind.” To this they applied the verse from Samuel II 14,14 which we quoted that “He made plans so that no one may be kept banished.” Thus far the quotation from Sefer Habahir. The saying is an illustration of the חסד of the Lord Who created a mechanism designed to forestall the permanent loss of a Jewish soul. This idea is spelled out in Sahedrin 90 where the Talmud states that all Israelites are entitled to a share in the world to come. In support of this the Talmud quotes Isaiah 60,21 “and Your people, all of them righteous, shall possess the land for all times. They are the shoot I planted, My handiwork in which I glory.” Solomon referred to this mystical dimension when he said (Kohelet 1,9) “whatever has been that shall be, etc.” He also said: “a generation departs and a generation comes, but the earth remains forever the same.” (Kohelet 1,4). Had Solomon meant what the superficial reader believes he meant he should have said: “a generation comes and a generation departs, etc.” The fact that he employed the reverse sequence, i.e. speaking of those who have departed the earth as if they had never made an appearance on earth first, indicates that he refers to the dead who will be reincarnated in order to ensure that no one will be lost permanently. In fact, the word דור used by Solomon, a word we usually translate as “generation” is closely related to כדור, “ball, globe,” i.e. something that has neither end nor beginning. The word indicates that the people of whom Solomon speaks will resurface at a time when it pleases the Lord.
    34,8. וימהר משה, “Moses hastened;”  According to the plain meaning of the words Moses’ prostrating himself promptly was an expression of his gratitude for G’d’s attribute of grace and Mercy which had been applied to him. We must not believe G’d forbid what the shallow-minded people believe, that Moses used this act of prostrating himself before G’d in order to forestall G’d from enumerating more attributes which could serve as ways of punishing Israel. Ibn Ezra quotes such opinions in his commentary, attributing them to shallow-minded people. The idea of Moses daring to interrupt G’d while He was speaking is quite intolerable. Seeing that one does not even dare interrupt a king of flesh and blood while he is speaking, how much more unthinkable is it to try and interrupt G’d when He is speaking as Ibn Ezra correctly counters. 
    The true meaning of the verse is that after G’d had completed His words Moses promptly  bowed and prostrated himself before the attribute of כבוד which had passed before his face. He acted much like the subject of a king upon whom the king had bestowed a rare distinction. Before leaving the king’s presence one prostrates oneself before him.
    A Midrashic approach (Sanhedrin 111) What did Moses perceive that made him hasten, i.e. וימהר, to prostrate himself at this point? Rabbi Chanina ben Gamliel said that he saw the attribute ארך אפים; the other scholars said that he saw the attribute אמת, “truth.” This interpretation of the Midrash (Psalms 93) corresponds to the plain meaning of the text. Rabbi Chanina who said that Moses saw the attribute ארך אפים meant that Moses acknowledged gratefully that G’d revealed to him the existence of this attribute as it is an attribute which both the righteous and the sinners are in need of. Unless G’d extended this attribute to the Jewish people both habitual sinners and the righteous who rarely sin would perish as the result of their guilt before they have time to repent their errors. The opinion expressed by the other scholars, i.e. that Moses acknowledged the attribute אמת, truth, is also in line with the plain meaning of the text. They understood the significance of that attribute to be that G’d would not only be slow to anger but that He would eventually annul the sin altogether. They therefore felt that Moses acknowledged an even greater attribute, i.e. truth, when he prostrated himself at this point. Moses acknowledged the  fact that G’d would never again bring up the subject of the sinner’s previous guilt. [the assumption is that the sinner had repented, confessed, etc. in the interval. Ed.]
    A kabbalistic approach: The meaning of the statement by the different Rabbis that Moses either acknowledged the attribute of ארך אפים or the attribute of אמת is not to be misunderstood. The two Rabbis quoted by the Midrash are not in disagreement with one another. Both view the attribute of ארך אפים as the decisive attribute. They agreed that the attribute originates in the emanation גבורה and as such is part of the attribute of Justice. Seeing that Rabbi Chanina perceived the list of attributes mentioned by the Torah as proceeding in an ascending manner, he concludes with the attribute ארך אפים. The other scholars who perceived the list of attributes as proceeding from the top down, conclude with the attribute popularly known as אמת, as they view it as decisive. In their view the expression אמת is more appropriate to express the decisiveness of that attribute’s impact on the sinner and his future.
    There is another comment in the Midrash concerning which attribute triggered Moses’ prostrating himself. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov is quoted as favouring the attribute ארך אפים, whereas the other scholars spoke of the attribute רחמים. From all this we conclude that it was the attribute called אמת as its very name indicates that it is of decisive influence as it indicates that in the final analysis considerations of mercy prevail.
    34,9. וסלחת לעונינו ולחטותינו ונחלתנו, “and forgive our iniquity and error and make us Your inheritance.” Seeing  Moses was so humble he included himself in the list of people needing forgiveness. By rights he should have said: “forgive them their iniquities and their errors.” The prophet Jeremiah, who was also a member of the tribe of Levi (a priest) learned from Moses when he said: (Jeremiah 14,7) “though our iniquities testify against us, act, O Lord, for the sake of Your name.” He too did not refer to the sins of the Jewish people as “their iniquities.”
    When Moses said ונחלתנו instead of ותנחילנו as is found elsewhere, especially in our liturgy, the reason may be that that he meant for G’d to make us G’d’s heritage. We find this idea reflected in Deut. 32,9 “for His people are part of G’d, Yaakov is the measure of His inheritance.” We also have a verse (Lamentations 3,24) where the prophet Jeremiah describes the relationship of the Jewish people to G’d in those terms, saying: “the Lord is my portion, my soul says with full heart, therefore I will hope in Him.” The meaning of the verse is that the Jewish soul is aware of G’d being its only true share. This is why the only hold on life on this earth Israel has is its service to the Lord.
    34,10. אשר לא נבראו בכל הארץ ובכל הגוים, “the like of which have not been created anywhere on earth nor amongst any of the nations.” G’d referred specifically to the arrest of the sun and moon in their respective orbits by Joshua and regarding the radiation of rays of light from Moses’ forehead. This is why G’d added the words: “which I perform with you.” Seeing that in this verse G’d promised Moses that he would experience miracles which had never been performed before, he was encouraged to request such a miracle when his legitimacy as a leader was challenged by Korach and company in Numbers chapter 16. Moses requested that the unrepentant Korach be swallowed up live by the earth (Numbers 16,29-30). I shall discuss that decree of G’d further when commenting on the episode in question.
    
    34,17. אלוהי מסכה לא תעשה לך, “do not make for yourself a cast image as deity.” The meaning is: “such as you have made up until now when you constructed the golden calf.” This had been an error because the people had wanted to counter (find means to frustrate) G’d’s attribute of Justice The reason this warning is appended to the commandment to observe the Passover rituals is that this festival is a reminder of G’d’s attribute of Mercy in action. Once the people remember the attribute of Mercy in action they will not feel the need to devise means to counter the attribute of Justice.
    
    Please reflect on how the Torah presents the Passover rituals here, i.e. the prohibition of chametz. The wording לא תשחט על חמץ דם זבחי, “do not slaughter My blood-offering while in the possession of leavened food,” is certainly most enigmatic [even after we have made it intelligible already by translating its meaning rather than its precise wording, Ed.] I believe that the Torah wishes to hint to us that both חמץ and מצה in this verse represent basic attributes of G’d, i.e. דין ורחמים. The same applies to the laws about mixing milk and meat at the end of this paragraph (verse 26). This is the reason that this whole passage appears in the paragraph in which the 13 attributes (nuances) of G’d are listed. If you find something similar in Exodus 22,24 where the legislation about not mixing milk and meat also appears, the reason is that that paragraph also dealt with the Sabbath legislation (Exodus 23,12) and mention of the six days we are to work and the seventh day on which we are to rest. It is similarly a reference to G’d expressing different attributes of His on the weekdays from those displayed primarily on the Sabbath. To sum up: the subjects of בשר וחלב, חמץ ומצה, שבת וימי חול, all are allusions to G’d’s different attributes at work in His relationship with man. 
    
    34,20 כל בכור בניך תפדה  ולא יראו פני ריקם. “You shall redeem every firstborn of your sons. They shall not appear before Me empty-handed.” If someone has the good fortune to be a firstborn this is a true distinction. To some degree he shares this distinction with G’d Himself Who is also “a first in the universe.” The offering of sacrifices prior to the sin of the golden calf was always performed exclusively by the respective firstborn of the family. This is why Yaakov was envious of his twin brother Esau who had this privilege. The wicked Esau sold his privilege, thereby displaying his contempt for service of the Lord. After the sin of the golden calf the firstborn were disqualified seeing they had participated in that sin instead of acting as true priests restraining the other Jews from worshipping the golden calf. Their function was taken over by the tribe of Levi, some of whom became priests, others performing tasks allocated to the Levites in the Book of Numbers. Although the firstborn were no longer accorded the privilege of performing priestly functions, they did retain the distinction of being firstborn, a distinction vis-a-vis people who are not firstborn. Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 2,2) state that whenever the Torah speaks of someone being לי, “for Me,” i.e. for G’d, the meaning is that such a status is accorded permanently both in this world and in the world to come. The Jewish people who are described as being set aside for G’d with the words ואבדיל אתכם מן העמים להיות לי, “I have separated you from the other nations to belong to Me,” are an example of what we just said. Another example is Numbers 3,45 והיו לי הלוים, “the Levites will remain Mine.” The same expression occurs in connection with the earth seeing G’d says in Exodus 19,5 כי לי כל הארץ for the entire earth is Mine. The Torah also writes of the firstborn that they belong to the Lord, i.e. כי לי כל בכור. This means that the firstborn does not forfeit this status either in this life or in the world to come. Thus far the Midrash.
    	
    The commandment involving the firstborn applies exclusively to male firstborns This is what is meant when the Torah wrote כל פטר רחם בבני ישראל, “every opening of the womb amongst the sons of Israel” (Exodus 13,2). The Torah also writes וכל בכור אדם בבניך תפדה, “and every firstborn human amongst your sons you shell redeem” (verse 13 in that chapter). It is incumbent upon a firstborn to devote himself to Torah and G’d’s commandments more than other people who do not share this distinction with him. His father must perform the duty to redeem him as this commandment devolves in the first instance on the father. Should the father have failed to perform this redemption the firstborn son must redeem himself when he comes of age (Kidushin 29). If the redemption is neglected both by his father and himself he is subject to being punished for our sages write that the reason that this legislation is written in connection with the duty to perform the pilgrimage to the Temple is to remind people to redeem the firstborn as the firstborn who have been redeemed will experience the privilege of welcoming the Shechinah and will live to see the Temple rebuilt. Those who have not been redeemed will not see the rebuilding of the Temple.
    	
    34,21. ששת ימים תעבוד וביום השביעי תשבות, “You shall labour for six days and rest on the seventh day.” Here the Torah mentions the Sabbath legislation in the very middle of the laws of the Passover and those concerning the firstborn seeing that all of these three commandments are a reminder of the act of creation. The reason the Torah adds that the Sabbath rest must be observed both during the harvest season and the ploughing season is that these are the seasons when the farmer is most concerned with performing his tasks without delay to ensure success. The Torah therefore reminds the farmer that the Sabbath legislation overrides otherwise important duties connected to his daily labour. The word תשבות emphasises the need to abstain from work-like activity on the Sabbath.
    
    34,23. יראה כל זכורך, “everyone of your males shall appear, etc.” The females are exempt from this commandment (Chagigah 2).The blind and the lame are also exempt from this commandment. The mystical dimension of all these exemptions is related to the cloud of G’d’s attribute of כבוד which accompanied the Jewish people and which was so bright and pure that it reflected the image of the beholder much as a mirror reflects it and these images were seen by all the Israelites. Whatever was inside the cloud could not be seen outside it. Seeing that it is not seemly for the image of the pilgrims which were afflicted with the handicaps we mentioned to be seen as reflected by the cloud, they were exempted from this legislation. This is the meaning of the peculiar wording in verse 24 “when you go up to see the face of the Lord your G’d, etc.” Although the spelling of the word is לראות, “to see,” it is read as if it had the vowels of le-ra-ot, i.e. “to be seen.” Our sages (Chagigah 2) rule that even a one-eyed person is exempt from the requirement to make this pilgrimage. They  base this on the word יראה in verse 23 which is understood to mean that the person who comes to be seen must also be able to see.[the spelling of the text allows for either vocalisation. Ed.]  Just as a person comes to be seen by the Shechinah which has two eyes (is not defective), so he himself is subject to this legislation only if he has two serviceable eyes. Avraham already used this expression יראה after his Mount Moriah experience when he proclaimed that at that mountain of G’d man is seen by the Shechinah (which has two eyes) compare Genesis 22,14. 
    34,27. כתב לך את הדברים האלה כי על פי הדברים האלה כרתי כרתי אתך ברית. “Write down for yourself these words as these words are the ones for the sake of which I have sealed a covenant with you.” According to the plain meaning of these words the instruction “write it down for yourself” means that Moses should record the conditions which form the basis of the covenant between G’d and Israel. This includes recording the conditions under which they accepted the Torah saying נעשה ונשמע, i.e. volunteering to observe whatever G’d would tell them to do. The conditions which applied before they had received the first set of Tablets would also govern their receiving the second set of Tablets. G’d commanded Moses to write this in book form. When G’d repeated: “for on the basis of these words, etc.,” implying that the oral instructions were the binding ones,  when He could simply have said על פיהם, “in accordance with them,” our sages (Gittin 40) point out that this was a reference to the oral Torah. G’d said that laws communicated to Moses only orally may not be committed to writing. On the other hand, words (laws) which I commanded you to commit to writing must not become material to be studied and quoted only by word of mouth. 
    The meaning of the whole verse then could best be summarised as follows: “if you observe the commandments which I commanded you to write down and you observe the commandments which I gave you only orally, then the covenant I have made with you remains operative. If, however, you made any changes to the conditions of the covenant I shall not be bound by it.”
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Vayera 5): “Rav Yehudah son of Shalom said that Moses requested that the Mishnah (collection of the oral Torah) should also be committed to writing.” G‘d told him: “I shall write down for you רובי תורתי, most of My teachings but they will be considered as something alien” (based on Hoseah 8,12). What was all this conversation about? The oral Torah represents mystical dimensions of Torah not accessible except to G’d-fearing individuals. If such parts of the Torah were to be accessible to everybody (by being available in book form) their impact is likely to be counterproductive. G’d does not reveal His secrets to anyone other than those who fear Him as we know from Psalms 25,14. Thus far the Midrash.
    If I understand this Midrash correctly the words משנה מסתורים “Mishnah of secrets” means that the Mishnah reveals mysteries hidden in he written Torah. Study of the oral Torah will make the meaning of the written Torah much clearer to the student. The “secrets” are in reality the parts of the written Torah which the reader has difficulty with. [The Mishnah, dealing with halachah, is or appears to be quite straightforward. Ed.]
    You are already aware that the Mishnah corresponds to the second letter ה in the tetragram which is the explanation of the mystical, the hidden name of the Lord. The name of G’d we are not to utter is representative of what is contained in the Mishnah. It is also the key to understanding the written Torah properly and the written Torah receives its authoritative interpretation only by means of the Mishnah. [in other words, the written text of the Torah cannot serve as the basis of halachah, rulings governing normative Judaism. Ed.] This was the reason that G’d wanted the oral Torah to be engraved on the ‘tablets’ of our hearts rather than merely on a parchment. This is the meaning of what G’d said to Moses “if the Mishnah were to be committed to writing it would be considered as alien.”] If all parts of the Torah, written and oral, were available in book form then the advantage which the Jewish people enjoyed over the Gentiles as a result of accepting the Torah at Mount Sinai would disappear. This is the meaning of the words in Hoseah 8,12 כמו זר נחשבו, i.e. that the Jewish people would be considered as just like the Gentiles.
    There is yet another reason why the oral Torah was meant to remain only “oral.” It was meant to deny the Gentiles an argument they could use on the day of Judgment. Let me illustrate what I mean by means of a parable. A king sent a sealed letter to his sons, employing a trusted servant to deliver the letter. In that letter he issued instructions to his sons how to conduct themselves both with him and with the rest of the world. In addition he issued oral instructions to his servant which formed the postscript to what was written in the letter itself. This “postscript” included the promise of a great reward for all those who would enter into a covenant with him and observe all that was written in the original letter. What did the people of that country do? They made themselves a copy of what was written in the letter, claiming that they too had a written document from the king promising them such a reward. They claimed that they too observed what was written in the letter. When the time came for the king to hand out the reward all the people of his kingdom lined up as potential recipients (not just the king’s sons). The king asked them if they had observed all that they had been instructed to observe. As the citizens were unaware of the postscript they were in no position to list the instructions contained in the postscript. The king, realising, that someone had tampered with his letter, said: “may their souls perish.” This is what the Talmud alluded to at the beginning of Avodah Zarah (folio 2) when  it says that in the future G’d would bring a Torah scroll and deposit it in His lap and say: “Is there anyone amongst you who can tell Me זאת? [a reference to Isaiah 43,9 where the Torah is referred to as זאת? Ed.] Upon hearing this all  the citizens realised that they had been found out. They left the proximity of the Lord in fear of their lives.
    This leaves us with the problem of why Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi, who decided to edit and publish the oral Torah in written form (some 1600 years after the revelation at Mount Sinai), decided to contravene what had been sacred instructions not to commit the oral Torah to paper. He was motivated by a very real fear that unless this were done the whole oral Torah was about to become forgotten as the circumstances of the Jewish people at his time and the dispersal of the people all over the world made it impossible for large parts of the people to memorise all that material. The venerable Rabbi based himself on the verse in Psalms 119,126  עת לעשות לה' הפרו תורתך, “at a time when they have violated Your Torah it is time to act on behalf of the Lord.” [actions which violate the Torah and which are decreed in defence of Torah must be temporary by definition. Ed.] Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi proceeded to edit the oral Torah as what is known today as the Mishnah, seeing it is like a second version of the written Torah and most of it is in clear and unsmistakable Hebrew similar to the written Torah. In the course of the centuries after Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi, the people’s ability to absorb Torah learning declined further so that Ravina and Rav Ashi saw fit to commit the Talmud, the commentary on the Mishnah, to writing also. During the era of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi most people of his generation (scholars?) were still thoroughly conversant with the meaning of the Mishnah, so that it did not need to be elaborated on. This situation had undergone a drastic change in the few centuries between the era of Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi and Rav Ashi and his contemporaries. We find that in the Talmud the sentence: “something is missing in the text of the Mishnah and it should read as follows, etc.” occurs quite frequently. This does not mean that the text of the Mishnah had been handed down incorrectly. It means that matters which were clear from the text to people in the generation of its editor, Rabbi Yehudah, were no longer clear to the people of the generation of Rav Ashi so that in order to clarify them for the people of his time the text was emended. (compare Zohar Tzav edition by Reuben Margolies folio 27 note 12)
    
    The word אתך in our verse means “for your sake,” meaning that G’d had made the covenant with the people for the sake of Moses.
   ויהי שם עם ה', “He remained there with the Lord, etc.” The expression “with the Lord” means that Moses’ nourishment during these forty days was provided by the attribute חסד and the radiation of supernatural light. We base this on the words כי עם ה’ החסד in Psalms 130,7 and on Daniel 2,22 ונהורא עמיה שרא, “and (supernatural) light  dwells with Him.” This is the same source that will provide the righteous with their nourishment in the world to come. It is the meaning of Psalms 36,8-10: “How precious is Your faithful care, O G’d! Mankind shelters in the shadow of Your wings. They feast on the rich fare of Your house; You let them drink at Your refreshing stream. With You is the fountain of life; by Your light do we see light.”
   לחם לא אכל ומים לא שתה, “he ate neither bread nor drank water, etc.” It is well known that bread and water are sources of nourishment for the body. It is also true that the soul is maintained alive thanks to the body functioning as a result of its intake of the necessary nutrients. It is no more than logical that if a body can keep an abstract soul alive that the celestial food, i.e. abstract food can do so no less. Seeing that the source of Moses’ food were such celestial abstract nutrients it is not surprising that he could remain on the mountain for forty days without need for physical food.
    When we consider the function of food on a more fundamental level, the truth is that the food necessary for maintaining the body is composed of a number of interrelated causes and ingredients. The various causes originate in celestial domains, in the domain where G’d creates life itself. When Moses was given the celestial kinds of nutrients we mentioned, this merely means that while on Mount Sinai Moses was able to eliminate some of the root causes which enable physical food to keep the body functioning. He was able to take a shortcut compared to ordinary individuals on earth. This is also the meaning of our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 20,10) on Exodus 24,11 “they saw G’d and they ate and drank.” Rabbi Yochanan interpreted the words to mean that these people ate “true” food, i.e. אכילה ודאית. He based this on Proverbs 16,15 באור פני מלך חיים, “in the light of the king’s face there is light.” [Rabbi Yochanan understood the vision which the people mentioned in that verse saw as being the celestial light which translates into nutrients for our bodies. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Ki Tissa 36) “seeing that Moses remained on the mountain for 40 days and forty ‘nights,’ how did he know when it was day and when it was night? When G’d taught him the written Torah he knew it was day whereas when G’d taught him the oral Torah he knew it was night.” In G’d’s domain there is no difference between day and night as we know from combining the contents of the verses in Daniel 2,22 and Psalms 139,12 i.e. “there is light with Him, and even when it is dark (on earth) it is not dark for You. The night shines as brightly as day.” The sages (in that same paragraph) also explain that when Moses observed the stars and the planets bowing down before the Lord, Moses knew that it was night; this is the meaning of Nechemyah 9,6: “the hosts of heaven bow down before You.”
   ויכתוב על הלוחות, “He wrote on the tablets, etc.” The subject of these words is G’d, of course, not Moses, G’d forbid! G’d had already made clear in verse one of our chapter that He Himself would do the writing on the Tablets when He said: “I will write just as on the original ones.” Actually, at the time (verse 1) all the Torah had to write were the words וכתבתי על הלוחות הדברים, וגו’. Why did the Torah add the word את? This was in order to draw our attention to the fact that the text on the second set of Tablets included the letter ט in the words למען ייטב לך as apart from the reward for observing the commandment to honour father and mother. The text in Exodus chapter 20, while promising long life for keeping this commandment, does not promise that one will enjoy a good life. The letter ט does not appear anywhere in the wording of the first Tablets. I have already drawn attention to this fact in my commentary on Parshat Yitro at the end of Exodus 20,17.
    Our sages explain further that the sequence of: “he remained there for forty days, etc.,” followed by “He wrote on the Tablets” mean that G’d inscribed the second set of Tablets in Moses’ presence. The forty days of which our verse speaks were the third time that Moses spent forty days on the mountain. During the second period of forty days on the mountain he had devoted all his time to obtaining forgiveness for the sin of the golden calf, as he said in Deut. 9,25: “I threw myself down before Hashem for the forty days and forty nights that I threw myself down, for Hashem wanted to destroy you.” 
    34,30. והנה קרן עור פניו, “and behold! the skin of his face had become radiant.” We know of the light which represents wisdom and we know light which emerges out of darkness. The former kind of light is the light G’d employed to create the universe. Concerning that light our sages have said that it preceded the first directive of G’d in the Book of Genesis, i.e. “let there be light.” This light which was employed as a tool in G’d’s work of creation is known as ראשית. Moses attained this light in his heart, and it was this light which separated him from all other prophets making him superior to all of them.
    The light which emerges out of darkness is the essence of fire, it is known as אור מוגרש, ”light which has been expelled.” This is the light which was applied to Moses, the light which is here called as radiating from the face of Moses. He acquired this ability to radiate light as a result of obtaining the second set of Tablets whereas he had not achieved this ability when he received the first set of Tablets when he was described as “turning and descending from the mountain” (32,15). During the period when the first set of Tablets was being prepared the people had still been under the spiritually uplifting experience of the revelation, everyone of them having been a party to insights never before granted to man. Now that they were no longer on that spiritual level and G’d had even warned them that “no one will ascend (spiritually) with you” (34,3), they would not have credited Moses with continuing to be on such a level had there not been some visible evidence of that. G’d provided this when he made Moses’ skin emit rays of light.
    Another way of looking at the absence of this phenomenon when Moses received the first set of Tablets is that seeing his stature of G’d’s prophet had been established beyond all doubt  he had not had any need to provide the Israelites with visible evidence of that. Seeing that in His wisdom G’d had been aware that Moses was going to smash the first Tablets, He had delayed equipping him with this power to emit rays of light until he had been given the second set of Tablets.
   וייראו מגשת אליו, “they were afraid to approach him.” Bamidbar Rabbah 11,3 comments that here we find evidence of the effect of sin. As long as the people had not been guilty of the sin of the golden calf they had been able to see the attribute of כבוד penetrating seven different kinds of fire in doing so without becoming unnerved. We know this from Exodus 24,17 that “the appearance of the attribute of כבוד of the Lord was like fire consuming the top of the mountain, visible to the eyes of the Children of Israel.” This verse has seven words, matching the seven מחיצות, “dividing” domains which the eyes of the Israelites had to penetrate in order to behold that attribute of the Lord with their eyes. Now, after the sin, they were unable to even look at the intermediary (Moses) of even a single one of these מחיצות. This is the meaning of the words וייראו מגשת אליו. 
    Moses merited these rays of light as a result of having stood in the cave when the glory of G’d passed by (33,22). This idea is confirmed in Chabakuk 3,4 קרנים מידו לו ושם חביון עזו, ”it is a brilliant light which gives off rays on every side- and therein His glory is enveloped.” The Torah’s wording here also suggests that the immediate source of this light which Moses’ face emitted was the writing of G’d on the Tablets. It is not unlike what Solomon wrote in Kohelet 8,1 “that the wisdom of man lights up his face.”
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Ki Tissa 36) to the words  “Moses’ face emitted rays of light, etc.”  All of the glory Moses had  achieved in this world represented only the “fruits,” the dividends of his true reward. The real reward was reserved for him in the world to come. This statement is based on the verse in Chabakuk that the rays of light emanate from Him. Thus far the Midrash. I believe the way to understand this somewhat enigmatic statement is that the emission of rays is to be considered as the “dividend” whereas the “real thing” is the actual source of light, not merely the emissions we perceive as emanating from its source. Rays of light are comparable to fruit falling from a tree. The real source of the fruit is the tree itself. In the world of the future Moses would experience the source of this light from which he emitted only rays in this world.
    34,33. ויכל משה מדבר אתם ויתן על פניו מסוה, “Moses finished speaking with them and placed a mask on his face.”  The meaning of this verse is that while Moses was teaching the people the commandments he did not wear a mask or anything else which separated his face from the people he addressed. The same applied when Moses spoke to G’d. When the Torah writes: “and when Moses would come into the Tent of Meeting in order to speak with Him he would remove the mask until he left the Tent,” (34,34) the Torah describes a routine which Moses had followed ever since the Torah had been given at Mount Sinai. When he addressed the people, communicating what G’d said to him, he never wore a mask. Moses would not put on the mask until he had completed speaking to the people about instructions he had received from G’d. He did so in order that they should not feast their eyes on holy matters when not engaged in receiving instruction of a sacred character. Moses retained the facility to emit these rays described here for the remainder of his life on earth. He retained it even on the day he died as we know from Deut. 34,7 that “his eye did not weaken nor did he lose his vitality.”
    
    34,35. וראו בני ישראל את פני משה, “When the Children of Israel saw the face of  Moses, etc.” We need to understand why the name of Moses is mentioned three separate times in this verse. The Torah could simply have written: כי קרן עור פניו והשיב את המסוה, “as soon as the skin of his face emitted rays of light he put the mask back on.” According to the plain meaning of the text we may understand the fact that the Torah bothers to mention Moses’ name three times as corresponding to the three times 40 days which Moses had spent on the mountain. It is a fact that during each of his stays on the mountain Moses achieved a greater degree of forgiveness from G’d. The radiations of light from Moses’ face may well have intensified each time he had achieved part of his purpose. This is why not only the name Moses but also the word פנים appears here three times. We may conclude that the very name משה assumed a greater significance in terms of his spiritual achievements during every visit on the mountain. The name had originally been derived from Pharaoh’s daughter saying that she had pulled him from the water. At that time the “water” referred to was physical water. In the interval Moses had graduated to Torah, otherwise known as the Jewish people’s “spiritual water,” their lifeline. Moses’ spiritual progress may reflect the saying of the sages in in Baba Kama 17 that אין מים אלא תורה, “the only water which is a true source of life is the Torah.”
    Moses’ very name contains within it an allusion to the fact that he would be able to hear the Shechinah speak to him at some time in the future. (the name משה is an acrostic of the respective first letters in the words מבין שני הכרובים, “from between the two cherubs” the angel-like figures on the lid of the Holy Ark from where G’d’s voice appeared to speak to Moses.)
    A kabbalistic approach to why Moses’ name appears three times in our verse: The fact that both the word משה and the word פנים is mentioned here three times is in order to pay a great compliment to Moses. The word פנים as we have seen repeatedly is a substitute for an attribute of the Lord. The Torah which is intrinsically G’d’s Torah has been called such on occasion such as  when David says תורת ה' תמימה, “the Lord’s Torah is perfect.” On the other hand, the prophet Maleachi 3,22 refers to it as Moses’ Torah when he said: “remember the Torah of Moses My servant, etc.” Just as we find that in that instance G’d paid honour to Moses by describing His Torah also as Moses’ Torah, so in our verse G’d paid Moses a compliment showing that He accorded him as much honour as had been accorded to Him. There were occasions in the Torah when Moses invited G’d (the Torah which was contained in the Ark) to rise or to repose, such as Numbers 10,35, and 36. According to a variety of Midrashim we are dealing with only one of numerous examples where G’d reciprocates by honouring Moses. [The author lists many more examples. The interested reader is referred to Torah Shleymah by Rabbi M. Kasher on Va-eyra 7,1 for a broader discussion on the subject. The common denominator of all of this is the use by the Torah of the same expressions for things performed by G’d and Moses respectively. Ed.]
   עד באו לדבר אתו, “until he came to speak with Him.”  Actually, the Torah should have written עד באו לדבר את ה'. Why is it that the same verse which mentions the name of Moses again and again when a pronoun would have sufficed, does not accord G’d the courtesy of referring to Him by name? We again have to fall back on the statement we have already made that the entire verse is an example of the great compliment the Torah pays to Moses. Once we understand -by means of such examples- how great was the esteem in which G’d held Moses, it is easier to understand that Moses as distinct from other prophets conducted a dialogue with G’d much as when people speak to each other. The informal manner in which the Torah describes Moses as communicating with G’d by even omitting to mention G’d by name, reflects this intimate relationship which existed between G’d and Moses. At the very end of the Torah (Deut. 33,11) this is spelled out for us once more when the Torah describes this unique and never repeated phenomenon of the communications between G’d and Moses, and Moses and G’d respectively, by comparing it to כאשר ידבר איש אל רעהו, “just as a man speaks to his fellow.”
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
ויקהל   משה
    
    
    
    
   אכל בני דבש כי טוב ונופת מתוק על חכך. כן דעה חכמה לנפשך אם-מצאת ויש אחרית. ותקותך לא תכרת, “My son, eat honey for it is good and the honeycomb for it is sweet on your palate. So shall knowledge of wisdom be to your soul if you have found (it); there is a future; your hopes will not be crushed.” (Proverbs 24,13-14).
    Solomon compared wisdom which is a spiritual delight to honey which is a physical delight. This is a method Solomon employs in most of his parables in the Book of Proverbs. His purpose is to teach man to relate his spirit, his intellect, to his nature. Seeing that man is made up of a physical part and a spiritual, disembodied part, the only way he can relate the one to the other is by the use of the parable. Comparisons between the physical and the spiritual have to be illustrated for man in order for him to comprehend their validity.
    We know that the phenomena in this terrestrial world are comprised of four distinct categories, beginning with the lowest, most primitive form and culminating in the most sophisticated creature. The most primitive category of physical phenomena are the ones called דומם, inert objects such as stones, etc. Such objects do not possess any degree of mobility. The next higher category are plants; they are rooted in the earth but grow both vertically and horizontally. Next in terms of sophistication are all living, mobile creatures; finally the most sophisticated physical phenomenon is man inasmuch as only he can communicate his thoughts and feelings by means of language. Man’s advantage over other mammals is not his physical mobility but his intelligence. You will find the report in the Torah of the progress of creation of the universe in Genesis describe the creation of the inert, followed by the creation of vegetation, followed by the report of the emergence of a variety of more and more sophisticated forms of life, and only at the very end does the Torah describe the creation of man, G’d’s crowning handiwork. Only of man does the Torah report that he reflected part of the Creator Himself, was created “in His image” (Genesis 1,25).
    The report of the phenomena in the terrestrial world coming into existence follows the opposite pattern of the report of the phenomena of a celestial (extra-terrestrial) nature. When reporting on the creation of physical phenomena the Torah begins with the lowest, i.e. the mass of dry land becoming visible on the third day (Genesis 1,9), it continues with the report of the creation of vegetable matter (Genesis 1,11), etc., etc., whereas when it comes to describing phenomena in the celestial spheres (or at least in the world of the planets, the galaxies, a world between earth and heaven), the Torah begins with the creation of “light,” followed by the creation of a רקיע, “a firmament,” etc. The luminaries sun and moon, which were placed in orbit on the fourth day are another example of celestial phenomena being created in a descending order of their sophistication or lack of physicality.
    Seeing that man shares common features with the essence of vegetation as well as with the essence of the mobility of the animals, he had to be equipped with an abstract intelligence in order for him to represent a higher stage of development than the stages of physical phenomena which preceded him. Even though all these facts are something we observe daily with our own eyes, Scripture nonetheless confirmed these facts. This is why we read in Job 35,11: “who gives us more knowledge than the beasts of the earth, makes us wiser than the birds of the sky?” By means of this additional intellect man proceeds to examine both his physical dimension as well as his spiritual dimension. He evaluates their respective worth. When man succeeds in making his spirituality his dominating feature he is likened to מלאך ה' צבאות, “an angel of the Lord G’d of Hosts” (Maleachi 2,7),  whereas when he allows his physicality to dominate him, placing his intellect into the service of his body, he is compared to the beasts as we know from Psalms 49,21 נמשל כבהמות נדמו, “he is like the beasts that perish (have no afterlife).”
    David is at pains to warn man not to allow this to happen when he says (Psalms 32,8) “Let me enlighten you and show you which way to go; let me offer you counsel; my eye is on you.” He warns man further not to follow his “nature,” i.e. physicality,  saying in verse nine of the same psalm: “be not like a senseless horse or mule whose movement must be curbed by bit and bridle; far be it from you!”
    In the course of the entire Book of Proverbs Solomon is at pains to demonstrate to us the superiority of intellect, wisdom, spirituality, etc. over the influence of man’s body.” He points out   
the ineffectiveness of the body demonstrating that it is lazy and inert by definition. Allowing it to dominate man would result in his having neither food, shelter nor clothing. Seeing that the acquisition of these things is necessary for man’s survival, unless he followed the dictates of his intellect he would perish as nature had not provided him with these necessities at birth. It is clear that the intellect should play a dominating role in man. The body does not know that clothing protects against cold, for instance. In order to know this one needs a brain, intelligence. It is because of such considerations that Solomon said: (Proverbs 12,27) “the lazy man does not roast his game; diligence is man’s precious possession.” The meaning of the verse is that a lazy man will not hold on to his wealth. Seeing that it is the custom of the hunter to burn the wings (feathers) of the birds to prevent them from escaping, Solomon says that that he who steals  and expects to hang on to his stolen game will not get to roast it. The only wealth a person can expect to hang on to is that which was earned by diligent effort. If man were to rely on nature, he would become an opportunist or worse, a criminal. His intellect teaches him which activities are worthwhile and which even if successful in the short run will ultimately result in his being shamed. In Proverbs 20,17 Solomon elaborates further by writing “bread gained by deceit may taste sweet; but later his mouth will be filled with gravel.” Whereas “nature,” i.e. the body desires instant gratification, partying, sexual activity, etc., man’s intelligence warns him of the tenuous nature of all such joys. The reason that sexual activity is a physically gratifying experience is because G’d wants to encourage people to procreate and to ensure the continuity of the human species. [In order to show man that such joy may turn into the reverse, Solomon describes the temptress as dripping honey from her lips which eventually turns bitter as wormwood (Proverbs 5,3-4). [The author continues, illustrating his view of the parables employed by Solomon in his book of Proverbs. I have only quoted a brief selection of a long list of examples. Ed.]
    Solomon also addresses apparent contradictions which man could expect if he were to make Torah-principles his sole guidelines such as giving charity generously. He explains that contrary to human logic “giving” does not impoverish the giver but enriches him (Proverbs 11,24). A similar thought is voiced in Proverbs 28,27  i.e. “he who gives to the poor will not be in need.” It is important to realise that all such parables need to be based on life’s experiences, matters man experiences with one or more of his five senses. Unless the parable is something with which we are familiar it cannot hope to achieve its purpose, i.e. to convey the moral lesson it is meant to convey. The meaning of this statement is also that just as the body derives physical gratification from the consumption of honey, so the soul derives spiritual gratification from the absorption of words of wisdom. This is one of the meanings of Exodus 24,11: “they saw G’d and ate and drank.” In other words, just as eating and drinking provided physical gratification, so a vision of the divine provides man with spiritual gratification. One of the reasons Moses could spend 40 days on Mount Sinai going without bread or water, i.e. physical food, was that the divine visions he beheld during that time did more for his soul, his spiritual essence, than even the vision described as being had by the אצילי בני ישראל, ‘the nobles of Israel” in Exodus 24,11. Moses drew on this spiritual food-reservoir for practically 120 days seeing that the brief time he spent in the camp between his three sojourns on the mountain amounted to less than a full day each time. [The author had already explained the logic that if physical food which originally derived from the celestial regions can sustain our bodies on earth, then spiritual food, i.e. food at its source, not diluted by various detours before it reaches man, such as soil, trees, etc., would most certainly not do any less for the person absorbing it. In our day and age the best illustration is probably to compare that celestial, “pure” food to patients on earth who have to be fed intravenously. These patients do not suffer by their food by-passing the mouth, the stomach, and the intestines which are the body’s primary organs for food intake. Ed.] 
    The author demonstrates that when Moses ascended the mountain on the first of Ellul (the third time) this was a Monday so that his return on Yom Kippur occurred on Thursday. This is why the sages determined that courts were to sit on Mondays and Thursdays of each week. This is the allegorical meaning of the words דרשו ה' בהמצאו, “seek out the Lord when He is liable to be found” (Isaiah 55,6). The days which have proved particularly propitious are Mondays and Thursdays. The commandment to construct the Tabernacle was issued on the morrow of Yom Hakippurim, hence this is where our portion begins.
    
    35,1. ויקהל משה את כל עדת בני ישראל ויאמר אליהם אלה הדברים אשר צוה ה' לעשות אותם. “Moses assembled the entire community of the Children of Israel and said to them: “these are the things that Hashem commanded.” If you take a good look at the order of these things you will find that the construction of the Tabernacle and all its appurtenances have been mentioned many times over. G’d mentioned it to Moses on two separate occasions. The first time it has been mentioned in detail  occurred in Exodus 25,2 where the Torah commanded that Moses should accept a contribution from the people, listing the various materials needed for its construction. The second time this commandment is phrased more generally in Ki Tissa (31,2). The third time it is mentioned by Moses at this point in a general way when he commanded them that every wise-hearted person amongst them should get involved and not only donate materials but participate in the conversion of these materials for the construction. The fourth time the Torah reports that the instructions had been carried out (36,8). The Torah mentions the word ויעש, “he constructed” in connection with every stage of the building of the Tabernacle and its components. The fifth time the Torah mentions the Tabernacle and all its components is in Exodus 39,33-42 where separate mention is made of all the components handed over to Moses after they had been completed. The reason the Torah troubles itself to mention all this on five separate occasions is to demonstrate how beloved the Tabernacle and its construction was to G‘d. In Numbers 8,19 where the name בני ישראל occurs five times in the same verse in which the Torah warns that the Israelites must avoid becoming victims of G’d’s retribution, the reason for using the name בני ישראל five times in a row when pronouns would have sufficed is also in order to demonstrate how beloved the people were in the eyes of G’d at that time.
    Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 2,5) comment by illustrating the matter with a parable. A father who had an only son of whom he was extremely fond sent him off to school. When the son would come back, the father would ask him: “did you eat my son, did you drink my son, do you want to go to sleep my son?” We find a similar demonstration of how G’d reports matters which He liked when looking at the conversations conducted by Eliezer, servant of Avraham when he went to secure a wife for Yitzchak. Eliezer’s words are repeated by the Torah in great detail (Genesis, chapter 24). This prompted the sages in Bereshit Rabbah 60,8 to say that the mundane conversations of an Eliezer were more pleasing to G‘d than even the Torah-inspired discourses of later Torah scholars.” The truth of this is best illustrated when we reflect on the fact that the Torah devoted only a single word, or even letter, in order to inform us of some of its commandments. This is so in spite of the fact that the principal function of the Torah is to teach us the commandments.
    A Midrashic approach to the verses ויקהל משה. The commandment for Moses to assemble all the people at this point was to compensate for the time Aaron had assembled all the people at the time of the golden calf. This new assembly was to atone for the previous assembly which had such tragic results. Similarly, the words Moses spoke at this time were intended to diffuse the impression Aaron’s words had left behind when he addressed the people at that ill-fated assembly (32,1). The wording אלה הדברים, “these are the words,” were meant to counteract the words אלה אלוהיך ישראל, “these are your gods O Israel,” spoken at the time when Aaron assembled the people. The gold donated for the construction of the Tabernacle was to atone for the gold donated for making the golden calf.
   אלה הדברים אשר צוה ה' לעשות אותם, “these are the things G’d commanded to do them.”  These words are followed by the instruction to work during six days. This teaches that construction work of the Tabernacle was not to override the work prohibitions of the Sabbath and should be carried on only on the six weekdays (Mechilta Vayakhel 1).The reason that the Torah writes the verb תעשה in the passive form, i.e. te-asseh instead of ta-asseh, is to teach the Jews that if they observe the laws of the Torah faithfully, the work to be performed on the six days of the week will be performed for them by Gentiles. If, however, the Israelites would not observe the commandments of the Torah, not only will they have to perform their own menial tasks but they will also have to perform menial tasks for others (Mechilta Ki Tissa 1).
    
    35,2. וביום השביעי יהיה לכם קודש שבת שבתון, “and the seventh day shall be holy for you, a day of complete rest.” In this passage Moses does not warn the people that they are to  observe the Sabbath, i.e. ושמרתם את השבת “you shall observe the Sabbath” (Exodus 31,14 or 31,13.).
     It appears therefore that we derive from here that the mystical dimension of the Sabbath is not to be revealed to the masses. When the Torah used the expression ושמרתם את השבת instead of  ושמרתם את יום השבת, this is an indication that in chapter 31 the Torah addressed itself to the philosophical and hidden meanings of the Sabbath. Seeing that in our paragraph Moses spoke to all the people, including women and children, this was not the time and place to reveal hidden meanings of the Sabbath. In 31,13, on the other hand, G’d had instructed Moses with the words דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel,” implying that he should reveal to them both the obvious as well as the hidden meanings of the Sabbath legislation. The manner in which the Torah phrases what went on here is a hint to us not to reveal hidden meanings of the Torah to people who are not on the spiritual level enabling them  to  appreciate such meanings.
    There is another proof for what we just said from the Talmud in Megillah 3. The Talmud says that when Onkelos was engaged in translating the Torah, a heavenly voice was heard to exclaim: “who is this who reveals the hidden dimensions of the Torah?” If restrictions are in place when one merely translates the written text of the Torah, how much more so must one be careful not to reveal the mystical dimensions of the Torah which have not been spelled out for all to see in the text to people not on the appropriate spiritual level? Anyone who becomes guilty of violating this principle is known as a מגלה סתרים, someone revealing mysteries. Only slanderers do something like that (Proverbs 11,13).
   כל העושה בו מלאכה יומת, “anyone performing (forbidden) work on it will be executed.” This line is immediately followed by the prohibition of lighting a fire on the Sabbath. It is possible to interpret these two verses as examples of forbidden work on the Sabbath. First the Torah prohibits the performance of certain categories of activities called מלאכה; the Torah describes the lighting of fire as an example of such a forbidden category of activity. The expression מלאכה applies primarily to activities connected to the building of the Tabernacle which are forbidden to be performed on the Sabbath. This is the reason the Torah does not speak here of כל מלאכה, “any manner of work,” as it does on other occasions when the work-prohibition on the Sabbath is mentioned (compare Exodus 20,10). Following the prohibition to perform such work on the Sabbaths during which the construction of the Tabernacle was in progress, the Torah goes on to prohibit such activities on the Sabbath for all future generations also. This is the meaning of the additional words בכל מושבותיכם, “in all your dwellings” (as opposed to G’d’s “dwelling’). The example of lighting a fire is merely representative of all the other categories of activity  which are prohibited on the Sabbath.
    Making fire is an appropriate example of basic human activity seeing that most of the principal activities we are engaged in cannot be performed satisfactorily if one were not able or allowed to make fire. This is the reason that the sages instituted the benediction over fire during the הבדלה ritual at the end of the Sabbath to signify that this crucial activity (as well as other activities) which was prohibited on the Sabbath is once again permitted. Fire, i.e. light, was the first of the activities G’d engaged in when creating the universe (Genesis 1,2).
    The ritual known as הבדלה comprises a total of four benedictions (wine, fragrances, fire/light, and the benediction reminding us of the difference between the holy and the profane). This number corresponds to the letters in the holy name of the Lord, the tetragram. The benediction over wine is alluded to in Genesis 1,1 in the word הארץ, a reference to Gan Eden. The grape vine was one of the trees in that garden. The benediction over the fragrances is also alluded to in the word רוח אלו-הים, “the spirit (whiff) of the Lord” in the same verse. Fragrance is central to wind, i.e. the wind carries the fragrance, the odour. It represents the air man breathes through his nostrils, the organ of smell. Finally, fire is represented in that same verse we quoted from Genesis 1,2 where the word “light” has a dual connotation, also meaning “fire,” i.e. the source of warmth. In the ritual of the  הבדלה we refer to the whole concept of fire and light as a separation between light and dark.
    
    35,5. יביאה את תרומת ה', “he shall bring it as a gift for the Lord.” We have already dealt with the meaning of this verse in our commentary on Exodus 25,2.
    
    35, 20-21. ויצאו כל עדת בני ישראל ...ויבואו, “the whole of the assembly of the Children of Israel departed...and they came, etc. This verse describes the eagerness with which the Jewish people responded to Moses’ request, and how they brought their respective gifts immediately. The women were the first to respond; this is why the Torah records  (verse 22) “the men came following the women, etc.” When the men arrived with their gifts they found that their women had already preceded them. It is a remarkable tribute to the Jewish women  who had not been willing to give their men their jewelry to help in the making of the golden calf but who now volunteered their most precious possessions with alacrity. (compare Exodus 32, 2 and 3, and Tanchuma on Ki Tissa 19)  
    When the Torah had described the donations for the making of the golden calf which, according to Aaron (32,3), should have been given by the women and the girls, the Torah did not report any of the women giving up their jewelry for such a project. This is why the Torah reports the men as divesting themselves of their own jewelry instead (in that verse). Solomon alluded to this when he wrote in Kohelet 7,28: אדם אחד מאלף מצאתי ואשה בכל אלה לא מצאתי, “I have found one man in a thousand, but I have not even found one woman amongst these,” (who contributed to אלה, the word used when the Israelites were told to look upon that calf as a deity). Now that the donations requested were for the building of the Tabernacle, were intended to provide a home for the Shechinah, the women were the first to respond enthusiastically to the call for contributions. The Torah enumerates that the women even contributed jewelry worn on intimate parts of their bodies. They overcame their habitual reluctance to part with such intimate jewelry.
    We find other examples in the Bible where the word על used here by the Torah means “in addition to.” An example of such a use of the word על is found in Isaiah 7,2: “Aram has joined Ephrayim (the Northern Kingdom) to gang up against you “ (the Kingdom of Yehudah). In that instance, Ephrayim were the first to ready themselves for war against Achaz, King of Yehudah. 
    In Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer we are told  (chapter 45) that G’d rewarded the women for this both in this life as well as in the world to come, seeing all this occurred on the first day of the month. (The Tabernacle was erected on the first of Nissan, the donations were given immediately after the Day of Atonement). Women observe the Day of the New Moon more than do the men as on that day they do not perform all the chores which they perform on ordinary days of the week (Rabbi David Luzzato based on a saying in the Jerusalem Talmud Pessachim beginning of fourth chapter). In the world to come, the reward set aside for women having volunteered their jewelry on this occasion is based on Psalms 103,5: “He satisfies you with the good things in the prime of life so that your youth is renewed like that of the eagle.”
    When the Torah reports that “every generously-minded individual brought bracelets and nose-rings, etc.,” this is a reference to the women who brought this jewelry. I believe we are dealing here with an abbreviated verse. The unabridged verse would read: “all the men who were of a generous disposition came after the women who had already brought jewelry including jewelry worn on intimate parts of their bodies.” The Torah then adds that the few people in whose possession there were such materials as blue wool, purple wool, and the skins of the animal called Tachash, etc., donated them. The same applies to the acacia wood in possession of a very small number of Israelites (verse 24). These people are named last as there were even fewer of them than there were people owning blue wool, etc.
    
    35,24. כל מרים תרומת כסף ונחושת, “Every man who donated a gift of silver or copper, etc.” No doubt silver was more plentiful than gold, not to mention copper of which the people must have owned an abundance. Presumably, the gold owned by the people was concentrated mostly in the hands of the women who used it as jewelry, whereas silver and copper were used mostly by the men, both as tools and as coins, i.e. money. This is why in connection with the silver the Torah speaks of תרומה, an expression of raising, separating, whereas in connection with donations consisting of gold the Torah speaks of תנופה, something which is lifted up. When someone donates gold he considers himself as having raised himself to a higher level. The recipients of a gift consisting of gold generally make a point of lauding the generosity of the donor. Still, on occasion we find the word תנופה used in connection with copper vessels when there is a reason to emphasise the value of that particular item such as in 38,29 where the Torah in mentioning the total weight of the copper donated (which collectively represented substantial value) describes it as “seventy talents, 2400 shekel worth.” The copper in question was highly polished, capable of acting as a mirror, therefore it deserved to be described as נחושת התנופה. Copper of that quality was  even rarer than gold.
    
    35,25. וכל אשה חכמת לב בידיה טוו, “and every wise-hearted woman, spun with her hands, etc.” This is the source for the sages who hold that the term חכמה when applied to a woman means only manual dexterity, to be employed exclusively for the needs of her household and showing honour to her husband. It is why they forbade women to engage in the study of the Torah (Yuma 66). Our sages derive specific proof for their attitude from Deut. 6,7: ושננתם לבניך, “you shall teach them (the words of Torah) diligently to your sons” (and not to your daughters). The Talmud Kidushin 29 goes as far as to say that anyone teaching his daughter Torah is comparable to someone teaching her תפלות, “frivolity.” We have already mentioned that in Yuma 86 the Talmud mentions that the wording in our verse where women are described as possessing חכמה, applies exclusively to their knack for using the spindle, the distaff.
    
    35,27. והנשיאים הביאו את אבני השוהם, “and the princes brought the shoham stones and the precious stones for the breastplate.” Seeing that in general it is the nature of the princes to feel and act superior to the common people [the reason why the Torah specifically warns a Jewish king not to be overbearing (Deut. 17,20)], the princes contributed items which were to be worn directly on the garments of the High Priest when he would perform service in the Tabernacle. They would thus obtain their atonement for their haughtiness, or remnants of it. This is also the reason that the verse refers to them with the introductory letter ה, i.e. the ones who were well known. The Torah implies that these princes had held back thus far meaning to supply all the things which the common people would fail to donate. In the event, their very arrogance resulted in there being nothing left to contribute other than these precious jewels as the people had pre-empted them and brought a surfeit of all the other materials needed (compare Sifri Nasso item 45). Even though their intention had been good, the Torah accounts their conduct as sinful seeing that if per chance the Israelites had possessed these precious stones they surely would have contributed them leaving the princes with nothing left to contribute. The Torah’s dissatisfaction with the princes’ behaviour is reflected in two letters י having been omitted here in the word והנשאם where the proper spelling should have been והנשיאים. This teaches that anyone who has the chance to be amongst the first to perform a commandment and holds back for whatever reason deserves to be punished.
    There are those who explain that the availability of these precious stones amongst any of the Israelites was altogether something miraculous; it was an act of G’d to enable the Israelites to complete the building of the Tabernacle using only their own resources. According to the Talmud in Yuma 75 the shoham stones, etc., fell from heaven at the same time as the manna and this is what is meant by the expression ונשיאים הביאו, “and the princes brought, etc.” The expression נשיאים in that verse denotes someone or something elevated, raised up high, such as we find in Psalms 135,7 מעלה נשיאים מקצה הארץ, “He makes the clouds rise from the end of the earth.” The clouds of glory were contributed by G’d Himself (descending to Moses’ tent), completing all that was needed to make the Tabernacle operational.
    
    35,35. מלא אותם חכמת לב, “He filled them with a wise heart.” There are 32 paths of wisdom (as we know from Sefer Hayetzirah 1,1). The 32 fringes which make up the commandment of ציצית correspond to these 32 paths of wisdom. I will explain the deeper meaning of this when discussing the relevant passage in the Torah in Numbers 15,38 under the heading: “a kabbalistic approach.” Seeing that attaining true understanding of the emanation חכמה is beyond most people, the Sefer Hayetzirah speaks about 32 נתיבות, “paths,” leading to wisdom rather than 32 דרכים, “ways” to wisdom. The word דרך means a “broad way,” whereas the word נתיב refers to a “narrow path.” This is reflected in the words of prophet Jeremiah (6,16) who said עמדו על דרכים וראו, ושאלו לנתיבות עולם, “stand by the roads and consider; inquire about ancient paths.” The prophet uses the word ראו to encourage exploration of the broad דרך, while concerning the narrow נתיב he speaks only of “inquire,” knowing that it is so much more difficult to obtain accurate information about where a narrow path leads to.
    Seeing that “wisdom” is so elusive, it is difficult to trace its origin. The only way is to explore it by means of the 32 different paths, each one revealing a small aspect of it. Wisdom, i.e. its root, is comparable perhaps to the roots of a tree which are covered with earth, difficult to trace. Only by following each little ridge in the earth can one tediously piece together where the centre of the tree (of wisdom) is to be found. When the Torah mentions the expression חכמת לב, “wisdom of the heart,” in our verse this is designed to highlight the outstanding wisdom of Betzalel and Oholiov who were filled with wisdom by the Shechinah. It is an expression similar to Genesis 6,6 where the Torah describes G’d’s anger at the corruption of mankind  with the words ויתעצב אל לבו, “He was saddened at ‘his heart,’” i.e. at the abuse man had made of the wisdom the seat of which is in his heart. The word לב to describe wisdom is also found in Kings I 5,26 where Solomon had requested a לב שומע a “discerning heart” to enable him to judge the people.” G’d responded by  וה' נתן חכמה לשלמה, “G’d had given wisdom to Solomon.” Seeing that both Betzalel and Oholiov were true believers, the Torah described their חכמה as being like that of the Shechinah itself, writing that “Hashem had filled them with the spirit of G’d, i.e. “divine-like spirit” ( verse 31). 
    When the Torah writes בהמה instead of בהם in 36,1 describing how Betzalel and Oholiov related to their task in fashioning each of the furnishings of the Tabernacle, the extra letter ה at the end of the word בהם was meant to alert us to the quality of the wisdom they needed in order to perform all this work successfully, i.e. G’d-like wisdom.
    This is not the only time that the Shechinah is alluded to in the written Torah by means of the letter ה, as I have pointed out repeatedly such as on Exodus 15,16.
    On the other hand, it is possible that the reason the Torah did not write בהם as we would have expected, is precisely to indicate that man is not able to penetrate to the root of wisdom so that the word had to be imperfect, reflecting man’s imperfect faculties. As David pointed our in Psalms 49,13 there are aspects of wisdom in which man is no better than an animal. Such thoughts are also expressed in Psalms 92,7 where David in discussing the majesty of G’d’s works exclaims: “a man cannot know, a fool cannot understand this.” The reason David describes man as איש, a term of distinction, in that line, is that he says that even worthy man cannot understand the greatness of the Lord’s works to their full extent. The translation of the word בער is: “beast-like.” David’s meaning then is that though איש, man, may attain great stature, when it comes to understanding the wisdom expressed in the Lord’s works his understanding is more or less animal-like, i.e. totally inadequate.
    According to Tanchuma Vayakhel 4 the words: “He filled them with the spirit of G’d,” do not refer only to Betzalel and Oholiov but to all the craftsmen involved in working on the project. In fact, G’d accorded such wisdom not only to the human beings engaged in constructing the Tabernacle but even to animals involved in that project were inspired with divine insights. However, only Betzalel’s role was made public.
    
    36,5. מרבים העם להביא, “the people are bringing more than enough.” The expression מרבים indicates that the people did not stop contributing. The Torah compliments the people, both men and women. The men contributed silver, copper, blue and purple wool, etc., the women contributed their golden jewelry. The principal contributions were all brought on the first day. The wording hints at the speed with which these contributions were made when the Torah writes: “all the people came out and they came (arrived).” (35,20-21). The Torah adds in 36,3 that “the people kept on bringing contributions morning after morning.” One gains the impression from what is written that even after it had become clear that there was enough, some people kept on bringing gifts every morning. The moral and ethical integrity of the people engaged in that work is evident from the fact that they took time out from their work to tell Moses that they had received more materials than they could use to complete the project. The words ויאמרו אל משה לאמור indicates that they told Moses about this overage time and again. The Torah also testifies to the superior trust Moses displayed in the craftsmen seeing he did not demand an accounting, nor did he make use of his legal position as their ruler to appropriate any of the leftover material claiming it was for the people’s “communal treasury.” This is why the Torah writes that Moses announced throughout the camp that there were to be no more contributions.
    
    36,7. והמלאכה היתה דים, “and the work had been enough for all the work, etc.”  The meaning of the words is: “there was enough material to complete all the work required, even more than enough.” In view of this, why did the Torah have to repeat this here seeing it has already been mentioned in 36,5? It is clear from that verse that not only sufficient materials but more than sufficient had been contributed. Perhaps the Torah wanted to give us a hint that the Tabernacle in our terrestrial world has a counterpart in the celestial regions. We have already mentioned a Midrash (Tanchuma Pekudey 20) on this subject which derives this from Exodus 15,17 מכון לשבתך פעלת ה' מקדש ה' כוננו ידיך, “‘the foundation of Your dwelling-place that You- Hashem have made-- the Sanctuary, my Lord that Your hands established.” The reason that the Torah used the “expression” היכל, is that it is a word describing a Sanctuary which has a numerical value of the attribute א-ד-נ-י, i.e. 65. As a result of these considerations we may understand our verse to mean “the amount of contributions for the Tabernacle in the terrestrial regions was sufficient and even beyond what was needed in order to ensure that the Sanctuary in the celestial regions could exist.“ The importance to the Jewish people of the Sanctuary in the celestial regions was that it was the source for providing man with his material needs, food, etc. This is the reason then that the word מלאכה appears twice in our verse. When relating to the Sanctuary in the celestial regions the Torah uses the expression הויה, “an existence,” whereas in connection with the terrestrial Tabernacle the operative expression is עשיה, “construction,  making it.”
    
    37,1. ויעש בצלאל את הארון, “Betzalel constructed the Ark.” It is well known that the Ark was the most sacred of all the furnishings of the Tabernacle. This is the reason why the Torah mentions Betzalel’s name in connection with the construction of the Ark, seeing that he was the one who possessed most of this divine spirit with which G’d endowed all the participants in the work of constructing the Tabernacle (compare the adjectives the Torah lavished on his insights in 35,31).
    Furthermore, the construction of the Ark required that the person making it entertained specific thoughts while making it. Seeing that construction of the other furnishings did not demand that the craftsman engaged in making it entertained specific thoughts, the Torah contented itself with simply writing: “he made it,” (the table) or (the lampstand), etc. without mentioning who it was who made it.”
    It is worth knowing that the sequence in which the furnishings of the Tabernacle are reported here was also the sequence in which the furnishings of Solomon’s Temple were constructed. The Ark was positioned in the Holy of Holies, on the far side of the dividing curtain, פרוכת. The table was positioned on the near side of that curtain on the north side of the heychal. The lampstand was positioned on the south side of the heychal, whereas the altar for incense, the “golden” altar, was positioned between the two former, slightly forward towards the entrance of the Tabernacle. This was in order that the priest entering the heychal should encounter it as the first item after he entered in order to perform the cleaning out of the ashes of the altar. This took place before five of the lamps on the lampstand would be replaced with new wicks each morning. The sequence of these rituals was determined by the principle אין מעבירים על המצות, that one does not ignore the performance of a commandment which is incumbent upon one if one encounters the opportunity to fulfill it immediately. 
    We find another allusion to the four-lettered holy name of G’d in these four paragraphs. The letter י of that name is symbolised by the height (10 handbreadths) of the Holy Ark together with its lid, the כפורת. The table in the northern part of the Sanctuary which represents מלכות, which receives its divine input from the fifth emanation, גבורה, an emanation on the “left” side of the diagram of emanations, represents the attribute of Justice. It is symbolised in the holy name of G’d by the first letter ה. This is the reason that the Torah mentioned the position of the table prior to the position of the lampstand. The lampstand with its six shafts (arms) in addition to the central stem  represents the letter ו in the holy name of G’d. Finally, the altar for incense which was covered with solid gold, represents the final letter ה in the holy name of G’d. The function of the incense is to counter the attribute of Justice when it is active. We know this from Deut. 33,10 ישימו קטורה באפיך, “they will place incense to counter Your anger, etc.”
    Having learned all this you need not be surprised at the statement of our sages in Berachot 55 that Betzalel knew how to manipulate or combine the letters in the alphabet employed by G’d when he created the universe. The letter י alludes to חכמה, wisdom, whereas the letter ה alludes to the celestial region it derives from, עולם האצילות. The letter ו alludes to the emanation בינה, (the one next to חכמה), whereas the final letter ה in that name refers to the concept of דעת, [according to some Kabbalists a combination of the former two emanations, eliminating the emanation מלכות from the diagram we are more familiar with. Ed.] This is what the Torah had in mind (31,3) when G’d said of Betzalel ואמלא אותו רוח אלוהים בחכמה, ובתבונה, ובדעת, “I will fill him with divine spirit, with wisdom, insight, and knowledge.” The three words refer to the three emanations we have mentioned. A Midrashic (Tanchuma Vayakhel 7) approach concerning the words: “Betzalel constructed the Ark,” Rabbi Chanina of Tzippori said that he actually made three arks, two of gold and one of acacia wood. He inserted the wooden one into the golden outer one; then he inserted the inner golden one into the wooden one. He covered the edges with gold to fulfill the instruction in Exodus 25,11: “you shall overlay it with gold from the inside and from the outside.” He understood the wording of the Torah to mean that although the wood of the Ark was totally enclosed, invisible, it was to be accorded honour seeing that the Torah is contained within it. The people even treated the broken first Tablets with honour placing the broken pieces within the Holy Ark, together with the Torah scroll and the second set of Tablets. The reason that the wood used for the Holy Ark was shittim wood was to remind the people of the sin the Israelites were to commit at a place called Shittim and to help atone for that sin. The wording of Deut. 10,2 “and place them in the Ark,” refers to the words immediately previous, i.e.  אשר שברת “the ones you have broken.” The moral message was that even if one encounters a Torah scholar who is impoverished and whose exterior reflects this, one is to treat him with respect and honour as his body houses the Torah.
    When G’d gave the instructions to build the Tabernacle, He had used the expression ועשית “you are to make, etc.” with every single item except in the case of the Ark where he said: ועשו, “they are to make the Ark” (25,10). The reason was so as not to allow any Israelite to say to another Israelite that he did not also have a share in the Torah. This was also one of the reasons that the Torah was given to the Jewish people in the desert, a region which is ownerless, has not been claimed by anyone as their own. The moral message is that the words of Torah are “ownerless,” no one  has an exclusive on them, there is no law of copyright protecting the Torah. A person could not claim that seeing he was a natural born Jew that he had a claim to Torah not shared by converts who joined Judaism after the Torah had been given to the Jewish people. This is part of the meaning of Deut. 33,4 תורה צוה לנו משה מורשה קהלת יעקב, “Moses commanded us the Torah, it is to be handed down as an heritage to the Community of Yaakov.” The Torah chose the word קהלת יעקב to teach that anyone who joins the community of Yaakov has an equal claim to that heritage. Any convert has an equal claim to Torah provided he makes it the focus of his study and observance. When the Torah defined the purpose of the Torah, it wrote “in order that האדם, should perform its laws and live thereby.” The Torah did not write: “in order that a priest, a Levite, or an Israelite should perform its laws and live by it,” but it chose the all-embracing term האדם, (Leviticus 18,5). 
    It is worthwhile to compare what is written in Chronicles I 2,55 i.e. “the families of the scribes that dwelt at Jabez: the Tirathites, etc., etc., these are the Kenites who came from Hammath, father of the house of Rechav.” According to Tanchuma these people sat in the office of the Sanhedrin, the Supreme Court, (on the Temple Mount), were members of it, studied, taught, and occupied positions of distinction. This proves how accessible Torah is and was to converts at all times. The words describing this are very similar to the ones used in the Torah (Deut. 27,9) where Moses exhorts the people to study Torah and to listen carefully to instruction in Torah. Some commentators even understand the word “the Tirathites” as a play on words, referring to people who had heard the sound of the Teruah at Mount Sinai (according to the view that Yitro arrived in the Jewish camp prior to the giving of the Torah). The “Kenites descended from Rechav” are definitely identified as descendants of Yitro, Moses’ father-in-law.
    In Yuma 72 we are told that Betzalel constructed three Arks, the inner one of gold being eight handbreadths in height, the middle one, the wooden one, being nine handbreadths in height, whereas the golden outer one was slightly over ten handbreadths in height. To the question how much higher than ten handbreadths the outer Ark was, the Talmud answers זיר, a measurement of approx. the height to accommodate the kapporet to fit on the inside and yet leave a crest to form a sort of crown or border. [According to this view the kapporet must have been considerably thinner than a handbreadth. Ed.]
    
    38,8. במראות הצובאות, “from the assembled piles of mirrors.” These mirrors were made of highly polished copper, extremely shiny. They should really have been included above in the donations of copper for the Tabernacle or with the list of jewelry donated by the women (35,22). Seeing that the jewelry mentioned there was made of gold, the Torah did not want to lump those contributions with the objects made from copper. Gifts made of gold were used in the construction of the actual Tabernacle, without distinction as to where the gold originated. These mirrors, however, became the material from which a special vessel was made, the basin from which the priests were washed. In fact this is the reason why Moses was first appalled  (Tanchuma Pekudey 9) that mirrors which had previously been used to arouse the carnal instincts of the husbands of the Jewish women should become the vessels from which the priests washed themselves, i.e. “purified” themselves prior to performing their sacred duties. When G’d became aware of Moses’ negative attitude towards these mirrors, He reputedly told him that these mirrors were especially dear to Him, more so than any of the other objects which had ben donated. Had it not been for these mirrors, which the women used to make themselves attractive to their husbands when these returned from hard work exhausted, there would not now have been a sufficient number of Israelites to have qualified for the revelation at Mount Sinai, for receiving the Tablets, and the Torah. This is all reflected in the peculiar adjective צובאות", “ i.e. it was because of these mirrors that the women managed to raise armies, צבאות,  of Jews.
    You are already aware that a principal function of the basin was the establishing of domestic harmony between man and wife, seeing that in the event a husband had suspected his wife of infidelity and she had denied it she would be given water to drink which came from this basin as a result of which her innocence could be established (Numbers 5,17).
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra holds  that the women who donated these mirrors were not the average Jewish women, but women who had become very pious and no longer experienced a tendency to enjoy the physical attractions of this world. They had already devoted themselves exclusively to the service of the Lord. Hence, seeing they had no use for mirrors to beautify themselves, they donated them for the Tabernacle. When the Torah testifies אשר צבאו פתח אהל מועד,”who had come in droves to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting,” this is a reference to these women (not the mirrors)  who flocked daily to he entrance of the Tabernacle to pray there and to hear words of Torah.
    This is also the way Onkelos translates  the verse when he wrote דאתין לצלאה בתרע משכן זמנא, “who came to pray at the gate of the Tabernacle at times.”
    The reason the Torah speaks of אהל מועד at a time when the Tabernacle had not yet been built, is that the women considered Moses as the אהל מועד ever since he had taken his tent and put it outside the encampment of the Israelites in order to be able to communicate there with the Lord. Seeing that the  Torah had described Moses’ tent as אהל מועד, (33,7) the Torah did so again. The meaning of the verse is that the women brought the mirrors to Moses.
    
    38,9. ויעש את החצר לפאת נגב תימנה, “He constructed the courtyard; on the south side, etc.” The southern side is mentioned first  seeing it is generally referred to as “the right side,” being on the right side of the person entering it. There are some scientists who hold that south is the beginning of all the other directions, whereas north is the last of the various directions, its tail, so to speak. This would account for the fact that the camp headed by the tribe of Reuven the firstborn was situated on the south side of the Israelites’ encampment, whereas the camp headed by Dan was situated in the north  seeing that the tribe of Asher the youngest was part of that camp (Numbers 2, 10 and 28 respectively). The Torah’s report of how the camp of the Israelites was positioned is very important even though it was altogether something which existed only for a very limited period. Even though we do not have a Temple nowadays, study of and familiarity with all these numbers and measurements is mandatory and people who take the trouble to familiarise themselves with these numbers are certain to receive a great reward. There is nothing in the Torah which is not worth studying regardless of whether one can appreciate the practical value of such knowledge (Berachot 62). The same applies to study of all the various animal offerings and the rules about who may eat what and where and when. Every person who makes study of these subjects his personal priority will be given credit as if he had personally offered the sacrifices whose laws he had studied. This is what the sages meant when they said in Menachot 110 that whoever busies himself with the rules of the burnt-offering is considered as if he personally had offered same, etc. [actually the wording in the Talmud is that “anyone who has studied these rules will not be in need of having to offer such sacrifices.” Ed.] This is also what the prophet Isaiah 40,10 had in mind when he said: “see, his reward is with Him, his recompense before Him.” The same applies to people who tell of the details of the Tabernacle, the Temple, etc. It is incumbent upon us to understand both the revealed and the hidden aspects of the details the Torah has revealed about all these materials and measurements of the Tabernacle. King David already mentioned this when he said (Psalms 48,13-14) ”walk around Zion, circle it, count its towers, take note of its ramparts; go through its citadels, that you may recount it to a future age.” The merit of doing what David suggested will help restore the Shechinah to our midst as we know from verse 15 immediately after the verses just quoted. David concludes by saying: “for G’d, He is our G’d forever, He will lead us evermore.”
    
    
    
    
   אלה  פקודי
    
    
    
   טוב מעט ביראת ה' מאוצר רב ומהומה בו. טוב ארוחת ירק ואהבה שם משור אבוס ושנאה בו, “Better a little with fear of the Lord, than a great treasure with trouble. Better a meal of vegetables where there is love, than a fattened ox where there is hate.” (Proverbs 15, 16-17).
    In these last two verses Solomon deals with the subject of man’s greed, i.e. he advises him that the quantity of one’s possessions is far less important than the ability to enjoy what one does have without worry. These two verse may be approached from three different aspects, the plain meaning, the allegorical meaning and the rational dimension contained in these statements. 
    According to the plain meaning of the text the words “better a little with the fear of the Lord than a  great treasure with trouble,” warns man not  to become guilty of robbery. The commandment not to rob belongs to the category which every human being understands even if the Torah had not commanded it. One does not need to be endowed with superior intelligence to realise that if one amasses treasure by illegal means, by robbing someone (and one is allowed to get away with it), other people will be encouraged to do the same in return and no one will ever be able to sleep without worry. Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 33,3), have stated that the sin of robbery, i.e. holding on to gains obtained by such means, is greater than other sins. In fact the reason that the people of the generation of the deluge were wiped out was precisely because they were guilty of this sin. Their other sins could have been forgiven, the sin of robbery could not qualify for forgiveness. The Torah stated this fairly plainly when it quoted G’d as saying that the “end of all flesh has come before Me (I had to decree it) because of the violence (robbery with violence) that the earth has been filled with” (Genesis 6,13). Anyone who does not return stolen property will never be forgiven. This is why it is the most serious of all sins. This is why Solomon said: “better a little (acquired while demonstrating fear of the Lord.)” He means better a little property which is permissible than a lot which is not permissible. Solomon makes a similar statement  in Proverbs 16,8 “better a little with righteousness than bountiful harvests with injustice.” He warns man of the seriousness of the sin of committing robbery as he is aware that man has a tendency not to abandon anything in his possession. To counter the perception that the quantity of one’s possessions is more important than how one came to acquire same, he says: “better a little, provided it is rightfully yours.”
    After having spoken of robbery in the abstract, Solomon illustrates his teachings in a practical manner by quoting the example of someone enjoying simple food such as a vegetable soup to someone eating fancy food being watched by envious eyes, etc. Food is enjoyed best in the company of friends and well wishers, whereas even the fanciest food when not eaten in a relaxed atmosphere loses its appeal for the person consuming it. The thrust of all of Solomon’s remarks on the subject is to teach man not to be greedy for physical possessions and for grati-fications of his body. At the same time, man should not put his trust in his material possessions, he should not make the mistake of “relying on the mosaic floors as if they were a high wall (Proverbs 18,11),” but should remember that when it comes to wealth he will always be outclassed by G’d whose wealth is immeasurably greater. This concept is emphasised by Eliphaz in Job 22,24 when he said: “if you regard treasure as dirt, Ophir-gold as stones of the wadi, and lift your face to G’d, You will pray to Him, etc., you will decree and it will be fulfilled and light will shine on your affairs.” As long as a person’s fear of G’d is subordinate to the reliance he places on his material possessions there is something basically wrong  with such a person’s outlook.
    A Midrashic approach. The words: “better a little with a measure of fear of the Lord,” is a reference to the people of Israel  of whom the Torah has written: “for you are the smallest of the nations” (Deut. 7,7), whereas the words: “with fear of the Lord,” refer to the fact that the people of Israel accepted the Torah in order that they should acquire fear of the Lord. This is the meaning of  Exodus 20,17: “in order to test you and in order that the fear of the Lord will always be with you, so that you do not go astray.”
    The words “rather than a great treasure,“ are a reference to the other 70 nations on earth. In other words: “G’d prefers a small nation such as Israel who are G‘d-fearing, to all the other more numerous nations on earth who lack that quality.” Our sages (on Song of Songs 2,4) “he brought me to the banquet room and his banner of love was over me,” comment that these words are a reference to the other 70 nations, whereas the words “with trouble” in the above-quoted verse in Proverbs refer to the punishment in store for these 70 nations. Solomon spoke about a simple meal he himself had consumed at the home of a poor man which had given him so much more satisfaction than a banquet in the homes of one of his wealthy friends.
     Midrash Mishley 16 tells the following: When Solomon lost his throne he was forced to go begging. Whenever he would come to the door of some house he would identify himself saying: “I am Kohelet, and I used to be king in Jerusalem.” Once he met two men who used to know him when he was king. One of them bowed down before him and accorded him the honour due to a king. He invited him to share a meal with him on that day. He took him home to the upper floor of his home and served him a fatted ox. During the meal his host reminded Solomon of the times when he used to be king over Israel in Jerusalem. Solomon broke out  crying because he had been reminded of his past glory and contrasted it with his present circumstances. In the end, he could not even eat the meal because he felt so depressed. When he met the other man whom he used to know, this one too bowed down before him  and he too invited Solomon to dine with him on that day. Solomon asked him if he too was going to remind him of all the glory he used to enjoy, etc, just as his other one time friend had done. The host replied that he was only a poor man and that the only kind of meal he was able to offer the erstwhile king was vegetable soup, etc. Solomon accompanied the man to his house. They arrived there, his host washed his hands and feet for him and served him a simple meal. During the meal he made a point of consoling Solomon over what he had lost. He said: “My lord king, G’d has sworn an oath to your father David that the kingdom of Israel would not depart from his descendants. The scriptural verse he quoted (Psalms 132,11) was: “the Lord swore to David a firm oath that He will not renounce, ‘One of your own issue I will set upon your throne’”. He explained to Solomon that it was the custom of G’d to subject a man to afflictions when He wanted to discipline him but to relate to him with goodwill again after He had done so. He added that G’d subjects particularly those whom He loves to such trials and tribulations, just as a father does when he wants to discipline his child (Proverbs 3,12). His host added that he was certain that G’d would restore his kingdom to Solomon. When Solomon heard these words he felt greatly encouraged and enjoyed this meal of simple vegetable soup far more than the meal he had been served on the day before. When his kingdom was eventually restored to him, he recorded his feelings on the matter in the verses we have quoted from Proverbs.
    A rational approach to our verses: When writing the verse: “better a little with the fear of G’d,” Solomon wanted to warn man  that he should reflect on matters involving philosophy only to the extent that his intellectual capacity was capable of dealing with the concepts involved. He should not delve into matters which were beyond his understanding. This is why he also counselled us in Kohelet 7,16: “do not act the wise man to excess.” He used the parable to explain that he who tries to digest more than his stomach can handle will inevitably bring up and vomit all he has eaten. The same is true with intellectual pursuits. He who engages in them beyond his capacity to understand will ultimately be revolted by all intellectual pursuits. He will reject the idea of a life beyond death and become a heretic. Solomon illustrated this further when speaking about the consumption of honey. A little honey is sweet and pleasant; too much of it is revolting (Proverbs 25,16). When one has eaten more honey than one should, one will even vomit the initial amout which would have been good for one.
    Our sages in Sanhedrin 106 illustrated these thoughts also  when they discussed that Bileam detoured to Midian in order to collect the reward for having been the cause of the death of 24,000 Israelites. Instead of reaping his reward, the Israelites who had mounted a punitive expedition against Midian caught up with him there and killed him. Had he gone back to his hometown he would not have suffered such a fate (Joshua 13,22). The reason he was killed was because he tried to amass something he was not entitled to.
    Our sages also comment on the subject of wisdom comparing it to honey when they interpreted the verse (Proverbs 25,16) “if you found some honey, eat only as much as you need,” as applying to Rabbi Akiva. The second half of that same verse, i.e. “lest you overeat and vomit all of it,” they applied to ben Zoma. {Both scholars had tried to delve into esoterical mysteries, Rabbi Akiva returned from his mental excursion with new insights, whereas Ben Zoma who had overestimated his intellectual capacity  became mentally deranged (Chagigah 14).
    Having concluded his remarks about the need to exercise discretion when studying philosophy and the mysteries of G’d’s creation, Solomon turned to the subject of the quality of one’s spiritual achievements. This is why he said that consuming a meal of vegetable soup in surroundings where love is present is good. The “love” Solomon spoke of is the belief in the Shechinah which is also described as a dimension of G’d’s love (Song of Songs 2,7). When the word אהבה, “love,” appears in our liturgy such as באהבה תרום קרננו להודות לך וליחדך באהבה, just before we recite the קריאת שמע in the morning, we allude to G’d’s Shechinah. It is better to become privy to this “love” of G’d without some of the deep philosophical insights that some people strive for, than to eat the fatted ox, i.e. to try and obtain the kinds of sophisticated insights which led some of the people of Israel to making the golden calf. Seeing that the Israelites had made the golden calf in their search for deeper insights, and not because they wanted to practice idolatry G’d was able to forgive them their sin. Proof that they were granted forgiveness promptly was the fact that the Shechinah manifested itself in the Tabernacle. This is also the reason why the אהל מועד, the Tent of Meeting in the desert became known by the name משכן, as that name is a reminder of the presence of the שכינה amongst the Jewish people at that time.
    Our sages, in commenting on the opening word of our portion, i.e. אלה say that the people who had sinned with the word אלה, when they said אלה אלוהיך ישראל, were now forgiven by the Torah using this very same word when describing the completion of the building of the משכן העדות, “the Tabernacle of Testimony.” (compare Tanchuma Pekudey 6).
    
   אלה פקודי המשכן משכן העדות אשר פקד על פי משה, עבודת הלוים ביד איתמר בן אהרן הכהן. “These are the records of the Tabernacle, the Tabernacle of Testimony, which were drawn up at Moses’ bidding- the work of the Levites under the direction of Ittamar son of Aaron the Priest.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the words אלה פקודי המשכן refer to the Tabernacle and all its constituent parts which formed the subject matter of the last chapter and a half. The supervision of the construction of all these components had been entrusted to the Levites who in turn were responsible to Ittamar, son of Aaron. However, such furnishings as the lampstand, the table, the Holy Ark  and the two altars were not part of the items for which Ittamar was responsible but they were entrusted to the supervision of his older brother Eleazar.
    A Midrashic approach: The reason that the Torah writes the words משכן,המשכן here in succession is to teach us that the Sanctuary on earth has a parallel in the celestial regions. We mentioned previously that all this is based on Exodus 15,17 where the Torah spoke of “the place You made to dwell in, O Lord, the sanctuary, O Lord which Your hands established.”
    The word מכון which the Torah wrote to describe the place for G’d to dwell in, should be read as מכוון, “prepared for, intended for.” The concept here is that the Tabernacle, Sanctuary, was considered as equivalent in importance and value to the entire world G’d had created previously. There are a number of expressions which have been used in the construction of the Tabernacle which closely parallel expressions we are familiar with in connection with descriptions of the universe such as carpets, יריעות, to name one. When earth was created the Torah spoke about luminaries, מאורות being created. The Tabernacle contained as an essential part a מנורה, a lampstand intended to illuminate the Sanctuary. In connection with the creation of earth the Torah mentioned that the waters congregated in one area, i.e. יקוו המים אל מקום אחד, whereas part of the vessels required for the Tabernacle was a כיור, a basin in which water had been collected. The Tabernacle’s roof consisted of carpets, יריעות, forming sort of a tent-like cover, whereas the sky or heaven covering our terrestrial universe is described as something G’d “spread like a tent over the universe” (Psalms 104,2). The author continues quoting more such examples. The gist of the Midrash Tanchuma 2 on our portion is that there are too many parallel expressions in the creation of the universe and the manufacture of the Tabernacle for them to be accidental; the message must be that we are dealing here with a microcosm, i.e. a miniature “world.” It is therefore easier to perceive of the Presence of G’d feeling comfortable in such surroundings. Thus far the Midrash
    Whatever the sages mentioned in the Midrash we just quoted which states that the Tabernacle was equivalent to a microcosm, may be understood as a generalisation. There are, however, many details which are capable of being derived from the generalisations we mentioned. 
    In connection with the verse אלה תולדות השמים והארץ, “these are the derivatives of heaven and earth,” Bereshit Rabbah 12,9 states that from the word בהבראם, which appears immediately after these words we can derive that G’d employed the letter ה at the end of the tetragram as the tool with which He created the world, (seeing that that letter was not necessary in that statement). We may perhaps find something parallel in connection with the Tabernacle in the verse אלה פקודי המשכן, i.e. that the letter ה in the word המשכן, is also an allusion to the presence of the attribute כבוד being present in the Tabernacle, i.e. the Shechinah. The last letter ה in the tetragram represents that attribute. This may be further alluded to by the fact that the subject of the Tabernacle occurs five times in the Torah. I have already explained this at the beginning of Vayakhel (page 1422).The relationship of the words משכן-שכינה-כבוד is further illustrated in the verse לשכון כבוד בארצנו, “for the attribute of Kavod to dwell in our land” (Psalms 85,10). 
    Just as the world had been planned before being actually created within a space of six days, so the Tabernacle had been planned before being actually constructed. When the Torah speaks about the planning stage of the Tabernacle it writes: לחשוב מחשבות, “to plan designs” (31,4), whereas subsequently it speaks of לעשות, “to carry out (such designs).” Just as the world itself was not a product of externally imposed conditions, so the Tabernacle was a structure built by the free-willed donations of the people constructing it. The Torah underlines this when it writes אשר ידבנו לבו, “whatever his heart will prompt him to donate” (Exodus 25,2). Just as the name of G’d is mentioned at every stage of the creation including His holy name, the tetragram (Genesis 2,4) at the end of the creation of the world, so His name is mentioned repeatedly during the Torah’s report of the construction of the Tabernacle, including G’d’s ineffable name כי ענן ה' על המשכן, “for the cloud of Hashem was above the Tabernacle “(40,38).
    Just as G’d employed two separate attributes of His when creating the universe, i.e. the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy, so the Tabernacle was constructed principally by two different craftsmen, Betzalel and Oholivov. The former was from the tribe of יהודה representing the attribute of Mercy, whereas the latter was a member of the tribe of דן, representing the attribute of דין, Justice.
    It is also possible to understand the word משכן as derived from the word המשכה, “conduct, continuation, etc.” This would symbolise the fact that the terrestrial Tabernacle was an extension, a continuation of the Tabernacle in the celestial regions. The Temple in our regions draws on the spiritual input from the Temple in the celestial regions. The Temple in those regions is known as זבול, this is why Solomon said in his prayer at the consecration of the Temple he had built: בנה בניתי בית זבול לך, “I have most certainly built for You” (a house which parallels the בית זבול). This is also the mystical dimension of Judges 5,14 ומזבולון מושכים בשבט סופר, “and from Zevulun who so far were only engaged as scribes (in this instance they joined the battle against Siserah and his chariots, though they were basically not warriors. Ed.). The message Devorah conveys is that the spiritual inspiration which scribes such as the members of the tribe of Zevulun could draw on from celestial sources they employed in helping their people in that battle. The word סופר in that verse is an allusion to the ספירות,  the emanations which G’d used in the creation of the universe. No doubt, Devorah referred to the lowest emanation, מלכות, the one which is part of the עולם העשיה, our own terrestrial universe. 
    Just as the Torah spoke of “the day on which the Lord G’d made (finished) the universe” (Genesis 2,4), saying also that when G’d reviewed His handiwork at the end of the six days “He saw that it was very good” (Genesis 1,31), so when the Tabernacle was completed the Torah writes: “It was on the day Moses completed the Tabernacle” (Numbers 7,4), as well as 39,43 “when Moses took a look at all the work and here they had performed it (i.e. it was good).”
    Just as the creation of the world did not interfere with the Sabbath, the day of rest, so the building of the Tabernacle was not allowed to interfere with the Sabbath legislation, i.e. no work was performed for it on the Sabbath. This is the reason the Torah wrote in connection with the report about the construction of the Tabernacle that “work shall be performed (on it) during six days,” (excluding the Sabbath). Just as the world as we know it is slated to be destroyed before it is going to be renewed after a period our sages describe as 1000 years of Sabbath (Sanhedrin 96), so both the Tabernacle and the Temple were slated to be destroyed only to be rebuilt in due course.
    Just as after the creation of man and his having been placed in the garden G’d commanded him to observe certain rules and not to eat from the tree of knowledge, so we find that Moses issued certain instructions in 36,6. Just as G’d had told the universe to stop continuing to expand, i.e. He said די, “enough,” (Bereshit Rabbah 46,2), so Moses also declared the contributions for the Tabernacle as being sufficient and ordered the people to stop bringing more, the Torah saying והמלאכה היתה דים, “and there were sufficient materials, etc.” (36,7). According to a kabbalistic interpretation the word מלאכה instead of something more appropriate, meant that it referred to the מלאכת שמים וארץ, the work of constructing heaven and earth, i.e. the Tabernacle was a replica of the creation of heaven and earth.
    In Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 3 we find the rhetorical question: “why was G’d called אל שדי? The answer given is that He was the One who said to the heavens רי, “enough,” thus preventing heaven from proliferating further by drawing on G’d’s mantle of light.
    Just as heaven and earth would be used by  G’d as witnesses in the event the Israelites were to violate the covenant and transgress the Torah -as we know from Deut. 30,19 “I have called as witnesses against you this day heaven and earth, etc.,- so the Tabernacle was called משכן העדות, the “Tabernacle of Testimony.” Just as the name elohim occurs thirty two times during the story of creation, so the name of G’d also appears thirty two times in connection with the construction of the Tabernacle. Just as there were seven days which together formed the period known as מעשה בראשית, “the creation of the universe,” so there were seven days which served as מלואים, days which were considered as preparatory to the functioning of the Tabernacle. No doubt one can find other similarities between the Tabernacle and its construction and the universe and its construction in addition to those which I have already listed. I myself am aware of a number of such additional examples.
    There is another comment by Shemot Rabbah 51,3 concerning the appearance of the words משכן twice in succession at the beginning of our portion. The reason mentioned is that it hinted at the fact that there would be two permanent Temples replacing this mobile structure at a future date, i.e. the first Temple and the second Temple. The verse alluding to this is Nechemyah 1,7 חבל חבלנו לך. Thus far the Midrash.
    If you will take a close look at the words המשכן משכן העדות you will find that these three words contain a hint of the number of years that the first and second Temple were standing. You will also find an allusion to the number of years which elapsed between the Exodus from Egypt and the erection of the first Temple. The numerical value of the letters in the word המשכן plus the letters themselves (5) amount to  420, i.e. the number of years that the second Temple was standing. The word משכן gives you the number of years the first Temple was standing, i.e. 410 years. The word העדות when spelled without the letter ו, amounts to the number 480, the number of years between the Exodus and completion by Solomon of the first Temple. The fact that one year seems to be missing from the number required (479 instead of 480), is accounted for by the fact that the Tabernacle was built in the second year after the Exodus so that from the time of its erection to the completion of Solomon’s Temple actually only 479 years elapsed. Moses realised all these numbers already by means of his Holy Spirit. This is the meaning of the introduction to our portion with the words אלה פקודי המשכן משכן העדות.
     Another view of these words is found in Tanchuma Pekudey 4 where Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai is quoted as saying that the word עדות refers to the Torah. The opening verse of our portion would be equivalent to: “these are the various laws of the Torah, one group of which is know as עדות.” The whole matter may be illustrated by a parable. A king had a daughter for whom he built a palace. He made her dwell inside this palace protected behind seven curtains The King said that anyone entering it in order to visit his daughter (without his permission) would be tantamount to insulting his own honour. This explains why the Tabernacle was known by two different names. We have one verse in which the Tabernacle is referred to as משכן העדות, i.e. the Torah. In another verse  the Torah .refers to the same building by speaking of it as לפני משכן ה' ‘in front of the Tabernacle of the Lord.” G’d made it plain that anyone who would debase and besmirch the Torah (G’d’s daughter) would be as if he had debased and besmirched G’d Himself.
    
    You should know that when the Roman Emperor Hadrianus entered the Temple he was swearing and cursing (G’d). [actually it was still the general Titus who entered the Temple seeing that Hadrianus lived later, after the destruction. Ed.] Concerning such a situation David said (Psalms 74,5) ‘it is like men wielding axes against a gnarled tree.” He (G’d) raises such wicked people to make it appear as if they were about to fell the tallest cedars in order to convert same into ladders reaching heaven itself in order to capture it. However, their attempts invariably end in failure and they have to abandon them.” When such enemies of the Lord realise their impotence to defeat Him, they attack us, His “daughter” to take out their frustration on us. This is what David referred to when he said (Psalms 79,1) “heathens have attacked Your domain.”
    Rabbi Chiya bar Abba said: “to whom can we compare the hostile heathen? To a man who hates his ruler and would like to engage him in combat but is unable to do so. What does such a disgruntled subject of the ruler do? He goes to the circus which the ruler is visiting and attempts to undermine the structure. Seeing that he is afraid of being discovered by the ruler and executed for his attempt to harm him, he introduces a digging tool under the main pillar of the circus hoping to thereby bring about the collapse of the structure which would kill the ruler while collapsing.” This is how and why the hostile heathens attack the Jews. They realise that we are crucial to G’d’s universe. By destroying us they hope to discredit Him. Concerning these ill-fated attempts of such enemies of the Lord, David says (Psalms 2,2) “kings of the earth take their stand, and regents intrigue together against the Lord and against His anointed.” This is an example of how those who are unable to kill the donkey attack the saddle instead, or to those who, while unable to kill the lion, kill the donkey instead in order to vent their frustration.
    
    38,22. ובצלאל בן אורי בן חור למטה יהודה עשה “and Betzalel son of Uri, son of Chur, of the tribe of Yehudah had made, etc.;” the meaning of the word עשה, “had made”: in this instance is that he had issued instructions for the items mentioned to be made by the appropriate people. The only item Betzalel constructed personally was the Holy Ark (37,1). This is why G’d’s Holy Name was used exclusively with Betzalel. Our sages (Jerusalem Talmud Peyah 1,1) say that Betzalel understood perfectly what was to be made and how without G’d having had to spell this out to him, he had divined exactly what G’d had told Moses while the latter was on the mountain.
    A comment by another Midrash claims that both Betzalel and Oholiov were craftsmen familiar with all aspects of the work that needed to be performed. Both were known as גור אריה, the former because he was a member of the tribe of Yehudah (Genesis 49,9), the latter  seeing Moses had referred to the tribe of Dan by the same term in Deut. 33,22. The Temple has been compared to a lion (אריה) the shape of the sanctuary being long and narrow whereas its shape near the entrance (with the אולם) was broad in front. This is supported by Scripture in Isaiah 29,1 where the word Ariel is understood to be derived from Aryeh (compare Rashi on that verse). Just as the construction of the Tabernacle, the Temple, and the altar was symbolised by the lion, the punishment of the Jewish people when the Temples were destroyed were also linked to the image of the lion as we know from Jeremiah 4,7: “the lion has come up from his thicket, the destroyer of nations has set out.” Eventually, when the messianic period will be ushered in, our prophets again foretold that at that time Israel would be compared to the rising of the lion when they said (Micha 5,7) ”the remnant of Yaakov shall be among the nations in the midst of many people like a lion among beast of the wild.”
    
     38,25. וכסף פקודי העדה מאה ככר, “and the silver of those of the community who were recorded amounted to 100 talents, etc.” The silver of the half-shekel contributions of the 600.000 males over the age of 20 amounted to 300.000 whole shekels (100 talents). Seeing that actually there were 603.550 males being counted, the total amount was precisely that mentioned in our verse, i.e. 100 talents and 1775 shekel (a talent having 3.000 shekel). According to the accounting listed in the Torah here, any silver “donated” rather than handed over as the mandatory amount by males over the age of twenty was not mentioned here.
    Rashi, in his commentary, computes the numbers as follows: “a talent equals 60 manah. Seeing that the shekels being counted were described as “holy shekels” i.e. double the weight of the ordinary shekel, a talent would be equivalent to 120 manah. The manah  is equivalent to 25 selaim. This gives you an amount of 3.000 shekel per talent. Rashi continues, arriving at the same result we already mentioned.
    Having established all this we can now address the amount of silver Haman offered to pay King Ahasverus in exchange for permission to destroy the Jews in his kingdom. Seeing that he offered 10.000 talents of silver, this was equivalent to 50 shekel for every Jew assuming that there had been 600.000 Jews at the time. The number 50 shekel is the maximum amount per adult male between the age of 20 and 60 prescribed by the Torah (Leviticus 27,3) that someone “donating” his own equivalent to G’d has to give to the Temple treasury.
    Another way of understanding why Haman picked on this amount of silver may be that when the Israelites sold their brother Joseph and received 20 pieces of silver in exchange, i.e. an amount of 5 shekel, or half a shekel each, and their guilt had not yet been atoned, he concluded that in exchange for the amount he offered he could legally make all the Jews his slaves (again by assuming that there were a total of 600.000 Jews). He felt certain that he would succeed seeing that the brothers had never been punished by G’d for selling Joseph into slavery. He presumably reasoned similar to what we have been told in Midrash Tehillim 10 that because the brothers sat down to eat their meal (Genesis 37,28) after throwing Joseph into the pit but before selling him, acting as if nothing out of the ordinary had just occurred, G’d was so angry that He said: “seeing you have sold your brother as a result of feasting, your descendants will be sold as a result of their having feasted (participating in the banquet given by King Ahasverus).” This is why the Book of Esther makes such a point of telling us that the King and Haman sat down to a feast after having concluded the deal in which Haman acquired authority to do to the Jews whatever he wanted. If we reflect on this calculation, Haman only had to offer a payment of 1.000 talents of silver as when you multiply the number 600.000 by 5 you have 3.000.000 shekel or 1.000 talents. [each brother had received half a shekel at the time, and the amount required by G’d for atonement of the sin of the golden calf was also only one half shekel per adult male. Ed.]
    It is possible to see a different motivation in the amount Haman offered the king in exchange for the Jews. He wanted to offer one thousand shekel in exchange for each of the Ten Commandments, i.e. the merit the Jews had acquired by agreeing to accept the Ten Commandments. When you look at the word אשקול “I will weigh,” which Haman used when offering this amount in exchange for the Jews (Esther 3,9), you could divde that word into two, i.e. אש קול, “fire and sound.” At the revelation at Mount Sinai the Jews had experienced the sound of G’d’s voice out of thunder and lightning, i.e. out of אש and קול. At that time G’d performed exceptional acts of kindness with us so that the fistful of barley (which represented the Omer sacrifice brought on the date of the month Haman was hanged) was found to be worth more than ten thousand talents of silver which Haman had offered the king. There is a tradition that on the 16th of Nissan, the day Haman was hanged, Mordechai had studied the laws of the Omer (a sacrifice which could be brought only while the Temple was standing). In our portion  the Torah speaks about the נחושת התנופה, that the total quantity of copper donated for the Tabernacle was some 70 talents plus 2400 shekel in weight. We learn from these details that Moses gave an exact accounting to the people concerning everything which had been contributed. He handed over everything to Ittamar who was appointed assistant treasurer so that he himself could not be suspected of having held back anything for himself  seeing he was in sole charge.
    The Midrash in Shemot Rabbah 51,1 states that the description (Proverbs 28,20) “a faithful man will enjoy many blessings; but he who is too eager to become rich will not go unpunished,” applies to Moses and Korach respectively. Of the former G’d Himself said “he is trustworthy in My entire house,” (Numbers 12,7).”He enjoyed many blessings,” means that Moses was the instrument through whom Israel received many blessings He became the treasurer of the Tabernacle’s funds. The words: “he is too eager to become rich,” refer to Korach who was not content with the distinction of being a Levite but wanted to become a priest also. Due to this greed, he did not go “unpunished,” but the earth opened up and swallowed him and all his riches (Numbers 16,32).
    Just as a person must be able to face G’d with a clear conscience, so it is important to appear unblemished in the eyes of the people. When addressing this subject our sages in Shekalim 3,2 postulate that the donors when delivering their mandatory contribution must not enter the office designated for receiving same while wearing clothes which could conceal any money in its folds, etc., in order that in the event such people become wealthy sometime afterwards they could not be accused of having helped themselves to money stored in that office. Even if such a person  was a wealthy man he is not allowed to wear this kind of clothing so that should he become poor afterwards people might say that he was being punished for misappropriating funds from that office. People must always be on guard to conduct themselves in such a fashion that they do not arouse suspicions in their fellowmen that they have been guilty of some misdemeanour. David already prayed to G’d that this should not happen to him when he said (Samuel II 22,44) ”You have saved me from the strife of peoples.” There is an even more specific verse in the Torah concerning this subject in Numbers 32,27: “you will be clear before the Lord and before Israel.” We also have an explicit verse about this subject in Proverbs 3,4: “and you will find favour and high esteem in the eyes of G’d and man.”
    
    38,28. ואת האלף ושבע המאות וחמשה ושבעים, “and from the one thousand and seven hundred and seventy five,”  I believe that the reason the letter ה appears before the word אלף, i.e. a reference to an already familiar amount of silver, is designed to remind the reader that we are still dealing with the half-shekel mandatory contributions. The reference is to the מחצית השקל בשקל הקודש mentioned in verse 26. 3.550 people who had contributed a half shekel each  made up 1775 whole shekels as stated in our verse. Our sages (Tanchuma Pekudey 7) have described matters as follows: “when Moses made an accounting of all the materials used and all the contributions received he was short 1775 shekels of silver. He had forgotten what he had done with that quantity of silver. A heavenly voice was then heard reminding him that this amount of silver had been used up in making the hooks by means of which the curtains around the courtyard were attached to the pillars supporting them. This was an illustration of how trustworthy Moses was, that in all of “My house,” i.e. the Tabernacle, he had not misused any of the materials which had been contributed for it. Thus far the Midrash.
    When you examine the matter you will realise that the letters  ה and ו were the two letters which were featured in the sin of the golden calf. Both these letters are part of the tetragram, the holy name of Hashem. [the reference is to the two opening letters in the words האש והקול, “the fire and the voice” (we discussed this on the previous page). This is why the Israelites who numbered (in round figures) 600.000 had to bring half a shekel each to atone for that sin from which the sockets for the boards of the Tabernacle were to be constructed. The additional shekels which were not used up in constructing these sockets were used to make the hooks for the curtains which had to be attached to pillars so that the whole formed a fence or wall around the courtyard of the Tabernacle. The Hebrew word for these hooks is ווים, i.e. a number of the letters ו which had featured in the people’s sin. [The author discussed the nature of the sin in Exodus 32,4 page 1346; the placing of these silver sockets under the boards (walls) of the Tabernacle was equivalent to reversing the people’s priorities in their theological thinking. Ed.] Perhaps the wording ואת האלף was designed to draw our attention to the letters ו and ה specifically.
    
    39,3. וירקעו את פחי הזהב, “they hammered out the thin sheets of gold, etc.” Nachmanides points out that this is the only time the Torah elaborates on how the work was performed. Had the Torah not pursued a definite intent here it should simply have written: “they made the ephod out of gold, blue wool, and purple wool.” Perhaps the Torah wanted to describe the unusual instruction that gold should be integral to a fabric made primarily out of different coloured woolen threads. Hence the Torah explains that the gold was to be beaten into thin strips to make it compatible with the woolen threads.
    
    39,27-28. ויעשו את הכתנות שש......ואת המצנפת שש, ואת פארי המגבעות שש, ואת  מכנסי הבד שש משזר. “They made the tunics of linen and the turban of linen, and the splendid headdresses of linen and the linen breeches of twisted linen.”  These two verses contain the word שש  meaning linen, five times, and the word בד which also means linen once, making a total of six times that the material “linen” is repeated here. Whereas the word did have to be mentioned once, the other five times it has been mentioned are meant to convey additional information, allegorical or otherwise. The sages in Yuma 71 offer a number of additional insights based on the repetitions of these words. One of the insights they offered is that בד and שש both mean “linen,” seeing that the tunic had been described as made of בד in Leviticus 16,4. The expression בד for linen describes the manner in which flax (the raw material for linen) grows out of the ground in long strands, fibers. This plant is identical to the one known as פשתים. The reason the Torah refers to it as שש, i.e. ”six” is because the strands used to weave it consist of six threads spun together. Had the word occurred only one extra time, we would have thought that though it is preferable that these strands consist of six threads each, this is not mandatory. The repetition of the word another time means that this kind of six-fold strand is mandatory.
    
    39,37. את נרותיה, נרות המערכה , “its lamps, the lamps of the prescribed order.” According to the plain meaning of the text the extra words נרות המערכה, were added to stress that there had to be seven lamps; they were the ones Aaron or his sons were to light each evening. The repetition of that expression means that there were neither to be more nor fewer than these seven lamps.
    It is also possible that the reason there were to be seven lamps was that they symbolised the seven fixed stars (planets). The whole expression was to allude to the fact that these lamps in terrestrial space corresponded to “luminaries” in  space. [seeing all this was written before Copernicus it has lost its meaning in our day and age. Ed.]
    
    39,42. כן עשו בני ישראל את כל העבודה, “so did the Children of Israel perform all the labour.”  We would have expected the Torah to write כל המלאכה instead of כל העבודה. The Torah, however, wanted to remind us that all work performed for the building of the Tabernacle was equivalent in spiritual value to service in the Sanctuary, עבודה, i.e. something sacred, holy. Just as the expression עבודה is always used in connection with directly serving the Lord, so this too was directly serving the Lord. (compare Deut. 13,5 or Exodus 23,28).
    
    39,43. וירא משה את כל המלאכה, “when Moses saw that all the works had been done, etc.,” the word מלאכה refers to the work of building and weaving, etc. for the Tabernacle. The word  וירא refers to the vision of the completed Tabernacle G’d had shown Moses while he was on Mount Sinai. This vision has already been mentioned in Exodus 25,40. The words והנה עשו אותה means that now the people had made this vision come true in the desert.
    
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Pekudey 11): The words “Moses saw all the work,” refers to the מעשה בראשית, the creation of the universe; the Torah deliberately omitted adding the words מלאכת המשכן, “the work of the Tabernacle,” in order to teach us that this construction of the Tabernacle was equivalent in a sense to the construction of the universe itself. Immediately after Moses observed this he blessed the people saying: “may the Presence of the Lord, the Shechinah, come to rest on the work of your hands.” He continued immediately with the words of Psalm 90,17: “may the favour of the Lord, our G’d, be upon us; let the work of your hands prosper, O prosper the work of our hands.” The reason these words were appropriate is that the Psalm commences with the words “a prayer of Moses, the man of G’d.” The meaning of the words: “the work of our hands” is a reference to the priestly blessing bestowed upon the people by Aaron on the day the Tabernacle was put up. This is why the word עלינו “upon us,” Moses including himself, was appropriate. Finally, the last word/s in/ this blessing, the words ומעשה ידינו כוננהו, refer to the enduring success of the work the people had accomplished. This does not agree with the opinion of David Kimchi (רד'ק) who views these words as a repetition of what Moses had said before in order to reinforce his wish.
    
    40,2. ביום החודש הראשון באחד לחודש תקים את משכן אהל מועד, “on the first day of the first month you shall erect the Tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting.” According to a view cited in Tanchuma Pekudey 11 Moses had been putting up and taking apart the Tabernacle three times daily as we have been told three expressions in the Torah concerning the erection of the Tabernacle, i.e. הוקם ,תקים,and ויקם, “it was erected, erect it!, and “he erected.” The first expression occurred in connection with the offering of the daily public morning burnt-offering. The second expression occurred in connection with the days of consecration and the rites performed during those days. The third and final time applied to the Tabernacle being erected in time for offering the daily public burnt-offeing of the evening. You will find all these three occasions on which the Tabernacle was erected alluded to in our portion. (compare verse 17, verse 18, ).
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma 11): Betzalel, Oholiov, and all the artisans were endeavouring to erect the Tabernacle but were unable to do do so. This is the meaning of the words in 39,33: “they brought the Tabernacle to Moses.” The reason they brought it to Moses was their inability to erect it so that it would remain standing. Moses felt very badly about all this, seeing he had not had a personal share in working on the Tabernacle. G’d consoled him telling him that no other human being would be able to put up the Tabernacle, whereas as soon as Moses would begin to busy himself with erecting it, it would erect itself. This would teach the Jewish people that if Moses would be unable to erect the Tabernacle it would never become functional. G’d told him that He would record in the Torah that the Tabernacle had been erected by Moses personally, unassisted. This is the meaning of our verse in which Moses is instructed to erect the Tabernacle on the date mentioned. After hearing this, Moses said to G’d: “I do not know how to put it up.” G’d answered him: “you begin to busy yourself with it, and seeing that you have been shown it when it stood, it will stand by itself corresponding to the vision you have had.” This is the meaning of the words הוקם המשכן, “the Tabernacle was erected” (verse 17). G’d added further that He would write that the erection of the Tabernacle was credited to Moses. This is why the Torah also wrote: “Moses put up the Tabernacle” (verse 18). This is also what Psalms 45,15 may have had in mind when the sons of Korach wrote “the princess wearing an embroidered dress is led inside to the king;” this is a reference to the Tabernacle which contained many colours as we know from Exodus 35,35: “and embroider it with blue wool, purple wool and red wool.” The words תובל למלך in our verse from Psalms are a reference to Moses  of whom the Torah says in Deut. 33,5 “he was king in Yeshurun.” The words בתולות אחריה “maidens in her train” in the same verse, refer to the Jewish people who are referred to as maidens in Song of Songs 4,12, seeing they are also defined as companions to the Lord, based on Psalms 122,8 where they are described: “for the sake of my kin and friends;” in each instance the Hebrew word for “my friends” being ריע. Finally, the last words in that verse in Psalms 45,15 are מובאות לך “brought to you,” a reference to Moses to whom the Tabernacle was brought in order for him to erect it.
    
     40,16. כן עשה, “so he did.” This is the final reference to any items constructed in connection with the Tabernacle. The instructions to build and erect the Tabernacle began in Exodus 25,8 with the words: “they shall make a Sanctuary for Me.” Our verse concludes the re`port about carrying out of these instructions. You will find that the whole subject of the Tabernacle mentions the term עשה in one form or another 248 times, the same number of times as the number of positive commandments in the Torah. This number is alluded to in Kohelet 7,27 where Solomon speaks of אחת לאחת למצוא חשבון, “one corresponding one to the other.” In arriving at that number, the commandment not to make idols, i.e. the use of the word עשה in connection with the making of the golden calf, must be ignored. In practice this means that every time the word עשה appears in any shape or form between Exodus 32,1 and 33,5 ואדעה מה אעשה לך, it is to be ignored for the purpose of our calculation. When you count the number of times the root עשה occurs from chapter 25 to here you will find that it is exactly 248 times.
    Seeing that the Israelites had said at Mount Sinai נעשה ונשמע, and by making the golden calf they had reneged on the נעשה part of their promise, all the times the root עשה occurs in connection with the golden calf, this word cannot be part of their atonement for that sin. There cannot be idolatry in an environment of יחוד, the unique and exclusive divinity of Hashem.
    The 248 appearances of the term עשה in the chapters mentioned (excluding the report of the golden calf) are also a symbol for the 248 limbs of man. Just as the Tabernacle was equal in importance to the work of the creation, being a microcosm of the universe, so it symbolised the entire Torah which contains 248 positive commandments. This was also the reason why G’d made man with 248 limbs. It is to bring home the point that man was the object of the entire creation of the universe. [If man were to perish, there would be no point in G’d allowing the universe to continue to exist. Ed.]
    
    40,17. הוקם המשכן, “the Tabernacle was erected.” Bamidbar Rabbah 14 states that another Tabernacle was erected at the same time as the Tabernacle Betzalel had constructed. This is a reference to the “Tabernacle” of the נער, the angel Mattatron, whose task it is to act as “general manager” of the Lord, running the universe, and particularly earth, on His behalf. The name of this angel is the same as that of his Master. Thus far the Midrash. We find further remarks about this subject in Bamidbar Rabbah 12,12 on the verse (Numbers 7,1) ויהי ביום כלות משה להקים את המשכן, “it was on the day when Moses completed erecting the Tabernacle, etc.” The wording there is that at the time G’d told Moses to erect the Tabernacle, He told the angels to construct a similar structure in the celestial regions. Both were erected at one and the same time. We also read about this phenomenon in Chagigah 12  where the wording is a little different, the Talmud speaking about an altar in heaven paralleling the making of the altar on earth. On that altar the souls of the righteous would be “sacrificed” to the Lord by the archangel Michael to atone for the sins committed by the Israelites while they are in exile. All of this is based on the expression את המשכן in Numbers 7,1 instead of merely המשכן. [the author has explained many times that the word את is always an allusion to something additional but unspecified in the verse. Ed.]
    
    40,18. ויקם משה את המשכן, “Moses erected the Tabernacle, etc.” Our sages in Menachot 99 taught that one increases or adds to levels of holiness and never decreases them. They derive the first half of their statement from the censers of the people who had supported the rebellion of Korach and offered incense in them. G’d commanded that theses censers of the 250 men who had paid with their lives for their mistake be subsequently used to make a copper cover for the main altar in the courtyard of the Tabernacle (compare Numbers 17,3). The rule that levels of sanctity are not to be reduced is derived from our verse here. The Torah writes the following sequence: “Moses erected the Tabernacle; he put down its sockets and emplaced its boards and inserted its bars and erected its pillars. The wording indicates that Moses repeated this procedure many times over; the Torah carefully refrains from mentioning that he “dismantled” any part of the Tabernacle in the process. Only actions which resulted in additional sanctity are spelled out.
    
    40,27. ויקטר עליו קטורת סמים, “he burned aromatic incense on it.” Moses personally was the one who performed this service. It was Moses who kept offering this incense during all the seven days of the consecration of the Tabernacle. G’d had commanded him to do so in verse 4 (which is part of G’d’s address to Moses beginning with verse 1 of our chapter) where we read וערכת את ערכו והעלית את נורותיה, “you shall prepare its setting and light its lamps.” Clearly, G’d instructed Moses to act as the first High Priest during the seven days of the consecration. Aaron only took over on the eighth’s day. The fact that Moses was actually called כהן, “priest,” is confirmed in Psalms 99,6 quoted to this effect in Zevachim 102; “Moses and Aaron among His priests.”
    
    40,34. ויכס הענן את אהל מועד, “the cloud enveloped the Tent of Meeting.”  At the revelation at Mount Sinai the Torah also reported that the mountain was enveloped in a cloud. Concerning the Tabernacle, the Torah writes that the attribute of Hashem called כבוד filled the Tabernacle, i.e. that this attribute was within the cloud which in turn was within the Tabernacle. When reporting on what happened at Mount Sinai, the Torah had written (Exodus 20,21) that Moses approached the dark cloud within which G’d (elohim) was present. In our verse (35) the Torah explains Moses’ inability to enter the Tabernacle because the cloud rested upon it and the attribute of כבוד filled the Tabernacle. This means that unless G’d called to Moses inviting him to enter he could not do so. As soon as he would be called the fact that the cloud enveloped the Tabernacle was no impediment preventing Moses from entering. This is the meaning of the verse in Leviticus 1,1 where G’d called to Moses, and Exodus 24,18 where Moses entered the cloud because he had been called (24,12). The call: “Moses, Moses,” did not mean that Moses was to share the “space” with G’d’s attribute of כבוד; rather it was an indication to him that this attribute had departed from the Tabernacle or the mountain (as the case might be) so that Moses could now enter. The only part of G’d’s Shechinah which remained when Moses was called was the part which filled the space between the expanded wings of the cherubs on top of the Ark. Although the experience at Mount Sinai and the experience at the completion of the erection of the Tabernacle were almost nine months apart in time, you could view what happened here as “history repeating itself.” [This had become necessary due to the sin of the golden calf after which the Presence of G’d had left the vicinity of the encampment of the Israelites. Ed.]
    Nachmanides writes that it is quite possible that the second verse which speaks about the attribute כבוד filling the Tabernacle  (compare verses 34 and 35) alludes to His glory which resides within that attribute. Thus far Nachmanides.
    I believe I should draw your attention to the fact that we are dealing with five verses (34-38) in each of which the ענן, “cloud” is mentioned. I believe these five are allusions to the five emanations, i.e. references to the five times the Torah speaks of קולות, sounds, thunder, at the time G’d revealed Himself at Mount Sinai (compare Berachot 6).The Talmud there stated that the Torah was given by means of five קולות, “sounds, voices.” Even though we have pointed out in that connection that Moses achieved an understanding of seven emanations, i.e. seven קולות, as I explained on my commentary on Exodus 20,1, the sages in the Talmud meant the five “hidden” קולות whose identities the Torah did not reveal at the time. The other two emanations which were spelled out, i.e. תפארת and כבוד, were not mentioned by the Talmud, as they have been mentioned in our verses, i.e. in Exodus 20,2 as ה' אלוקיך in connection with the revelation at Sinai, and as the words וכבוד ה' twice here in connection with the Tabernacle, in order to hint at the presence of the attribute תפארת which resides within the attribute כבוד.
    This is what Nachmanides had in mind when he wrote that the Torah repeated the words וכבוד ה' another time. We find something very similar in connection with the Temple where we are told in Chronicles II 7,1-2: “it was when Solomon had completed to pray (during the consecration ceremonies) that the fire descended from the heavens and consumed the burnt-offering and the meat-offerings, and the attribute כבוד of the Lord filled the House; as a result the priests were unable to enter the House of the Lord as the attribute כבוד had filled the House of the Lord.” You have learned from all this that in our instance seven emanations, attributes, are referred to; the five times the Torah mentions the word ענן and the two occasions when the Torah speaks of the כבוד ה'. Just as seven emanations were part of the Sinai experience of the Jewish people, so seven emanations were part of what the people experienced during the inauguration of the Tabernacle. In both instances mention of these seven emanations is testimony to Moses’ spiritual attainments.
    
    40,38. כי ענן ה' על המשכן יומם ואש תהיה לילה בו, “for the cloud of the Lord would be over the Tabernacle by day, whereas by night fire would be above it.” We would have expected the Torah to write: ענן ה' ביום ואש (ה') תהיה בלילה. Why did the Torah mention the word “fire” in front of the word “night” when describing the presence of heavenly attributes as manifest in connection with the Tabernacle? The reason is that the Torah wanted to use both “day” and “night” as divine attributes, respectively. (The word “day” is an alternate name for the attribute of Mercy, whereas the word “night” is an alternate name for the attribute of Justice).
    It is well known that the name of the attribute of Mercy  often appears with the letter מ being repeated, such as in the word יומם, [usually translated as “by day.” Ed.] The basic letters in the word לילה are ליל, the letter ה at the end being the allusion to the attribute of Justice which is most active at night. You know that this attribute had been particularly active at night when it was applied to the firstborn of Egypt (Exodus 12,29). This is part of the mystical dimension of the words used in Scripture. When we read in Joshua 1,8  that G’d told Joshua to be busy with Torah both by day and by night, the wording is והגית בו יומם ולילה instead of והגית בו ביום ובלילה, the message is that the Torah, the subject of the instruction is composed of both the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice. The Torah is divided between the written and the oral Torah, the former symbolising the attribute of Mercy whereas the latter symbolises the attribute of Justice.
    This gives you an idea of the Shechinah cleaving to the Jewish people. Both the Shechinah and the people dwelled in tents while the people were in the desert. This is part of what is meant in 33,8 ונצבו איש פתח אהלו, “they each stood at the entrance to his respective tent.” Bileam already praised the tents of the Jewish people in the desert as being something out of the ordinary when he said (Numbers 24,8) “how goodly are your tents O Yaakov.”
    In verse 36 in our chapter here the Torah speaks of the Children of Israel adjusting their journeys in the desert to the movements of the cloud representing the Shechinah. This is only one more example of what we called the דבקות, the cleaving to one another of the Jewish people and the Shechinah. Here in our verse (38), the cloud is associated with כל בית ישראל לכל מסעיהם, “the entire house of Israel in all their journeys.” The Children of Israel were again mentioned twice in close succession seeing that the Torah had mentioned both the cloud and the fire.
    How beautiful were the flags of the people of Israel in the desert, drawing attention to holy encampments equal to camps of holy angels in the celestial regions which surround the mani- festation of the Shechinah in their domain. The very fact that this manifestation of G’d’s presence was visible equally to men and women testifies to the purity and sanctity of the whole people at that time.
    When discussing Psalms 85,10: “His help is very near those who fear Him, to make His glory (attribute כבוד) dwell in our land,” our sages (Tanchuma end of our portion) write that G’d said that whereas in this world He manifested His Presence amongst the Jewish people in the Holy Temple, a Presence which had to be withdrawn due to the sins of the people, in the world to come the manifestation of G’d’s presence would never again be withdrawn. This is based on Leviticus 26,11: “I will establish My abode in your midst; and My spirit will not reject you. I will remain as your G’d.” The meaning of these words is that in the future prophecy will be restored to the people of Israel as in former times, and the Shechinah will once more be in its regular place. All the people will learn intimate information about G’d in those days. The verse of the prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel promising both the elimination of war (Isaiah 2,4) and the gift of a new heart from G’d (Ezekiel 36,26) will then be realised. The “heart of stone” attributed to the Jewish people by Ezekiel will be replaced by a heart of flesh (ibid.). There will neither be a Satan nor an evil urge (the view of Nachmanides that man will be naturally good in those days, compare Rabbi Chavell).
    These words have to serve as our solace and comfort during these long days of our exile. Hopefully, we shall all return to our former glory in the near future. Isaiah promised all this in the concluding chapters of his book (chapters 60-66) If, during the period after the Exodus we loved G’d and appreciated that His goodness was superior to the heady feeling one experiences after having drunk wine (Song of Songs 1,2), how much more intimate will our relationship with the Lord be after we experience the last and ultimate redemption! At that time G’d will extend His personal supervision of our fate to an even greater degree than had been the case in the past. We will then be able to see that attribute of כבוד with our own eyes, i.e. עין בעין  נראה אתה ה' (Numbers 14,14), “You Hashem appeared eye to eye, etc.” The meaning of these words is this that there will no longer be an artificial barrier to our obtaining deep insights into the workings of G’d’s providence. Isaiah 52,8: proclaims: “Hark! Your watchmen raise their voices, as one they shout for joy; for every eye shall behold the Lord’s return to Zion,” will then finally be realised.
  